GRAND ISLAND, NE
MUNICIPAL CODE
   Complete through November 4, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1   How Code Designated And Cited
1-2   Definitions And Rules Of Construction
1-3   Continuations Of Existing Ordinances
1-4   Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances
1-5   Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-6   Catchlines Of Sections
1-7   Penalties; Continuing Violations; Exclusion
1-8   Citation; Failing To Appear; Penalty
1-9   Aiding, Abetting Or Procuring; Penalty
1-10   Amendments Or Additions To Code
1-11   Police Jurisdiction Outside City Limits
1-12   Extra Territorial Jurisdiction
1-13   Sale Of Abandoned Property
1-14   Disposal Of Contraband
1-1   How Code Designated And Cited
All ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated and cited as the "Grand Island City Code."
1-2   Definitions And Rules Of Construction
In the construction of this Code and all other ordinances of the City, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly
requires otherwise:
City. The words "city", "the city," or "this city" shall be construed as if
followed by the words "of Grand Island, Nebraska."
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Grand Island City
Code."
Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day falls upon
any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case the period runs until the end
of the next day.
Council. Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the
council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Hall County,
Nebraska.
Day. A day is a 24-hour period of time between any midnight and the following
midnight.
Daytime, Nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset.
"Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine.
In the City. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over
which the city now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise
of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
Joint Authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation.
Offense. The doing of any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any act
or thing commanded to be done in this Code within the city is hereby declared
to be an offense against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the people of the City.
Or, And. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense
requires it.
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of
the whole or of a part of such building or land, or vendee in possession under
a land sale contract.
Person. "Person" includes but is not limited to individuals, corporations,
associations, firms, partnerships and limited liability companies.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before
and next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Public place. The words "public place" shall mean any public place or building
or any private place, business or building, open to and frequented by the
public.
Real property. Real property shall mean any estate or interest in land,
including all buildings, fixtures and improvements thereon and all rights-of-
way, easements, rents, issues, profits, income, tenements, hereditaments,
privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging, used or enjoyed with said
land, or any part thereof.
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
Signature or subscription by mark. "Signature" or "subscription by mark"
includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or
subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own
name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by
mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn
statement only when one witness shall sign his own name thereto.
State. The word "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the
State of Nebraska.
Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or
land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.
To. "To" means "to and including" when used in reference to a series of
sections of this Code or when reference is made to the Nebraska Revised
Statutes.
Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing, in the
English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise
provided. (Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006)
1-3   Continuations Of Existing Ordinances
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
1-4   Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or
at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
1-5   Severability Of Parts Of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
1-6   Catchlines Of Sections
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
1-7   Penalties; Continuing Violations; Exclusion
   A.   In any case where there shall be a violation of any city ordinance for
which no penalty is provided, the person violating the same shall be subject to
a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than five hundred dollars for each
offense. Each day a violation of a continuing nature shall remain in existence
shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The violation of any City Code provision or ordinance shall be deemed
an infraction, and the only violation for which imprisonment may be imposed
shall be a violation of §
1-8 below, pertaining to the offense of failing to appear.
   C.   For any violation of Federal or State law or City Code while on City
owned property the following penalties shall apply:
      1.   Upon citation or arrest, the person violation the same shall be
excluded from all City property excepting the conducting of necessary business
at the Utilities Department located at 1306 3rd Street, City Hall located at
100 E 1st Street, the Grand Island Police Department located at 111 Public
Safety Drive, all in Grand Island Nebraska.
      2.   This exclusion shall operate while the violation is pending before
any Court of competent jurisdiction and for a period of one year following
conviction for any offense which occurred on City-owned property.
      3.   In the event a matter is referred for prosecution, but no case is
filed within sixty (60) days of the violation, this exclusion shall expire.
      4.   Citation, arrest or the filing of any criminal complaint for an
offense occurring on City-owned property shall serve as actual notice of said
trespass warning and no additional written notice shall be required.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
1-8   Citation; Failing To Appear; Penalty
   A.   Any person who fails to appear or otherwise comply with the command of
a citation shall be guilty of an infraction.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006)
1-9   Aiding, Abetting Or Procuring; Penalty
Whoever aids, abets or procures another to violate a provision of this Code, or
whoever is an accessory after the fact to the commission of any such violation
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished in accordance with §
1-7 of this Code.
An accessory after the fact is a person who, after full knowledge that a
violation of this Code has been committed, conceals it from a police officer,
or harbors and protects the person charged with or found guilty of a violation
of any provision of this Code or state law.
1-10   Amendments Or Additions To Code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such
ordinances, enacted or presented to the city council for enactment after the
adoption of this Code, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific
amendments, or additions to the Grand Island City Code. Amendments to this Code
shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the Code which is to
be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter and
section.
1-11   Police Jurisdiction Outside City Limits
The provisions of this Code enacted in the exercise of the police jurisdiction
of the City of Grand Island for the regulation, use, operation, ownership,
control, and protection of the public parks, waterworks system, sewerage
system, electric generation and distribution system, and other municipal
facilities, and portions thereof, shall apply to and be of the same force and
effect upon the municipal golf course, public parks, waterworks systems,
sewerage systems, and other municipal facilities, outside the corporate limits
of the City of Grand Island, with the same effect as though such properties
were located within the corporate limits of such City of Grand Island.
1-12   Extra Territorial Jurisdiction
The City of Grand Island zoning and property use regulations, building
ordinances, gas ordinances, and plumbing ordinances are hereby extended and
apply to the area two miles beyond and adjacent to the corporate boundaries of
the City of Grand Island with the same force and effect as if such outlying
area were within the corporate limits of such city; provided, no such ordinance
shall be extended or applied so as to prohibit, prevent, or interfere with the
conduct of existing farming, livestock operations, businesses, or industry.
1-13   Sale Of Abandoned Property
   The chief of police is hereby empowered to offer for sale and to sell at
public auction including sale by internet or other electronic medium to the
highest bidder, all personal property, except impounded vehicles, and except
property of a nature dealt with in §
1-14 which may come within the custody of the police department by reason of
its being abandoned, impounded, or unclaimed. Notice of such sale shall be
printed once in a legal newspaper published in the City of Grand Island at
least ten (10) days prior to the sale or by being posted on the City of Grand
Island website for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the sale;
provided, that no such property shall be offered or sold unless it shall have
remained unclaimed by the lawful owner for a period of sixty (60) days after it
shall have come within the custody of the chief of police or the police
department, or, in the case of property taken from or deposited by, persons
arrested, detained, or accused of crime, shall have remained unclaimed for a
period of sixty (60) days after the discharge, liberation or departure of the
person from whom such property was taken or by whom such property was
deposited.
   It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to make such effort as
they deem reasonable to notify the lawful owner of any such property that it
will be sold or otherwise disposed of upon a given date.
   All money received from the sale of the unclaimed property shall be paid to
the chief of police, whose duty it shall be to account for such money collected
by him/her to the city treasurer who shall place the same in the police fund.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,030, effective 08-20-2025)
1-14   Disposal Of Contraband
   The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause to be destroyed, or to
dispose of in such other lawful manner as they deem proper all firearms,
alcoholic beverages, contraband, or such other property, the possession of
which may be unlawful, prohibited or regulated by federal, state, or local
statutes or ordinances, which may come within the custody of the police
department by reason of its being abandoned, recovered, confiscated, impounded
or unclaimed.
   That all such property shall be held for a period of not less than sixty
(60) days prior to the disposition, and it shall be the responsibility of the
chief of police to make such effort as they deem reasonable to notify the
lawful owner of any such property prior to its disposal that it will be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of upon a given date.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,030, effective 08-20-2025)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
Article 2-I   Meetings; Committees
Article 2-II   Elected Officials
Article 2-III   Appointed And Hired Officials
Article 2-IV   Indemnification Of Officers And Employees
Article 2-V   Emergency Interim Successors
Article 2-VI   Retirement And Pension Plans
Article 2-VII   Board Of Health
Article 2-VIII   Prevention Of COVID-19
Article 2-IX   Tax Oversight Committee
Article 2-I
Meetings; Committees
2-1   Form Of Government
2-2   Regular Meetings
2-3   Special Meetings
2-4   City Council; Study Sessions
2-5   City Council; Quorum; Voting
2-6   Agenda For Meetings
2-7   Rules Of Order
2-8   Disturbing Meetings
2-9   Council Committees
2-10   Mayor's Committees
2-11   Boards And Commissions
2-12   Method Of Publicizing Meetings
2-1   Form Of Government
The City of Grand Island is a City of the First Class with a municipal
government organized pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16 of the Revised
Statutes of Nebraska.
2-2   Regular Meetings
The regular meetings of the council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. in the council
chambers of city hall, on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month;
providing that if such meeting date shall occur on a holiday, the meeting shall
be on the next business day following, or such other time as the council may
provide. Amendments to the schedule of city council meeting dates shall be by
resolution.
2-3   Special Meetings
Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any four council members, upon
twenty-four hours written notice to every member of the council; provided, that
the requirement of notice shall not be binding in any special meeting at which
all members of the council are present without objection. Such notices may be
served by any member of the police department or any other person in the City,
and it shall be the duty of the city clerk when given such notices to serve the
same or cause the same to be served immediately.
2-4   City Council; Study Sessions
The City Council may hold a meeting to be referred to as a "Study Session" as
needed and at the discretion of the City Council. Study sessions will be public
meetings held at the time and place to be determined by the Council for which
notice will be published pursuant to Nebraska statutory requirements. Study
sessions shall be conducted to facilitate discussion between members of the
Council and shall not be subject to formal parliamentary procedure. No motion,
action, or vote of any kind shall be taken on any matter during a Study
Session, except upon a motion to recess or to adjourn.
2-5   City Council; Quorum; Voting
   A.   A majority of all the members of the city council must be present at a
regular or special meeting to constitute a quorum; but if less than such
majority is present at the meeting; the majority of the council members present
may adjourn the meeting from time to time without further notice.
   B.   Except in those cases where Nebraska law requires a greater number of
votes, six (6) affirmative votes shall constitute a majority vote required to
adopt a motion, resolution, ordinance, action, or policy. In those cases where
the mayor is authorized by law to vote, the mayor's vote shall be counted as
one of the six necessary affirmative votes.
   C.   On votes requiring two-thirds vote of the council, such vote shall
require seven (7) affirmative votes to pass.
   D.   On votes requiring three-fourths vote of the council, such vote shall
require eight (8) affirmative votes to pass.
2-6   Agenda For Meetings
All matters for consideration at any regular meeting or study session of the
city council shall be submitted in writing and filed in the office of the city
clerk pursuant to the timetable established by resolution. All matters for
consideration at any special meeting of the city council shall be submitted in
writing and filed in the office of the city clerk at least twenty-four hours
prior to the time set for such special meeting. The city clerk shall place upon
the agenda of any regular, special, or study session meeting only those matters
which have been directed by one council member, or authorized by the mayor or
the city administrator.
2-7   Rules Of Order
The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall guide the proceedings of
the council where not in conflict with statutes or ordinances.
2-8   Disturbing Meetings
It shall be unlawful to disturb or disrupt any regular, special, or study
session meeting of the council. Any person or persons who repeatedly disturb or
disrupt a meeting of the council may be summarily ejected from the council
chambers and the city hall at the Mayor's discretion. The Police Chief or his/
her designee shall carry out such Mayoral directive.
2-9   Council Committees
Committees of the council may be created by the mayor and approved by a
majority of the council to advise the council in regard to special issues. Each
committee will consist of not more than five council members, appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the council. The committees may also consist of other
members, including staff, who shall serve only as non-voting members. The
manner of appointment shall be the same. The chairman of the committee will be
a council member. Council committees shall conduct their meetings in compliance
with the open meetings law, shall maintain minutes of all meetings, and shall
submit their minutes, findings, and recommendations to the city council in
writing in a timely manner. Appointments to council committees shall be for a
term of one year unless ended sooner by dissolution of the committee. The
committee may be dissolved by any of the following actions:
   A.   Majority vote of the committee to dissolve;
   B.   Resolution of the special issue assigned;
   C.   Majority vote of the city council; or
   D.   Expiration of one year from date of creation unless reappointed.
2-10   Mayor's Committees
Mayor's committees may be appointed by the mayor without council approval to
advise the mayor in regard to special issues. Mayor's committees are subject to
the open meetings law. Findings and recommendations of mayor's committees shall
be submitted to the mayor and shall be considered as advising the mayor only
and not the council.
2-11   Boards And Commissions
The city council may establish citizen advisory boards and commissions of
either a permanent or temporary nature to study and/or make recommendations on
designated issues. Certain powers may be delegated to boards and commissions as
provided for by statute. Boards and commissions of a permanent nature shall be
established by ordinance. The structure and appointments of the boards and
commissions shall be in accordance with other provisions contained herein.
2-12   Method Of Publicizing Meetings
   A.   For all Regular, Special, and Study Session meetings of the City
Council, City staff shall make all reasonable attempts to publish notice of
such meeting at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled starting
time of such meeting by taking the following action:
      1.   Publication in The Grand Island Independent;
      2.   Publication on the City’s website;
      3.   Electronic Mail notification to news media outlets who previously
requested such notice; and
      4.   Paper copies of meeting documents and materials accessible to the
public in the lobby of City Hall.
   B.   If after all reasonable efforts, City staff is not able to meet the
terms of §
2-12(A), it may publicize notice of meetings of the City Council by taking the
following action:
      1.   Posting notice of such meeting in areas accessible to the public in
the following buildings:
         a.   Grand Island City Hall;
         b.   Hall County Courthouse;
         c.   Grand Island Public Library; and
         d.   The offices of The Grand Island Independent.
      2.   Publication on the City’s website;
      3.   Electronic Mail notification to news media outlets who previously
requested such notice; and
      4.   Paper copies of meeting documents and materials accessible to the
public in the lobby of City Hall.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9454, effective 10-15-2013)
Article 2-II
Elected Officials
2-15   Mayor; Powers; Duties
2-16   Mayor; Veto Powers; Passage Over Veto
2-17   Mayor; Additional Powers; Duties
2-18   Mayor; Compensation
2-19   Council; Authority; Duties
2-20   Council President; Election; Term; Duties
2-21   City Council Members; Compensation
2-22   Mayor And Council; Benefit Plans
2-23   Bonds For Elected Officials
2-24   Removal Of Elected Official For Misconduct
2-25   Filling Vacancies Of Elective Officers
2-15   Mayor; Powers; Duties
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City of Grand Island, and
advised by the members of the city council; shall in general supervise and
control all of the business, affairs, and officers of the City of Grand Island.
The mayor shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the city council. The
mayor shall have the power, together with any other proper officer of the City
of Grand Island, upon authorization by the city council, to sign certificates,
deeds, mortgages, bonds, contracts, or other documents except in cases where
the signing and execution thereof shall be expressly delegated by the city
council to other officers or agents of Grand Island, and in general shall
perform all duties incident to the mayor's office.
The mayor shall have the right to vote when his or her vote shall be the sixth
decisive vote upon any pending matter, legislation, or transaction. The mayor
shall take care that the ordinances of the City and the provisions of the law
relating to cities of the first class are complied with. The mayor may
administer oaths, and shall sign the commissions and appointments of all
officers appointed in the City.
2-16   Mayor; Veto Powers; Passage Over Veto
The mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance passed by the
city council, and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of, or
vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim; provided, any
ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract,
or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the mayor may be passed over such veto
by a vote of two thirds of all the members elected to the council,
notwithstanding such veto. If the mayor neglects or refuses to sign any
ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract,
or the allowance of any claim, and returns the same with objections in writing
to the next regular meeting of the council, the same shall become a law without
the mayor's signature. The mayor may veto any item or items of any
appropriation bill, and approve the remainder thereof. An item or items so
vetoed may be passed by the council over the veto as in other cases.
2-17   Mayor; Additional Powers; Duties
In addition to the foregoing powers and duties, the mayor shall:
   A.   Appoint and remove, with approval of the city council, all statutory
officials; appoint with the approval of the city council, the Police Chief and
the Fire Chief; appoint, remove, correct, or discipline all other hired
officials and subordinate employees in the departments in both the classified
and unclassified service, which appointments shall be upon merit and fitness
alone pursuant to the personnel rules, and in the classified service all
appointments and removals shall be subject to civil service requirements.
   B.   Appoint all members of advisory boards, commissions, and committees
established by ordinance or action of the council, subject to council approval.
   C.   Have the power to grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising
under the ordinances of the city after conviction to remit fines and
forfeitures.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07/17/2012)
2-18   Mayor; Compensation
   Until the monthly installment payable prior to December 2026, the annual
compensation for the Mayor shall be sixteen thousand dollars ($16,000.00),
payable monthly in equal installments as required by law.
   Beginning with the first regular meeting of the City Council in December
2026, and every four years thereafter, the Mayor's pay shall be increased on
December 1st of said year thereafter by an amount equivalent to all cost-of-
living increases provided to the city's non-union employees during the
preceding term of office. In the event no cost of living increases are provided
to non-union employees, the Mayor's compensation shall remain the same.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9412, effective 12/09/2014) (Amended by Ordinance
10,043, effective 10/28/2025)
2-19   Council; Authority; Duties
   A.   The council can bind the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, by their acts
only when they are duly assembled at a regular or special meeting.
   B.   The city council shall do all things necessary to comply with, and
enforce the ordinances of the City of Grand Island and the laws of the State of
Nebraska relating to cities of the first class.
   C.   The city council specifically reserves the right to make inquiries of
any personnel relative to municipal activities. Except for purpose of inquiry,
the city council shall deal with the administrative services of the City
through the administrator, and neither the council nor its members shall give
orders directly to any subordinate of the city administrator.
   D.   The city council may by motion or resolution adopt appropriate
personnel rules, and amend such rules in the same manner from time to time.
2-20   Council President; Election; Term; Duties
The council shall elect one of the council members as president of the council.
The term of the president shall be one year, commencing the first regular
meeting in December, and terminating upon election of a new president at the
first regular meeting in December of the following year. The president will
assume the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or illness. Absence
will be indicated by notification by the mayor, or through the mayor's
inability to participate in a council meeting or city function. Illness shall
be any sickness or injury preventing the mayor from participating in his or her
daily administration or ceremonial duties.
2-21   City Council Members; Compensation
   Until the monthly installment payable prior to December 2026, the annual
compensation for members of the City Council shall be seven thousand eight
hundred dollars ($7,800.00), payable monthly in equal installments as required
by law.
   Beginning with the first regular meeting of the City Council in December
2026, and thereafter, the annual compensation for members of the City Council
shall be ten thousand seven hundred one dollars ($10,701.00), payable in equal
monthly installments as required by law.
   Commencing December 1, 2028 and continuing biannually thereafter, pay for
members of the City Council shall be increased by an amount equivalent to all
cost-of-living increases provided to the city's non-union employees during the
preceding two years. In the event no cost of living increase is provided to
non-union employees, Council member's compensation shall remain the same.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9411, effective 12/09/2014) (Amended by Ordinance
10,043, effective 10/28/2025)
2-22   Mayor And Council; Benefit Plans
The mayor and members of the city council shall not be eligible to participate
in the city employee health insurance, life insurance, disability insurance, or
retirement plans.
2-23   Bonds For Elected Officials
Before entering upon the duties of their office, the following named elective
officers of the city are hereby required to give bonds and security as provided
by law for the faithful performance of their duties, which bonds shall be
approved by the city council and shall be given for the following sums:
 
Mayor               $20,000
City Council Member $1,000
 
2-24   Removal Of Elected Official For Misconduct
Any elected official of the city may be removed from office for misconduct or
malfeasance pursuant to state statute by the mayor and council in the following
manner:
Upon the filing of written charges signed and verified, charging any such
officer with misconduct, the council shall by resolution set a time for hearing
not less than five days nor more than ten days subsequent to the passage of
such resolution for a hearing on such charge. At such hearing, the officer
whose conduct shall have been called into question shall have the right to be
present to interrogate witnesses, to be represented by counsel, and either in
person or by counsel make a statement or argument to the council. The city
attorney shall act as prosecuting attorney and shall have the right to examine
or cross examine each witness presented and to make any statement or argument
to the council. If upon such hearing, the council shall by a three-fourths vote
of all the council members, find or determine that the officer in question has
been guilty of misconduct rendering him or her an unfit person to hold such
office, then the city council may declare such office vacant and such office
shall then be vacant forthwith.
2-25   Filling Vacancies Of Elective Officers
The mayor shall fill by appointment any vacancy which may exist, caused by
death, resignation or disability of any elective officer of the City. Such
appointment of the mayor shall be subject, however, to approval of the majority
of the council.
Article 2-III
Appointed And Hired Officials
Division 2-III-1   General
Division 2-III-2   City Administrator
Division 2-III-3   City Clerk
Division 2-III-4   City Treasurer
Division 2-III-5   City Attorney
Division 2-III-6   City Engineer/Public Works Director
Division 2-III-1
General
2-30   Officers; Appointive
2-31   Hired Officials
2-32   Bonds For Appointed Officials
2-30   Officers; Appointive
The following shall constitute the statutory officers of the City of Grand
Island which shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. These
officers shall hold office until the end of the mayor's term and until their
successors are appointed and qualified. These appointive officers may be
removed at any time by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the
council:
City Administrator
City Attorney
City Clerk
City Engineer/Public Works Director
City Treasurer/Finance Director
2-31   Hired Officials
The officials set forth below shall be hired officials which shall be selected
for employment by the city as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations.
All of the hired officials shall be subject to the personnel rules of the City
of Grand Island as adopted by resolution. The personnel rules are supplemental
to the civil service rules for the officials set forth in subparagraph (B), and
supplemental to the terms of interlocal agreements pertaining to the officials
set forth in subparagraph (C) below. The officials listed in subparagraphs (A)
and (B) shall be hired by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The
length of service of all the officials listed below shall be indefinite. The
discipline and/or removal of the officials listed in subparagraphs (A), (C),
and (D) shall be governed by the City’s personnel rules. The discipline and/or
removal of the officials listed in subparagraph (B) shall be governed by the
City’s personnel and civil service rules.
   A.   The following shall constitute the general officials of the City of
Grand Island:
Building Department Director
Human Resources Director
Parks and Recreation Director
Utility Director
   B.   The following shall constitute the officials subject to the civil
service rules of the City of Grand Island:
Fire Chief
Police Chief
   C.   The following shall constitute the interlocal officials of the City of
Grand Island:
Emergency Management Director
Planning Director
   D.   The following shall constitute the official subject to the provisions
of Article 2, Chapter 51 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes pertaining to
libraries:
Library Director
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07-17-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9390, effective 07-31-2012)
2-32   Bonds For Appointed Officials
Before entering upon the duties of their employment, the following named
appointed officials and employees of the city are hereby required to give bonds
and security as provided by law for the faithful performance of their duties,
which bonds shall be approved by the city council and shall be given for the
following sums:
 
City Treasurer        $100,000
Deputy City Treasurer $50,000
City Clerk            $10,000
City Administrator    $20,000
 
Division 2-III-2
City Administrator
2-35   Administrator; Appointment; Duties
2-36   Administrator; Qualifications
2-37   Administrator; Duties; General
2-35   Administrator; Appointment; Duties
There is hereby created and established the office of city administrator, to be
appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council; provided, no
elective officer of the City of Grand Island shall hold the position of city
administrator. The city administrator shall be the chief operating officer of
the City of Grand Island. The administrator shall hold office until the end of
the mayor's term of office, and until a successor is appointed and qualified,
unless sooner removed, or the ordinance creating the office shall be repealed,
except as otherwise provided by law. The employment of the city administrator
may be administered by a negotiated contract.
The purpose of the office of city administrator is to provide for the day-to-
day administration of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. The city
administrator will remain under the direction of the mayor and be responsible
thereto for the efficient conduct of the office.
The city administrator shall not participate in a local election that affects
the office of mayor or city council, or any other elective municipal position
or issue, except for the casting of an individual ballot.
The city administrator will keep the mayor informed and seek input on any
action he or she takes or will take. The salary of the city administrator shall
be established by ordinance.
2-36   Administrator; Qualifications
The city administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience, or
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the
time of appointment, the city administrator need not be a resident of Grand
Island, Nebraska, but during the term of office he or she shall reside within
the city limits.
2-37   Administrator; Duties; General
The duties of the city administrator are as follows:
   A.   Attend all meetings of the city council and its committees unless
excused, with the duty of reporting on any matter concerning the City under his
or her direction; and to attend such other meetings of departments and
officials as the duties of the office may require, or as may be directed by the
mayor or council.
   B.   Make investigation into all affairs of the City and to make
recommendations to the mayor and council for the adoption of such measures and
ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient for the good government of the
City.
   C.   Analyze the functions, duties, and activities of the various
departments, divisions, and services of the City, and of all employees thereof,
and to make recommendations regarding the same to the mayor and council; and to
faithfully carry out the directives and recommendations of the mayor and
council in coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the
various departments, divisions, and services.
   D.   Keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition
of the City. With the adoption of the budget and the passage of the
appropriations ordinance by the governing body, the city administrator shall be
responsible for the supervision and control of the budgeted expenditures.
   E.   Oversee the supervision of all employees, and evaluate all appointed
and hired officials, and recommend to the mayor the appointment, discipline,
transfer and dismissal of all City personnel.
   F.   Investigate or have investigated all complaints filed against an
employee, department, division, or service of the City, and to report such
investigation with recommendation to the mayor and council.
   G.   Act as Program Administrator for the Economic Development Program of
the City, act as ex-officio member of the Economic Development Committee,
assist the committee, and provide the committee with necessary information and
advice on the economic development program.
   H.   Perform all other duties and exercise such other power as may be
required by ordinance, or prescribed by resolution of the mayor and council.
Division 2-III-3
City Clerk
2-38   City Clerk; Duties; Compensation
2-38   City Clerk; Duties; Compensation
There is hereby created the office and position of city clerk. The city clerk
shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of a majority of the city
council. The city clerk shall have the custody of all laws, ordinances and
official records, and keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the council,
and perform all other duties and meet all requirements imposed by law upon the
position or office of city clerk. The salary of the city clerk shall be fixed
by ordinance.
Division 2-III-4
City Treasurer
2-39   Finance Department; City Treasurer/Finance Director; Duties;
Compensation
2-39   Finance Department; City Treasurer/Finance Director; Duties;
Compensation
There is hereby created a department of the City which shall be known as the
Finance Department, which shall be responsible for the performance of the
financial management and accounting functions of city government, including
those of all departments and divisions thereof. The Department shall be
responsible for developing, instituting, and maintaining all of the financial
and accounting systems associated with the operation of city government
including general ledger accounting; financial statements and reporting; cash
management and investments; accounts payable and receivable; utilities billing
and collection; payroll; and auditing. All personnel assigned to these
functions shall come under the auspices of the Department and the direction of
the finance director.
There is hereby created the office and position of City Treasurer/Director of
Finance. This position hereafter referred to as "Finance Director," shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council.
The Director shall perform all duties and meet all requirements imposed by law
upon the position or office and such other duties as directed. The Director
shall assist the city administrator in the preparation of the annual budget.
The finance director shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual
estimates of revenues and expenditures of the proposed budget for the
presentation of a complete financial plan for the City to the mayor and council
prior to the consideration and adoption of the annual appropriation ordinance
by the governing body. The finance director shall prepare and submit to the
mayor and council, on a monthly basis, a complete report on the finance
activities of the City. The salary of the position shall be fixed by ordinance.
Division 2-III-5
City Attorney
2-40   City Attorney; Duties; Compensation
2-40   City Attorney; Duties; Compensation
The office of city attorney is hereby created, which office shall constitute a
full-time obligation upon the individual so appointed. The city attorney shall
be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and city officers.
The city attorney shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and actions
necessary to be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the City, or
that may be ordered by the council. The city attorney shall attend meetings of
the council and give an opinion upon any matters submitted by the council,
either orally or in writing, as may be required. The city attorney may hire
outside counsel on matters in which the city attorney lacks expertise or in
which the city attorney has a conflict of interest.
The salary of the city attorney shall be fixed by ordinance.
Division 2-III-6
City Engineer/Public Works Director
2-41   City Engineer/Public Works Director; Duties; Compensation
2-41   City Engineer/Public Works Director; Duties; Compensation
There is hereby created the office and position of City Engineer / Public Works
Director, hereafter referred to as "Public Works Director". This position shall
be a licensed professional engineer with the State of Nebraska appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council.
Among the duties required of the Public Works Director shall be making
estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by
contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates and calculations
necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, the building of culverts,
sewers, bridges, curbing, gutters, and the repair and improvement of streets.
The Public Works Director shall make a record of the minutes of their surveys
and of all work done for the city, including sewers and sewerage systems and
accurately make such plats, sections, profiles and maps as may be necessary in
the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public records and belong to
the city and be turned over to his or her successor.
The Public Works Director shall establish standards, ensure enforcement of
those standards and may make any exceptions to those standards as warranted in
their professional opinion. The standards shall be on file with the Public
Works Department.
In addition to the duties specifically set forth above, the Public Works
Director shall perform such other duties as the city council may require or are
required by law.
The salary of the position of Public Works Director shall be established by
ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance No. 9835, effective 07-7-2021)
Article 2-IV
Indemnification Of Officers And Employees
2-44   Definitions
2-45   Representation; City Attorney
2-46   Indemnification; Good Faith
2-47   Governmental Immunity
2-48   Notice
2-49   Representation; Conflict Of Interest
2-44   Definitions
Officer shall include any elected, appointed, or hired official of the city;
Employee shall include all employees of the city, whether under civil service
or not.
2-45   Representation; City Attorney
Among the duties of the city attorney shall be that of representing as counsel,
without charge to the persons represented, any city officer or employee in
connection with any claim, suit for damages, or other action against such
person arising in connection with the performance by such officer or employee
of his or her public duties; provided that such employee or officer may have
his or her own counsel to assist in the defense, at the expense of the employee
or officer.
2-46   Indemnification; Good Faith
Any officer or employee who is held liable for the payment of any claims or
damages, by way of judgment or settlement, shall be entitled to indemnification
by the city, where the acts resulting in such liability were done in good
faith, without malice, within the scope of authority of the employee or
officer.
2-47   Governmental Immunity
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of
governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought
against the city or such officer or employee.
2-48   Notice
The provisions of this Article shall apply only where the city has been given
notice of any actions brought against any city employee or officer, based upon
any action of such employee or officer within the scope of his or her authority
as such.
2-49   Representation; Conflict Of Interest
Nothing in this Article or in any ordinance of the city, and nothing in any
agreement with the city attorney shall be construed to require the city
attorney to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the attorney
to be involved in a conflict of interest.
Article 2-V
Emergency Interim Successors
2-54   Emergency Succession; Declaration
2-55   Officers To Appoint Successors
2-54   Emergency Succession; Declaration
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the state General Emergency
Succession Act, hereinafter referred to as "such act," the mayor and council
declare that it is necessary to invoke the provisions of such act in the City.
2-55   Officers To Appoint Successors
Emergency interim successors shall be designated pursuant to the Local
Emergency Operations Plan on file with the City Clerk and the Emergency
Management Director.
Article 2-VI
Retirement And Pension Plans
2-59   Ratification Of Existing Plans
2-59   Ratification Of Existing Plans
The City hereby affirms and ratifies the existing pension and retirement plans
it has established which specifically includes the following plans:
   A.   A Police Officers Retirement System Fund and retirement plan pursuant
to Neb. R.R.S. §16-1001 et seq;
   B.   A Fire Fighters Retirement System Fund and retirement plan pursuant to
Neb. R.R.S. §16-1020 et seq;
   C.   A general employee pension fund and pension plan pursuant to Neb.
R.R.S. §19-3501.
Said funds and plans are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(Entire Chapter 2 Amended and Reorganized Pursuant to Ordinance No. 9036,
effective 04-12-2006)
Article 2-VII
Board Of Health
2-60   Board Of Health; Created; Composition; Appointment; Jurisdiction; Clerk
2-61   Quorum; Rules And Regulations
2-62   Records
2-63   Vacancies In Office
2-60   Board Of Health; Created; Composition; Appointment; Jurisdiction; Clerk
   A.   A Board of Health is hereby created in and for the City, which board
shall consist of five (5) members as follows:
The Mayor, who shall be Chairman of the board; a physician who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and who shall be Medical Adviser of the board; the Chief
of Police who shall be Secretary and Quarantine Officer; the President of the
Council; and one other member at large who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   B.   The Board of Health may make regulations to prevent the introduction
and spread of contagious, infectious, or malignant diseases into the city.
   C.   The Mayor shall see that all rules and regulations of the Board of
Health, passed pursuant to Section
2-61 shall be enforced over all places within this City. The City Clerk shall
be Clerk of such board but not a member thereof.
2-61   Quorum; Rules And Regulations
A majority of such board shall constitute a quorum and shall enact rules and
regulations, having the force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the
people of such city and prevent nuisances and unsanitary conditions, enforce
the same, and provide fines and punishments for the violation of such rules and
regulations.
2-62   Records
The Board of Health shall keep a record of all their transactions, orders,
notices and of such other action taken by it, which records shall be filed with
the City Clerk and are hereby made public records of the City and shall be
accessible to the public for inspection in the office of the City Clerk at all
reasonable hours.
2-63   Vacancies In Office
In the absence or disability of the Medical Advisor, the Mayor may appoint some
other physician to act in the place of such Medical Adviser during such absence
or disability; and to the end that the Board may at all times be in position to
function and perform its duties, there shall be a substitute appointed for any
member thereof when absent, unable or disqualified to act; and the substitute
so appointed shall have the power to do each and every act as the regular
member thereof while serving on the Board.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9803, effective 11-23-2020)
Article 2-VIII
Prevention Of COVID-19
2-64   Legislative Finding And Intent 2-65 Definitions
2-66   Individual Facial Coverings Required
2-67   Premises Open To The General Public -- Duty To Require Facial Coverings
2-68   Notice Of Face Covering Requirements
2-69   Exceptions
2-70   Public Nuisance Declared
2-71   Application
2-72   Penalty
2-73   Civil Abatement
2-74   Sunset Provision
2-75   Conflicts
2-64   Legislative Finding And Intent
   A.   The City Council hereby finds and declares, based upon the scientific
and medical evidence before it, that:
      1.   the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) has impacted and continues to
dramatically impact the citizens of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska; and
      2.   exposure to COVID-19 presents a risk of death or serious long-term
disability; the exposure is widespread and poses significant risk of harm,
including death, to people in the general population of the City of Grand
Island; there is a particular subset of the population that is more vulnerable
to the threat and thus at an increased risk; and the threat is from a novel
infectious disease; and
      3.   information from the World Health Organization, the United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Nebraska Department of Health
and Human Services, the Central District Health Department, local public health
departments throughout Nebraska, and members of the City of Grand Island and
Hall County medical community indicates that citizens of the City of Grand
Island have been and will continue to be exposed due to community transmissions
of COVID-19; and
      4.   the manner in which the spread of COVID-19 cases in the City of
Grand Island has occurred creates an unacceptable risk to the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the City of Grand Island; and
      5.   the number of COVID-19 infections within the City of Grand Island
continues to increase; and
      6.   COVID-19 constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of the City of Grand Island; and
      7.   the CDC, doctors and infectious disease experts from the University
of Nebraska Medical Center and Nebraska Medicine have concluded that the
wearing of face coverings by every individual while in public is one of the
best methods to slow and stop the spread of COVID-19; and
      8.   the wearing of face coverings by every individual while indoors in
public places in the City of Grand Island will reduce community transmissions
of COVID-19, resulting in fewer deaths, serious health complications, and will
ease the strain on hospitals and other medical offices and facilities; and
      9.   the wearing of face coverings by every individual while indoors in
public places in the City of Grand Island will help keep businesses open and
operating, encouraging economic growth, and preventing prolonged economic harm;
and
      10.   this ordinance is designated as an urgent measure necessary to
preservation of public health; and
      11.   it is just and proper for the City Council to exercise the
authority granted to it by Nebraska statutes in furtherance of protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare.
2-65   Definitions
For purposes of this Article, the following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   Face Covering. A face covering is defined as a covering which, when
worn properly, must cover the nose and mouth completely and can include a paper
or disposable face mask, cloth face mask, scarf, bandana, neck gaiter, or a
religious face covering. Medical-grade masks and respirators are sufficient
face coverings, but to preserve adequate supplies, their purchase and use is
discouraged for those who do not work in a health care setting or in other
occupations that require medical-grade personal protective equipment. Masks
that incorporate a valve designed to facilitate easy exhaling, mesh masks, or
masks with openings, holes, visible gaps in the design or material, or vents
are not sufficient face coverings because they allow exhaled droplets to be
released into the air.
   2.   Premises Open to the General Public. Premises open to the general
public is broadly defined to include entities that employ or engage workers,
including private-sector entities, public-sector entities, non-profit entities,
regular commercial or business establishments, private clubs, religious centers
or buildings, public transportation (including buses, taxis, ride-sharing
vehicles, or vehicles used for business purposes), and any place which is
generally open to the public, including educational institutions and daycare
facilities.
2-66   Individual Facial Coverings Required
All individuals age five and older shall wear a face covering over their mouth
and nose while indoors in a premises open to the general public unless the
individual maintains a minimum of six feet of separation or social distance at
all times from anyone who is not a member of the individual's household, except
face coverings will not be required if the individual:
   1.   is seeking federal, state, or county services; or
   2.   is seated at a bar, restaurant, or other location to eat or drink, or
while immediately consuming food or beverages; or
   3.   is engaged in an occupation preventing the wearing of a face covering;
or
   4.   is obtaining a service or purchasing goods or services that requires
the temporary removal of the face covering; or
   5.   is asked to remove a face covering to verify an identity for lawful
purposes; or
   6.   is providing a speech, lecture, or broadcast to an audience so long as
six feet of distancing from other individuals is maintained; or
   7.   cannot otherwise wear a face covering because of a medical condition, a
mental health condition, or a disability that makes it unreasonable for the
individual to wear a face covering.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner or person in charge of a
premises open to the general public from requiring an individual to wear a face
covering during any of the circumstances enumerated above or from implementing
a more restrictive face covering policy.
2-67   Premises Open To The General Public -- Duty To Require Facial Coverings
Any individual or entity which maintains a premises open to the general public
shall require all individuals age five and older to wear a face covering over
their mouth and nose while indoors in said premises, unless the individual
maintains a minimum of six feet of separation or social distance at all times
from anyone who is not a member of the individual's household, except face
coverings will not be required if the individual:
   1.   is seeking federal, state or county services; or
   2.   is seated at a bar or restaurant to eat or drink, or while immediately
consuming food or beverages; or
   3.   is engaged in an occupation preventing the wearing of a face covering;
or
   4.   is obtaining a service or purchasing goods or services that requires
the temporary removal of the face covering; or
   5.   is asked to remove a face covering to verify an identity for lawful
purposes; or
   6.   is providing a speech, lecture, or broadcast to an audience so long as
six feet of distancing from other individuals is maintained; or
   7.   cannot otherwise wear a face covering because of a medical condition, a
mental health condition, or a disability that makes it unreasonable for the
individual to wear a face covering.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner or person in charge of a
premises that is open to the general public from requiring an individual to
wear a face covering during any of the circumstances enumerated above or from
implementing a more restrictive face covering policy.
2-68   Notice Of Face Covering Requirements
Any individual or entity which maintains a premises that is open to the general
public must post one or more signs that are visible to all persons — including
workers, customers, students, and visitors instructing them to wear face
coverings as required by this Article.
2-69   Exceptions
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:
   1.   Courts of law; non-city department public utilities; federal, state, or
county operations; medical providers, facilities, or pharmacies; congregate
living centers or facilities; group homes and residential drug and/or mental
health treatment facilities; shelters for homeless persons; airport travel;
election offices; polling places on an election day; or to residential dwelling
units.
   2.   Children under the age of five. While children ages three and four may
wear a face covering if that child can remove the face covering without
assistance, guidance from the CDC states that children two years old and under
should never wear a face covering due to the risk of suffocation.
   3.   Federal and state activities. Nothing in this Article shall be
construed to limit, prohibit, or restrict in any way the operations of the
federal or state government or the movement of federal or state officials in
the city while acting in their official capacity, including federal and state
judicial, legislative, and executive staff and personnel.
   4.   Individuals at their workplace when wearing a face covering would
create a job hazard for the individual or others as determined by federal,
state, or local regulators or workplace safety and health standards and
guidelines.
   5.   Individuals who are alone in an office, room, a vehicle, the cab of
heavy equipment or machinery, or an enclosed work area. In such situations, the
individual should still carry a face covering to be prepared for person-to-
person interactions and to be used when the individual is no longer alone.
   6.   Individuals who are seated at a desk or standing at a stationary
workstation, provided that the desk or workstation has a solid Plexiglas or
plastic barrier installed upon it which cannot be moved.
   7.   Individuals who are officiating at a religious service.
   8.   Individuals communicating with other individuals who are deaf or hard
of hearing or who have a disability, medical condition, or mental health
condition that makes communication with that individual while wearing a face
covering difficult, provided that minimum social distancing of six feet or more
is maintained to the extent possible between persons who are not members of the
same household.
   9.   Individuals who are engaged in activities, such as swimming or
showering, where the face covering will get wet.
   10.   Individuals who are exercising in an indoor business or indoor space
such as a gym or fitness center, while the level of exertion makes it difficult
to wear a face covering, provided that minimum social distancing of six feet or
more is maintained at all times.
   11.   Individuals in an indoor premises that is generally open to the public
while playing a musical instrument that cannot be played when a face covering
is worn, provided that a minimum social distancing of six feet or more is
maintained at all times.
   12.   Public safety workers actively engaged in a public safety role,
including but not limited to law enforcement personnel, fire fighters, or
emergency medical personnel, in situations where wearing a face covering would
seriously interfere in the performance of the individual's public safety
responsibilities.
   13.   Participants in a sporting event, but only while they are playing the
game, if the school or sponsoring organization does not require facial
coverings, however, spectators, coaches, and non-participants would be required
to wear facial coverings.
2-70   Public Nuisance Declared
Any individual or entity which maintains premises that are open to the general
public who fails to comply with the requirements of Section
2-67, above, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the public
health, safety, and welfare.
2-71   Application
The provisions of this Article shall only apply to all persons and property
within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island and shall not extend
into the two-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.
2-72   Penalty
Any individual or person who is found to have violated any of the provisions of
this Article shall be guilty of an offense as defined in Section
1-2 of City code for each offense and shall be subjected to a minimum fine of
not less than $25 for the initial offense. Each instance of violation of this
Article may be considered to be a separate offense.
2-73   Civil Abatement
In addition to any other penalty sought or obtained under this Article or other
applicable law, the City Attorney may institute injunctive or other appropriate
civil proceedings necessary to obtain compliance with this Article or to abate
any nuisance resulting from violations of this Article.
2-74   Sunset Provision
The requirements imposed by this Article shall expire and terminate at 11:59
p.m. on February 23, 2021, unless otherwise extended or earlier terminated by
ordinance of the City Council.
2-75   Conflicts
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter 2, Article
VIII and a Directed Health Measure issued by the Nebraska Department of Health
or by the Central District Health Department the provision providing the
greatest protection for public health shall control.
Article 2-IX Tax Oversight Committee
2-76   Tax Oversight Committee; Creation, Duties, and Composition
2-77   Terms of Tax Oversight Committee Members
2-78   Tax Oversight Committee Vacancies; Removal
2-79   Tax Oversight Committee Meetings
2-80   Tax Oversight Committee Officers
2-76 Tax Oversight Committee; Creation, Duties, and Composition
There is hereby created a Tax Oversight Committee ("Committee") for the City of
Grand Island. This committee shall fulfill the following duties:
   A.   Review the revenues and expenditures of the city's occupation tax
imposed upon persons and entities engaging in the business of providing food
services, drinking places, or restaurants pursuant to Chapter 23, Article VII
(hereinafter referred to as "Food and Beverage Tax"). The Committee shall
advise the public and city officials with regard to the city's Food and
Beverage Tax, and shall confirm that the Food and Beverage Tax revenues are
accounted for in the designated special revenue funds and are being expended on
eligible projects as provided by city ordinances.
   B.   Serve as the Citizens Advisory Review Committee for purposes of the
Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act and Chapter 38, Article 1 of
Grand Island City Code.
All meetings of the Committee are subject to open meeting laws.
The Committee shall be composed of seven (7) voting members who shall be
registered voters of the City of Grand Island. Four (4) members shall
constitute a quorum. The City Administrator and a City Council member shall
serve as ex officio members of the Committee. The members shall be appointed by
the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council.
Members must meet the eligibility criteria contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-
2715. No voting members may be elected or appointed city officials, employees
of the city, a member of the Hall County Regional Planning Commission, or
participants in any decision making process related to the distribution of Food
& Beverage Tax revenue or of funds disbursed pursuant to Chapter 38, Article 1
of Grand Island City Code. No member may have received funds, be an employee of
a business receiving funds, be employed by a financial institution
participating in the use or distribution of funds, or have provided
professional services to any recipient of Food & Beverage Tax revenue or Local
Option Economic Development Program funding within the three (3)-years
preceding their membership. At least one (1) member of the Committee shall have
expertise or experience in the field of business, finance or accounting and a
majority of the members should have experience in the fields of accounting,
banking, business, finance, accounting or as a business owner or management
level professional.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
2-77 Terms of Tax Oversight Committee Members
The term of office for the members shall be as follows:
   A.   Four (4) members shall have terms ending in even numbered years; and
   B.   Three (3) members shall have terms ending in odd numbered years; and
   C.   Eligibility to continue service beyond the initial term is based on
City Council approval.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
2-78 Tax Oversight Committee Vacancies; Removal
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Tax Oversight Committee shall be
filled by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council for the
remainder of the term. Any member of the Tax Oversight Committee may be removed
from office by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
2-79 Tax Oversight Committee Meetings
The Committee shall hold regular meetings not less than quarterly and on other
occasions as necessary to perform all duties of citizen oversight contained in
City Code Chapter 23, Section 80, and Chapter 38, Article I, and to advise the
City Council with regard to the programs. Special meetings of the Tax Oversight
Committee shall be held whenever called by the Mayor or chairperson of the
Committee. The Committee shall report to the governing body on its findings and
suggestions at least twice during each fiscal year at a public hearing called
for that purpose.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
2-80 Tax Oversight Committee Officers
The Tax Oversight Committee shall elect its chairperson from its members in
January of each odd-numbered year. The term of the chairperson shall be two (2)
years, with eligibility of reelection.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
CHAPTER 3
ALARM SYSTEMS
3-1   Definitions
3-2   Duties Of Subscriber And Of Vendor
3-3   Standards Required For Alarm Systems
3-4   Standards For Future Alarm Systems
3-5   Excessive False Alarms
3-6   No Liability On Part Of The City
3-7   Penalty
3-1   Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as
herein set forth:
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged,
designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the City of Grand Island of a
burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency
requiring urgent attention, and to which law enforcement, fire, or emergency
medical personnel are expected to respond. Alarm systems include those through
which Public Safety personnel are notified directly of such signals through
automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons
who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to Public Safety
personnel. Alarm systems also include those designed to register a signal which
is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected
building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood
beyond the zoning lot where the signal is located, who may in turn notify the
Public Safety personnel of the signal. Alarm systems do not include those
affixed to automobiles. Further, alarm systems do not include auxiliary devices
installed by telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems
which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.
False alarm is any signal created by an alarm system (including but not limited
to alarm signals initiated by human error) which signal directly or indirectly
notifies Public Safety personnel of the occurrence of a burglary, robbery,
other criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency when no such
emergency exists and when law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical personnel
are not needed to respond to a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire
emergency, or medical emergency.
Subscriber is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who or
which purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system.
Vendor is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity associated with
an alarm business or company, either indirectly or directly, whose duties
include but are not limited to any of the following: selling, replacing,
moving, repairing, maintaining, or installing an alarm system on or in any
structure, building, or facility.
3-2   Duties Of Subscriber And Of Vendor
   A.   Duties of Subscriber. It shall be the responsibility of each subscriber
to see that the standards of installation and maintenance set forth in this
chapter are adhered to.
   B.   Duties of Vendor. It shall be the responsibility of any vendor causing
installation of or maintaining an alarm system to cause such installation or
maintenance to conform to the requirements of the Fire Code and the Electric
Code applicable in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
   C.   Duties of Subscriber and Vendor. Each alarm system shall be utilized
only for the purposes of summoning the Public Safety personnel for emergency
and/or life hazard situations. Without the prior express consent of the
Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department, systems shall
not be tested so as to transmit a signal to Public Safety personnel when an
emergency or life hazard situation does not exist. It shall be the
responsibility of each subscriber and also each vendor not to make such tests.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006)
3-3   Standards Required For Alarm Systems
   A.   Notification. Each subscriber must provide to the City of Grand Island
on a form provided by the Communications Division of the Emergency Management
Department the name, address, and telephone number of the subscriber and of the
vendor, if any, with whom the subscriber has contracted for maintenance of the
alarm system. Each subscriber shall also provide the City with the names,
addresses, and phone numbers of those persons (not less than two) who can be
contacted 24 hours a day and seven days a week to turn off or deactivate an
alarm system. It shall be the obligation of the subscriber to keep this
information current and correct through supplementary notifications filed from
time to time on the same form.
   B.   Designated Telephone Lines. No person shall use or cause to be used an
alarm system or device of any kind that automatically dials or calls any
telephone line of the offices of the City of Grand Island or any department or
division thereof except such telephone line or lines as may be designed by the
Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department of the City for
the specific purpose of receiving signals from alarm systems.
   C.   Automatic Dialing or Calling Devices. Alarm systems that automatically
dial or call a telephone line designated by the Communications Division of the
Emergency Management Department shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Total length of the recorded message being transmitted to the
Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department (including
repetition of message) shall not exceed 30 seconds duration.
      2.   The recorded message transmitted shall be repeated not less than two
nor more than three times.
      3.   The recorded message being transmitted shall incorporate language
specifically identifying the message as a "recording" with the balance of the
message identifying by street number and street name the location of the
emergency and the nature of the event which caused the alarm system to
activate. If the location of the event signaled by the alarm system is in a
multi-family building or a multi-unit office or commercial building, the
message shall also identify by number and by floor the particular dwelling
unit, office unit, or commercial unit in which the event occurred.
      4.   The recorded message being transmitted to the department shall be
appropriate for the purpose for which the alarm system was installed, and the
message in its entirety shall be intelligible and spoken in the English
language.
      5.   The City of Grand Island's cost of providing monitoring and
telephone lines designated for alarm systems that use automatic dialing or
calling devices, including any re-occurring fees charged, shall be paid in
advance each year to this City by the subscribers. The fee shall be in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. If payment is not
received within thirty days after billing, the system must be disconnected
immediately in the manner described in §
3-5(C).
   D.   Digital Alarm Systems. Subscribers to alarm systems that automatically
transmit digital data via common telephone line to a receiving unit located at
the Communications Center shall pay a digital alarm system monitoring fee, in
advance, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   E.   Supervised (Dedicated Line) Alarm Systems. Subscribers that
automatically transmit alarm conditions via dedicated telephone line to a
receiving unit at the Communications Center shall pay a supervised (dedicated
line) alarm system monitoring fee, in advance, in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   F.   Video (Live) Alarm Systems. Subscribers that transmit continuous video
to a receiving unit at the Communications Center for the purpose of monitoring
a premise shall pay a video (live) alarm system monitoring fee, in advance, in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006)
3-4   Standards For Future Alarm Systems
Systems installed shall comply with the following standards as to installation
and maintenance (and, in addition, shall also comply with the standards set
forth in §
3-3):
   A.   Alarm systems must incorporate a device that allows an adequate delay
before the time at which activation of the system would directly or indirectly
signal Public Safety personnel, or signal other parties who in turn might be
expected to notify Public Safety personnel. This delay is to permit the
subscriber to stop a false alarm from being transmitted.
   B.   The alarm system shall incorporate a device that limits any exterior
signal to a period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes in duration. At the
expiration of the maximum time permitted, the alarm system shall automatically
cease to emit a signal.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006)
3-5   Excessive False Alarms
If any alarm system produces three false alarms in any twelve consecutive
months, written notice of that fact shall be given by certified mail or
delivery to the subscriber, or other appropriate party listed in the
notification required in §
3-3(A) at the addresses listed in the most recent such notification for that
alarm system. Thereafter, the Communications Division of the Emergency
Management Department shall have the power to require the subscriber to comply
with any one or combination of the requirements set forth below as would
minimize, such false alarms in the future:
   A.   The subscriber may be charged a fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule. Such charges shall continue for each excessive false
alarm until six consecutive months have elapsed during which no false alarms
have been registered, and must be paid within 15 days after notice thereof is
given in the same manner as provided by this section for notice of excessive
false alarms.
   B.   The subscriber may be required to cause the alarm system to comply
immediately with the applicable standards referred to in §
3-4.
   C.   The subscriber may be required to disconnect the alarm system
immediately in such fashion that signals are not emitted so as to notify Public
Safety personnel directly or indirectly through automatic telephone recording
devices or to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways
perceptible outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify
persons in the neighborhood who may in turn notify Public Safety personnel of
the signal.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006)
3-6   No Liability On Part Of The City
Nothing in this chapter nor the existence of any other fact(s) shall be
construed to require a response by Public Safety personnel to an address or
location registering an alarm. The City shall neither assume nor bear any
liability for its failure to respond to such an alarm signal.
3-7   Penalty
Any person in violation of §
3-2 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. (Amended by Ordinance No.
9037, effective 04-12-2006)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-1   Definitions
4-2   Declared Legislative Intent
4-3   Liquor Application; Standards
4-4   Applicant To Appear Personally At Hearing
4-5   Notice
4-6   Liquor Application Procedure
4-7   Applications For Liquor Licenses
4-7.1   Special Designated Liquor Licenses
4-8   Grounds For Revocation Or Cancellation
4-9   Hours Of Operation; Retail Establishment
4-10   Through 4-14 (Reserved)
4-15   Occupation Tax; Amounts
4-16   Delivery By Distributor On Sunday
4-17   Licensed Premises; Lights Required
4-18   Consumption In Public Places
4-19   Possession In Parks Prohibited
4-20   Minors Not Permitted After 9 P.M.
4-21   Violations; Liability Of Licensee
4-22   Right Of Entry Of Officersp
4-23   Unlawful Presence In Establishments
4-1   Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol and alcohol processed or sold in a gaseous form. Alcohol does not
include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol;
Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified,
blended, or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances;
Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits;
Beer means a beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water and includes, but
is not limited to, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and near beer;
Alcoholic liquor includes alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and any liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. Alcoholic liquor also
includes confections or candy with alcohol content of more than one-half of one
percent alcohol. The act does not apply to (a) alcohol used in the manufacture
of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and
regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to such acts, (b) flavoring
extracts, syrups, medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary, or toilet
preparations, or food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the act applies
to alcoholic liquor used in the manufacture, preparation, or compounding of
such products or confections or candy that contains more than one-half of one
percent alcohol, or (c) wine intended for use and used by any church or
religious organization for sacramental purposes;
Near beer means beer containing less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by
volume;
Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead, or other receptacle or container used, corked or capped, sealed, and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor;
Manufacturer means every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, winemaker,
blender, processor, bottler, or person who fills or refills an original package
and others engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying, or bottling
alcoholic liquor, including a wholly owned affiliate or duly authorized agent
for a manufacturer;
Nonbeverage user means every manufacturer of any of the products set forth and
described in subsection (4) of section 53-160 Revised Statutes of Nebraska,
when such product contains alcoholic liquor, and all laboratories, hospitals,
and sanatoria using alcoholic liquor for nonbeverage purposes;
Manufacture means to distill, rectify, ferment, brew, make, mix, concoct,
process, blend, bottle, or fill an original package with any alcoholic liquor
and includes blending but does not include the mixing or other preparation of
drinks for serving by those persons authorized and permitted in the act to
serve drinks for consumption on the premises where sold;
Wholesaler means a person importing or causing to be imported into the state or
purchasing or causing to be purchased within the state alcoholic liquor for
sale or resale to retailers licensed under the act, whether the business of the
wholesaler is conducted under the terms of a franchise or any other form of an
agreement with a manufacturer or manufacturers, or who has caused alcoholic
liquor to be imported into the state or purchased in the state from a
manufacturer or manufacturers and was licensed to conduct such a business by
the Nebraska State Liquor Control Commission on May 1, 1970, or has been so
licensed since that date. Wholesaler does not include any retailer licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises who sells alcoholic
liquor other than beer or wine to another retailer pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat.
§53-175, except that any such retailer shall obtain the required federal
wholesaler's basic permit and federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax
stamp. Wholesaler includes a distributor, distributorship, and jobber;
Person means any natural person, trustee, corporation, partnership, or limited
liability company;
Retailer means a person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form except as provided in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 53-175;
Sell at retail and sale at retail means sale for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-175;
Commission means the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;
Sale means any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means for
a consideration and includes any sale made by any person, whether principal,
proprietor, agent, servant, or employee;
To sell means to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale,
or to keep with intent to sell;
Restaurant means any public place (a) which is kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and
where meals are actually and regularly served, (b) which has no sleeping
accommodations, and (c) which has adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and a sufficient number and kind of employees to
prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests;
Club means a corporation (a) which is organized under the laws of this state,
not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, (b) which is kept, used, and
maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, (c) which owns,
hires, or leases a building or space in a building suitable and adequate for
the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their
guests, and (d) which has suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space
and equipment and a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking,
preparing, and serving food and meals for its members and their guests. The
affairs and management of such club shall be conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and no member, officer, agent, or employee of the club shall be paid
or shall directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members other
than any salary fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by the
governing body of the club out of the general revenue of the club;
Hotel means any building or other structure (a) which is kept, used,
maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is
actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for
adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or
residential, (b) in which twenty-five or more rooms are used for the sleeping
accommodations of such guests, and (c) which has one or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and
dining rooms being conducted in the same buildings in connection therewith and
such building or buildings or structure or structures being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity;
Nonprofit corporation means any corporation organized under the laws of this
state, not for profit, which has been exempted from the payment of federal
income taxes;
Minor means any person, male or female, under twenty-one years of age,
regardless of marital status;
Brand means alcoholic liquor identified as the product of a specific
manufacturer;
Franchise or agreement, with reference to the relationship between a
manufacturer and wholesaler , includes one or more of the following: (a) A
commercial relationship of a definite duration or continuing indefinite
duration which is not required to be in writing; (b)   a relationship by which
the wholesaler is granted the right to offer and sell the manufacturer's brands
by the manufacturer; (c) a relationship by which the franchise, as an
independent business, constitutes a component of the manufacturer's
distribution system; (d) a relationship by which the operation of the
wholesaler's business is substantially associated with the manufacturer's
brand, advertising, or other commercial symbol designating the manufacturer;
and (e) a relationship by which the operation of the wholesaler's business is
substantially reliant on the manufacturer for the continued supply of beer;
Territory or sales territory means the wholesaler's area of sales
responsibility for the brand or brands of the manufacturer;
Suspend means to cause a temporary interruption of all rights and privileges of
a license;
Cancel means to discontinue all rights and privileges of a license;
Revoke means to permanently void and recall all rights and privileges of a
license;
Generic label means a label which is not protected by a registered trademark,
either in whole or in part, or to which no person has acquired a right pursuant
to state or federal statutory or common law;
Private label means a label which the purchasing wholesaler or retailer has
protected, in whole or in part, by a trademark registration or which the
purchasing wholesaler or retailer has otherwise protected pursuant to state or
federal statutory or common law;
Brewpub means any restaurant or hotel which produces on its premises a maximum
of ten thousand barrels of beer per year;
Manager means a person appointed by a corporation to oversee the daily
operation of the business licensed in Nebraska. A manager shall meet all the
requirements of the act as though he or she were the applicant, except for
residency and citizenship;
Shipping license means a license granted pursuant to section 53-123.15 of the
Revised Statutes of Nebraska;
Sampling means consumption on the premises of a retail licensee of not more
than five samples of one fluid ounce or less of alcoholic liquor by the same
person in a twenty-four-hour period;
Microbrewery means any small brewery producing a maximum of ten thousand
barrels of beer per year;
Craft brewery means a brewpub or a microbrewery;
Local governing body means (a) the city council of the City of Grand Island;
and
Consume means knowingly and intentionally drinking or otherwise ingesting
alcoholic liquor.
4-2   Declared Legislative Intent
It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of the city council in
adopting and administering the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   To express the community sentiment that the control of availability of
alcoholic liquor to the public in general and to minors in particular promotes
the public health, safety, and welfare;
   B.   To encourage temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor by sound
and careful control and regulation of the sale and distribution thereof; and
   C.   To ensure that the number of retail outlets and the manner in which
they are operated is such that they can be adequately policed by local law
enforcement agencies so that the abuse of alcohol and the occurrence of
alcohol-related crimes and offenses is kept to a minimum.
4-3   Liquor Application; Standards
The city council shall consider the licensing standards and criteria at the
hearing and evaluate any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor license,
whether for a new license, a renewal of an existing license, or a modification
of an existing license, for the purpose of formulating a final order from the
governing body to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission in accordance with the
Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
4-4   Applicant To Appear Personally At Hearing
It shall be the duty of every applicant for an alcoholic liquor license, whose
application is pending before the council, to appear before the council
personally (if a partnership, at least one of the partners; and if a
corporation, at least one managing officer thereof) on the date of the hearing
upon the propriety of granting or recommending such license, provided for by
§53-134, R.R.S. 1943, of said Liquor Control Act, to answer such questions as
may be asked him or her in determining the facts required by law and this
chapter, concerning the propriety of granting such license, and a failure to so
appear without reasonable excuse, shall be grounds for denying such
application. Such applicant may at said hearing present evidence, other than
his or her own testimony, which shall be considered by the council in
determining the propriety of recommending approval of such license. In adopting
any recommendation for approval of such license, the council may require
certain conditions to be effected to ensure that the applicant performs in
conformance with applicant's representations and to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
4-5   Notice
Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-134 shall be given to
the applicant by the city clerk and shall contain the date, time, and location
of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally or factually related
may be heard and considered together unless any party thereto makes a showing
sufficient to satisfy the council that prejudice would result therefrom.
4-6   Liquor Application Procedure
The hearing will be informal and conducted by the Mayor. The hearing shall be
held for the purpose of inquiring into the facts and shall not be an adversary
action. Each witness may present testimony in narrative fashion or by question
and answer.
The governing body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by an
official court reporter or by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant.
The governing body and its representatives shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence, and shall have full authority to control the procedures of
the hearing including the admission or exclusion or testimony or other
evidence. The governing body may admit and give consideration to evidence which
possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent individuals.
The Mayor may limit testimony where it appears to be incompetent, irrelevant,
or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any application and such
opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-examine
the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they shall choose
a spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the Mayor of his/her
representation prior to the start of the hearing.
4-7   Applications For Liquor Licenses
In order to assist the council in determining the general fitness of an
applicant for a retail liquor license, and the character and reputation of the
applicant in the community, the applicant shall provide the city clerk at least
ten days before the council hearing on the application the following
information:
The application for a new license shall be submitted upon such forms as the
commission may prescribe. Such forms shall contain:
   A.   The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has
resided within the State of Nebraska.
   B.   The particular premises for which a license is desired designating the
same by street and number if practicable or, if not, by such other description
as definitely locates the premises.
   C.   The name of the owner of the premises upon which the business licensed
is to be carried on.
   D.   A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States, that
the applicant and the spouse of the applicant are not less than twenty-one
years of age, and that such applicant has never been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a felony or been adjudged guilty of violating the laws governing the
sale of alcoholic liquor or the law for the prevention of gambling in the State
of Nebraska, except that a manager for a corporation applying for a license
shall qualify with all provisions of this subdivision as though the manager
were the applicant, except that the provisions of this subdivision shall not
apply to the spouse of a manager-applicant.
   E.   A statement that the applicant intends to carry on the business
authorized by the license for himself or herself and not as the agent of any
other persons and that if licensed he or she will carry on such business for
himself or herself and not as the agent for any other person.
   F.   A statement that the applicant intends to superintend in person the
management of the business licensed and that if so licensed he or she will
superintend in person the management of the business, and
   G.   Such other information as the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission may
from time to time direct. The applicant shall also submit two legible sets of
fingerprints to be furnished to the Federal Bureau of Investigation through the
Nebraska State Patrol for a national criminal history record check and the fee
for such record check payable to the patrol.
   H.   No license for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises shall be recommended for approval until the Building Department,
Fire Department and Police Department have completed inspections and have
certified that the premises meets all Building and Life Safety Codes. If a
license is recommended for approval pending final inspections, the City Clerk
shall not issue the license until such time as all inspections have been
complete for full compliance.
The application shall be verified by the affidavit of the petition made before
a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths. If
any false statement is made in any part of such application, the applicant or
applicants shall be deemed guilty of perjury and upon conviction thereof, the
license shall be revoked and the applicant subjected to the penalties provided
by law for that crime.
4-7.1   Special Designated Liquor Licenses
All applications for a special designated liquor license shall be reviewed
administratively, and approved or denied, in accordance with established
criteria adopted by the City of Grand Island. Any applicant denied a special
designated liquor license based on the adopted criteria may request that such
application be heard by the City Council.
4-8   Grounds For Revocation Or Cancellation
A retail license to sell alcoholic liquors, which this council is legally
empowered to revoke, may be revoked by the city council whenever it shall find,
after notice and hearing as provided by law, that the holder of any such
license has violated any of the provisions of said Nebraska Liquor Control Act,
or of this chapter, or rule or regulation of the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission; or any statutory provision or ordinance of the City now existing or
hereafter passed, enacted in the interest of good morals and decency; or for
any one or more of the following causes:
   A.   The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed, has been convicted of or has pled guilty to a felony under the laws
of the State of Nebraska, or of any other state of the United States.
   B.   The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed, has been convicted of or has pled guilty to being the proprietor,
manager or agent in charge of a gambling house, or of pandering or other crime
or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   C.   The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed, has been convicted of or pled guilty to violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquors.
   D.   That the licensee either swore falsely to any question in his/her
application for said license, or has failed to comply with the statements and
representations made by the answer to any question or questions in said
application; or has failed to perform in accordance with any other statement or
representation, or keep any promise, oral or written, made to the council, in
connection with such licensee's request for said license.
   E.   The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed, shall have forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges for
any one of the violations of law or ordinances referred to in this section.
   F.   It shall be cause for revocation as herein provided if the licensee,
his/her manager or agent, shall allow any live person to appear, or have
reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear in any licensed
premises in a state of nudity, to provide entertainment, to provide service, to
act as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any capacity.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing
of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or the human
female breast including the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less
than a full opaque covering.
   G.   It shall be cause for revocation when a licensee, his/her manager or
agent in charge of the premises has successive violations that meet the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission standard of violation, the City Council may
revoke or cancel the liquor license.
4-9   Hours Of Operation; Retail Establishment
   A.   No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or
dispensed on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   B.   No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or
dispensed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
   C.   Alcoholic liquor, including beer, may be sold and dispensed for on-site
consumption only from 9:00 a.m. on Sunday until 1:00 a.m. the following Monday.
   D.   Alcoholic liquor, including beer, may be sold at retail and dispensed
for anything other than on-site consumption from 12:00 noon on Sunday until 1:
00 a.m. the following Monday.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9811(B), effective 01-06-2021)
4-10   Through 4-14 (Reserved)
4-15   Occupation Tax; Amounts
   A.   For the purpose of raising revenue, there is hereby levied upon
distributors, retailers, and nonbeverage users of alcoholic liquor in the City
of Grand Island an annual occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule. No reduction in occupation tax except as hereinabove
stated shall be made regardless of the time when the application for license is
made, or the license is issued. Such occupation tax, or any part of it, shall
not be refunded for any cause.
   B.   All occupation taxes levied pursuant to section (A) above, shall be due
and payable within thirty days of the date of the renewal of the licensee's
state liquor license.
4-16   Delivery By Distributor On Sunday
It shall be unlawful for any licensed distributor or wholesaler of beer to
deliver such beverage to any retailers of the same in the city on the first day
of the week, commonly called Sunday prior to 9:00 a.m.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9811(B), effective 01-01-2021)
4-17   Licensed Premises; Lights Required
All rooms where alcoholic liquors are sold shall be continuously lighted during
business hours by natural or artificial light.
4-18   Consumption In Public Places
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquors within the
city in the public streets, alleys, roads or highways, or upon property owned
by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while
upon the public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, in any dance hall,
restaurant, cafe, club, or any place open to the general public except as
permitted by a license issued to such premises. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning, operating, managing or conducting any dance hall, restaurant,
cafe, club, or any place open to the general public to permit or allow any
person to consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises, except as permitted by a
license issued to such premises.
4-19   Possession In Parks Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession or physical
control any alcoholic liquors upon any of the property belonging to the City
designated as a city park, pool, hike/bike trail, playground or plaza.
This section shall not apply to events authorized or sponsored by the Railside
BID for use of the plaza located at Pine Street and 3rd Street, Grand Island,
Nebraska. Any user shall comply with all terms of the Railside BID use
agreement and shall have the appropriate liquor licensing for said use.
This section shall not apply to events authorized or sponsored by the Heartland
Public Shooting Park located at 6788 W. Husker Highway, Alda, Nebraska. Any
user shall comply with all terms of the Heartland Public Shooting Park Event
User Agreement and all other rules and regulations of the Park. The user shall
have the appropriate liquor licensing for said use.
This section shall not apply to alcohol purchased and consumed at the
Jackrabbit Run Golf Course.
This section shall not apply during for-profit adult sporting events held at
Ryder Park so long as all alcohol is possessed within the fenced perimeter of
the grandstand; is purchased and consumed in compliance with all rules and
regulations set forth in any use agreement; and is sold, possessed, and
consumed pursuant to a liquor license issued for said event.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9927 on 5/10/2023
Amended by Ord. 9968 on 3/12/2024
4-20   Minors Not Permitted After 9 P.M.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed retailer or his, her, or its agent or
employee to suffer or permit any minor to be or remain in any room or
compartment of such licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is being sold or
consumed after 9 p.m. of any day; provided, that this section shall not apply
to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or adult guardian, or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of
services or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
4-21   Violations; Liability Of Licensee
Any act or the omission of any act constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or
employee of any licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, if such act is
committed or such omission is made with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of such licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
employer or licensee, and such employer or licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
4-22   Right Of Entry Of Officers
All police officers of the city are authorized to enter at any time upon the
premises of any license under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act within the City
to determine whether or not any of the provisions of such Act or of this
chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted by the City or by the Nebraska
Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated and at such time to
examine sufficiently such premises of such licensee in connection therewith.
4-23   Unlawful Presence In Establishments
It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any establishment where
alcoholic liquors are sold or dispensed at any time during which sales of
alcoholic liquors are prohibited by the foregoing sections; provided, that a
person may be present in such an establishment for only fifteen minutes after
the time required for cessation of sales of alcoholic liquors set out in prior
§
4-9 to allow the person present in the establishment at closing time to leave
the premises; provided further, that the word "person" shall not include the
owner or operator or his/her agent or employee when actually engaged in cleanup
or custodial work. This section shall not apply to restaurants which are open
for business.
CHAPTER 5
ANIMALS
Article 5-I   General
Article 5-II   Commercial Animal Establishments
Article 5-III   Animal Licenses
Article 5-IV   Animal Care
Article 5-V   Rabies Control
Article 5-VI   Animal Control
Article 5-VII   Penalties
Article 5-VIII   Appeal Procedure
Article 5-IX   Apiaries
Article 5-I
General
5-1   Definitions
5-2   Animal Advisory Board; Establishment
5-3   Composition And Membership; Term Of Office; Quorum; And Procedure
5-4   Enforcement; Jurisdiction; Agencies; Duties
5-5   Interference With Animal Control Officer
5-1   Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean:
Abandon. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or custodian, for
any length of time without making effective provision for its food, water, or
other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.
Animal. Any live, member of the Animal Kingdom with the following exceptions:
   A.   Human beings;
   B.   Animals that are sold commercially as food for human consumption;
   C.   Animals that are slaughtered as food for human or animal consumption;
   D.   Animals that are slaughtered or processed for human use;
   E.   Animals that are used for scientific research conducted at commercial
or academic facilities;
   F.   Animals that are used as commonly acceptable bait for lawful fishing
activities;
   G.   Vermin;
   H.   Uncaptured wild creatures; or
   I.   Livestock as defined in Neb Rev. Stat. §54-902.
Animal Abuse. To knowingly, willfully, intentionally or inhumanely kill, maim,
injure, torture, or beat an animal with the following exceptions:
   A.   Euthanization or treatment by a Veterinarian or at a Veterinary
Hospital or Clinic;
   B.   Euthanization or treatment at an Animal Control Facility;
   C.   Killing or injuring by members of law enforcement or Animal Control
Officers in the course of their duties;
   D.   Killing or injuring by persons protecting themselves or others from
potential death or serious injury; or
   E.   Training or disciplining an animal using commonly accepted methods.
Animal Control Authority. The entity contracted to enforce the City of Grand
Island’s animal control laws. This also includes any law enforcement agencies
authorized to enforce local, State, or Federal animal control laws.
Animal Control Officer. Any person employed or designated by any Animal Control
Authority or law enforcement agency to enforce local, State, or Federal animal
control laws.
Animal Shelter. Any facility operated by the City or by the duly authorized
Animal Control Authority for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter.
Anti-Escape Barrier. Any housing, fencing, or device humanely designed to
prevent a dog from leaving an area.
Auctions Facility. Any commercial establishment place or facility where animals
are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise
defined in this ordinance. This section does not apply to individual sales of
animals by owners.
Bedding. Dry material such as straw, cedar or wood chips, or any other
absorbent material that provides insulation.
Birds. Any feathered vertebrate, including pigeons, but excluding poultry.
Bite. Any seizure with the teeth or mouth by an animal which causes injury or
harm.
Boarding Kennel. Any commercial facility used to house animals owned by persons
other than the owner or operator.
Breeder. Any person or entity engaged in breeding and/or selling more than ten
(10) animals in any twelve (12) month period.
Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
Commercial Animal Establishment. Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction facility,
riding school or stable, performing animal exhibition, or kennel with the
following exceptions:
   A.   An animal shelter;
   B.   A veterinary hospital or clinic;
   C.   A commercial facility that sells, slaughters, or processes animals; or
   D.   A commercial or academic animal research facility.
Cruelly mistreat. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, kick, hit, strike in any manner, mutilate, burn, scald, or
otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
Cruelly neglect. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as owner
or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for
the animal’s health.
Dangerous Animal. An animal that has killed a human being; has inflicted injury
on a human being that requires medical treatment, or has killed a domestic
animal without provocation with the following exceptions:
   A.   An animal that is provoked;
   B.   An animal that is serving as a guard for persons or property; or
   C.   An animal that kills or injures a person who is trespassing.
Domestic animal. Shall mean a cat, a dog, or livestock.
Enclosure. Any tract of land intended to restrain or contain an animal by means
of a building, fence, or any other means.
Fowl. Any poultry, other than pigeons.
Grooming Shop. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped,
plucked, or otherwise groomed.
Health Department. The agency or organization the City contracts with or
designates to enforce the provisions of Chapter 5 - Animals of the Grand Island
City Code related to public health and welfare.
Hybrid animal. Any animal which is the product of the breeding of a domestic
dog with a nondomestic canine species.
Humane killing. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
Kennel. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or
cats.
Livestock. Any hoofed animal or poultry commonly associated with domestic
agricultural purposes, including but not limited to: horses, mules, donkeys,
cows, sheep, goats, llamas, hogs, domesticated cervine animals, chickens,
ducks, ratite birds, or turkeys.
Medical treatment. Treatment administered by a physician or other licensed
health care professional.
Mutilation. Intentionally causing permanent injury, disfigurement, degradation
of function, incapacitation, or imperfection to an animal. Mutilation does not
include conduct performed by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary
medicine and surgery in this state or conduct that conforms to accepted
veterinary practices.
Owner. Any person(s), or legal entity having permanent control of an animal,
keeping, possessing, harboring, or knowingly permitting an animal to remain on
or about any premises owned or occupied by such person, or housing, feeding, or
controlling an animal for more than three (3) days with the following
exceptions:
   A.   A boarding kennel; or
   B.   A veterinarian, veterinary hospital, or veterinary clinic.
Performing Animal Exhibition. Any spectacle, display, act, circus, fair, or
event in which animals perform.
Pet. Any animal kept for pleasure or companionship rather than solely for
utility.
Pet Shop. Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately
or in connection with another business except for a licensed kennel, that buys,
sells, or boards any species of animal.
Potentially Dangerous Animal.
   A.   Any animal that when unprovoked:
      1.   Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment; or
      2.   Injures a domestic animal; or
      3.   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any public
grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
   B.   Any specific animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition
to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans
or domestic animals.
Poultry. Domesticated fowl which are bred for the primary purpose of producing
eggs or meat, including but not limited to chickens, ducks, ratite birds,
turkeys, geese, waterfowl, and game birds, excluding doves and pigeons.
Restraint. Securing an animal by a leash or lead which results in it being
under the control of owner or custodian or being confined within the real
property limits of its owner or custodian.
Riding School or Stable. Any place which has available for hire, boarding and/
or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro.
Running at Large. Any dog or other animal outside the premises of its owner or
custodian and not controlled by a leash, cord, chain, rope, cage or other
suitable means of physical restraint.
Shelter. Any structure with a roof and at least three (3) walls designed and
capable of protecting and/or housing one or more animals while providing
protection from the elements and affording any animal housed or protected in
it, the space to sit, stand, lie down, and turn around.
Torture. Intentionally subjecting an animal to pain, suffering, or agony with
the following exceptions:
   A.   The slaughter of animals as food for human or animal consumption;
   B.   The slaughter or processing of animals for human use;
   C.   The use of animals for scientific research conducted at commercial or
academic facilities;
   D.   The use of animals as commonly acceptable bait for lawful fishing
activities;
   E.   The extermination of vermin;
   F.   The euthanization or treatment of an animal by a Veterinarian or at a
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic;
   G.   The euthanization or treatment of an animal at an animal control
facility;
   H.   The killing or injuring of animals by members of law enforcement or
Animal Control Officers in the course of their duties;
   I.   The killing or injuring of animals by persons protecting themselves or
others from potential death or serious injury; or
   J.   The training or disciplining of animals using commonly accepted
methods.
Vermin. Animals that infest places where humans live, work, or control and
which are commonly considered objectionable, excluding animals used solely as
feeder animals. Examples include but are not limited to rodents, insects and
bee colonies.
Wild Animal. Any animal that is native to a foreign country, of foreign origin
or character, not native to the United States, not native to the State of
Nebraska, and/or is any wild, poisonous, or potentially dangerous animal not
normally considered domesticated, including but not limited to monkeys,
raccoons, skunks, snakes and lions but excluding birds and those animals listed
on the Approved Animal List.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9229, effective 08-26-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-
2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023 Amended by Ord. 9965 on 2/27/2024
5-2   Animal Advisory Board; Establishment
There is hereby established the Animal Advisory Board of the City of Grand
Island, whose duty it shall be to advise the mayor and city council on all
matters relating to this chapter. The board shall be composed of nine members:
five (5) members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city
council; one (1) of whom shall be a licensed veterinarian, three (3) shall be
registered voters residing within the City of Grand Island; and one (1) member
of the City Council. The other four (4) non-appointed members shall consist of
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the City Attorney or his/her designee,
the director of the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee, and the
director of the designated health department or his/her designee. Appointed
members shall serve without compensation. The Animal Advisory Board shall meet
during January of each year and/or such other occasions as may be established
by said board.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9229, effective 08-26-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-
2014)
5-3   Composition And Membership; Term Of Office; Quorum; And Procedure
Said advisory board shall be composed of the following voting members: one (1)
veterinarian and three (3) representatives from the community at large, a
member of the City Council, the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the
director of the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee, and the director
of the health department or his/her designee. The City Attorney or his/her
designee shall serve as an ex officio member without voting privileges. The
original appointees to the Animal Advisory Board shall serve terms as follows:
One for one year, one for two years, and one for three years. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for three year terms, provided, any appointment to fill a
vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the term of the member being
replaced. The mayor may remove any appointed member without cause.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-4   Enforcement; Jurisdiction; Agencies; Duties
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced only within the corporate limits of the
City of Grand Island.
   B.   The Code provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the agency
with which the City contracts to enforce said provisions and the Police
Department. All employees of said Animal Control Authority shall be designated
animal control officers for the purposes of this chapter.
   C.   The Health Department shall assist in enforcement of code provisions
relating to public health, safety and welfare.
   D.   This Chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Care or treatment of an animal by a veterinarian licensed under the
Nebraska Veterinary Practice Act until December 1, 2008, and the Veterinary
Medicine and Surgery Practice Act on and after December 1, 2008;
      2.   Commonly accepted care or treatment of a police animal by a law
enforcement officer in the normal course of his or her duties;
      3.   Research activity carried on by any research facility currently
meeting the standards of the federal Animal Welfare Act, 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq.,
as such act existed on January 1, 2003;
      4.   Commonly accepted practices of hunting, fishing, or trapping;
      5.   Commonly accepted practices occurring in conjunction with rodeos,
animal racing, or pulling contests;
      6.   Humane killing of an animal by the owner or by his or her agent or a
veterinarian upon the owner’s request;
      7.   Commonly accepted practices of animal husbandry with respect to farm
animals and commercial livestock operations, including their transport from one
location to another and nonnegligent actions taken by personnel or agents of
the Nebraska Department of Agriculture or the United States Department of
Agriculture in the performance of duties prescribed by law;
      8.   Use of reasonable force against an animal, other than a police
animal, which is working, including killing, capture, or restraint, if the
animal is outside the owned or rented property of its owner or custodian and is
injuring or posing an immediate threat to any person or other animal;
      9.   Killing of house or garden pests;
      10.   Commonly followed practices occurring in conjunction with the
slaughter of animals for food or byproducts; and
      11.   Commonly accepted animal training practices.
      12.   The Nebraska State Fair; and
      13.   Post-secondary educational institutions.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9531, effective 04-15-2015)
5-5   Interference With Animal Control Officer
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal control officer
in the performance of his or her duties.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
Article 5-II
Commercial Animal Establishments
5-6   Commercial Animal Establishments
5-7   Permits Required
5-7.1   Selling And/Or Giving Away Animals On City Or Private Property
5-8   Commercial Permits; Fee; Renewal
5-9   Commercial Permits; Transfer
5-10   Commercial Establishments; Inspections
5-11   Commercial Permits; Revocation
5-6   Commercial Animal Establishments
All provisions of this chapter relating to the care and control of animals
shall apply to commercial animal establishments as to all animals not kept for
sale or resale; and, as to all animals kept for sale or resale, all provisions
shall apply except for the enclosure distance requirements set forth in §
5-16 and §
5-17; the limitations of the number of animals set forth in §
5-18; the minimum area requirements set forth in §
5-18; the prohibition of roosters as set forth in §
5-41.1; and the registration of dogs and cats set forth in §
5-12.
5-7   Permits Required
No person, partnership, or corporation shall operate a commercial animal
establishment within the City of Grand Island without first obtaining a
commercial permit. Operation of a commercial animal establishment without a
commercial animal establishment permit shall constitute a public nuisance,
subject to abatement pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code and fine pursuant to §
1-7 of this Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-7.1   Selling And/Or Giving Away Animals On City Or Private Property
No person, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity shall sell and/
or give away animals on City property. Before the sale and/or giving of animals
may occur on private property, the animal owner must first obtain the written
permission of the property owner. Refusal to leave upon request shall be
punishable by a fine as listed in §
1-7 of this Code.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-8   Commercial Permits; Fee; Renewal
   A.   A commercial permit fee as adopted by the Health Department and
identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be paid to the Health
Department for each commercial animal establishment within the City.
   B.   Each permit shall be effective for one year, beginning on August 1 of
each year and ending on July 31 of the following year.
   C.   Renewal applications shall be made no sooner than thirty days prior to,
nor later than thirty days after, the first day of August.
5-9   Commercial Permits; Transfer
Permits may be transferred upon a change of ownership of a commercial animal
establishment upon payment of a transfer fee as adopted by the Health
Department and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
5-10   Commercial Establishments; Inspections
It shall be a condition of the issuance of a permit for operating a commercial
animal establishment that the Animal Control Authority on behalf of the City,
or the City’s designee or the Health Department shall be permitted to inspect
the premises and all animals thereon semi-annually. Refusal to allow an
inspection by any authorized agent of the City or Health Department shall be
grounds for revocation of said permit. All commercial animal establishments
shall comply with the Minimum Standards of Sanitation, Care, and Adequate
Housing to be promulgated and adopted by the Animal Advisory Board and approved
by the Mayor and City Council. Copies of the Minimum Standards of Sanitation,
Care, and Adequate Housing shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Animal
Control Authority, and shall be available for public inspection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-11   Commercial Permits; Revocation
The city council may, after notice and hearing as provided by law, revoke or
suspend any commercial permit for one or more of the following causes:
   A.   Refusal by the commercial permit holder to allow the City or an animal
control officer to inspect the premises or examine the animals thereon.
   B.   The conviction of the commercial permit holder or any of his or her
employees for the offense of cruelty to or neglect of animals, whether or not
said conviction is based upon the treatment of any animal on the premises of
the commercial animal establishment.
   C.   Three or more convictions of the commercial permit holder and/or any of
his or her employees for violations of any provision of this chapter within any
twelve month period where said violations are based upon the care and/or
control of the animals on the premises of said establishment.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
Article 5-III
Animal Licenses
5-12   Registration Fee; Amounts; Delinquent
5-13   Pet Tag; Issuance
5-12   Registration Fee; Amounts; Delinquent
   A.   The owner of any dog or cat over the age of three months in the City of
Grand Island shall pay an annual pet license fee for said dog or cat. Such fee
shall be adopted by the governing body and identified in the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
The annual pet license as provided in this section shall be for the period of
January 1 through December 31 of the licensing year. The pet license provided
for by this section shall be secured by each new owner or new resident within
thirty days of establishing residency in the City or after acquiring said
animal, notwithstanding the fact that the dog or cat may have been registered
within the annual period by a previous owner or that the dog or cat had been
registered with another authority other than the City of Grand Island.
   B.   The fee required in (A) above shall become due on January 1 of the
licensing year and shall become delinquent on February 1 of each year. The
owner of any dog or cat in the City of Grand Island registering the same after
said fee has become delinquent shall pay a surcharge in accordance with the
fees adopted by the governing body identified in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
   C.   No dog or cat shall be registered and licensed unless and until the
owner shall display a certificate of a licensed veterinarian showing that such
dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies.
   D.   The owner of any dog or cat that has been declared “potentially
dangerous” or “dangerous” shall pay, in addition to the pet license above, an
annual kennel inspection fee. Such fee shall become due at the time of the
declaration, and then shall be paid annually thereafter with the annual fee
becoming due on January 1 of the year following the declaration, and shall
become delinquent on February 1 of said year. The kennel inspection fee shall
be adopted by the governing body and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9142, effective 11-28-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9200, effective 12-17-2008)
5-13   Pet Tag; Issuance
   A.   Upon the payment of the pet license fee required by §
5-12, the owner shall be issued a metal tag for each dog or cat registered,
which tag shall be marked and numbered with the year for which the tag is
purchased and fee paid, and the number corresponding with the number of the dog
or cat on the fee list. The pet tag must be attached to a collar or a harness
and must be worn by each dog or cat at all times while it is outside its
owner’s residence.
   B.   Each dog or cat registered must be listed and numbered by the treasurer
and listed at the offices of the Animal Control Authority.
   C.   If a pet license tag is lost, a replacement tag must be issued upon
payment of a fee as adopted and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
Article 5-IV
Animal Care
5-14   Shelter Required
5-15   Enclosure Required
5-16   Enclosures; Requirements
5-17   Enclosures; Registration Required
5-18   Number Of Animals; Limits
5-19   (Reserved)
5-20   Shelters And Enclosures; Sanitation
5-21   Food, Water, Health Care, Grooming; Owner's Duty
5-22   Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
5-23   Abandonment Of Animals Prohibited
5-24   Exposing Poison Prohibited
5-25   Accidents Involving Animals; Duties
5-26   Ear Cropping, Dewclaw Removal, And Taildocking; Prohibition
5-27   Restricted Sale Of Chicks And Ducklings
5-28   Animals As Prizes Prohibited
5-29   Performing Animal Exhibitions
5-14   Shelter Required
No owner shall fail to provide pets with shelter of sufficient size to allow
each pet to stand, turn around, and lie down, and be of sufficient construction
to shield the pets from the wind, sun, precipitation and extreme weather
conditions.
No owner shall fail to provide chicken hens with shelter in the form of a hen
house or coop. A hen house or coop must be of sufficient construction to shield
the hens from the wind, sun, precipitation and extreme weather conditions,
while being well-ventilated and designed for easy access for cleaning. Chicken
coops or hen houses must allow at least one and one-half (1.5) square feet of
floor space per chicken hen.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-15   Enclosure Required
Every owner shall confine his or her animals within an enclosure of sufficient
size and design to prevent the animal from escaping or to restrain said animal
by a securely fastened rope, chain, or cord, or trolley/pulley system, all of
which must be of a size and weight appropriate to the size, weight and
temperament of the animal. Confinement shall be done in such a manner as to
prevent such animal from going onto any public property or onto the property of
another. Enclosures, other than appropriate full yard fences or enclosures used
to confine rabbits, birds or chickens, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any
property line.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-16   Enclosures; Requirements
   A.   All enclosures and restraints required by §
5-15 which are used to confine horses, mules, donkeys, cows, sheep, goats or
llamas shall be no less than 150 feet from any residence other than the
residence of the owner of said enclosure unless a waiver or variance is
obtained as provided in subsection (C) below.
   B.   All enclosures and restraints required by §
5-15 which are used to confine rabbits, birds, or chickens shall be at least
twenty (20) feet from any residence other than the residence of the owner of
said enclosure. Rabbit hutches, chicken coops and enclosures shall not be
located within five (5) feet of a property line and must be adequately secured
to contain the animals on the property and to prevent predators from obtaining
access to the enclosure.
   C.   The owner of any animal affected by subsection (A) may keep or maintain
an enclosure within the prohibited distance by either obtaining a waiver from
all property owners within the prohibited distance stating that said property
owners do not object to the keeping of animals within the prohibited distance,
and filing the same with the City Clerk, or obtaining a variance from the city
council; provided, that no variance shall be granted by the city council for a
distance less than 75 feet. The council shall consider the following factors in
determining whether or not to issue a variance:
      1.   That the variance, if allowed, is in harmony with the general
purpose and interest of this animal ordinance;
      2.   That there are practical difficulties or practical hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of this animal ordinance;
      3.   For the purpose of supplementing the above requirements, the council
in making the determination whether there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which
the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the
evidence:
         a.   that the majority of the applicant's neighbors have presented no
objection to the proposed variance;
         b.   that the variance, if granted, would not be a threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare;
         c.   that the variance, if granted, would not materially reduce the
marketability of surrounding real property.
      4.   Upon the filing of a request for variance under this subsection, the
city clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing for variance
to be mailed to all residences within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the
enclosure for which the variance is sought.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9229, effective 08-26-2009)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-17   Enclosures; Registration Required
   A.   The location of all enclosures with the distance requirements as set
forth by §
5-16 shall be registered with the Animal Control Authority within ten days of
placing any animal upon an unregistered location. Said registration shall be
non-reoccurring for each owner, but shall be nontransferable.
   B.   The location of all enclosures in existence prior to the effective date
of this ordinance shall be registered with the Animal Control Authority within
90 days of the effective date of this ordinance.
   C.   An enclosure shall be considered registered with the Animal Control
Authority when an owner has submitted a diagram or aerial photo of the
enclosure on the property clearly showing compliance with the distance
requirements.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-18   Number Of Animals; Limits
   A.   No residential property shall have more than one of the following
animals over weaning age per half acre of outdoor enclosure area where said
animals are of the following livestock species:
      1.   horses;
      2.   mules;
      3.   donkeys;
      4.   cows;
      5.   sheep;
      6.   goats; and
      7.   llamas;
(i.e. two acres of outside enclosure area may be occupied by two horses and two
cows, not four horses and four cows).
   B.   No person, except for commercial retail establishments that offer live
fowl (excluding chickens) for retail sale and governmental and/or non-profit
educational facilities, shall keep or maintain on his or her property any fowl
(excluding chicken hens) in a number that exceeds four (4) per one acre with a
minimum of land being one (1) acre (i.e., two acres may be occupied by eight
(8) fowl).
   C.   No person shall keep or maintain on his or her residential property
chicken hens in a number that exceeds eight (8), with no less than three (3) on
any lot of less than one (1) acre in size. No person shall keep or maintain on
his or her residential property chicken hens in a number that exceeds twenty-
four (24) chicken hens per one (1) acre (i.e., two (2) acres may be occupied by
forty-eight (48) chicken hens).
   D.   No residential property shall have more than fifteen (15) rabbits of
weaning age at any one time.
   E.   No residential property shall have more than thirty (30) birds over six
months of age at any one time.
   F.   For the purposes of this section, the number of animals permitted to be
kept under subsection (A) shall be reduced by one if rabbits are also kept on
said property, and also by one if birds or fowl are kept on said property.
   G.   No residential property shall have more than four dogs and/or cats over
three months of age.
   H.   No residential property shall have more than four different species of
animals sheltered and/or enclosed outside the residence.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9142, effective 11-28-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-19   (Reserved)
5-20   Shelters And Enclosures; Sanitation
No owner shall fail to keep the shelters and enclosures on his or her property
in a sanitary condition. As a minimum, owners shall not fail to:
   A.   Remove or dispose of in a sanitary manner, the bedding, offal manure,
and waste materials accumulating from livestock at least once every seven (7)
days.
   B.   Remove or dispose of in a sanitary manner, the bedding, offal manure,
and waste materials accumulating from all other animals at least once daily.
   C.   Clean and disinfect said shelters and enclosures so as to prevent the
breeding of flies and insects and the emission of deleterious and offensive
odors therefrom.
5-21   Food, Water, Health Care, Grooming; Owner's Duty
Owner shall provide at a minimum:
   A.   Food of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the daily
requirements for the condition and size of the animal and fresh, clean water
for his or her animals, in containers of sufficient weight and design as to
preclude readily tipping over and spilling the contents.
   B.   Adequate shelter in subzero degree temperatures, excessive heat or
stormy weather.
   C.   Grooming of animals as required to keep the animal free from dangerous
matting, skin disease and insect infestation which can affect the health of the
animal.
   D.   Keep the enclosure or tethered area where the animal is kept free from
unsanitary conditions, vermin-harboring debris, junk, contaminated materials,
chemicals dangerous to the health of the animal or any other dangerous items
that may cause injury to the animal or in any other way endanger the health of
the animal.
   E.   Appropriate veterinary care for treatment of injuries, parasite and
disease, sufficient to maintain good health.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-22   Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
   A.   No person shall beat, cruelly mistreat, torment, tease, torture,
cruelly neglect, or otherwise abuse any animal.
   B.   No person shall cause, instigate, or permit any fight or other combat
between animals, or between animals and humans.
   C.   No person shall cause, place or confine an animal or allow an animal to
be confined in a dwelling, motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or
for such periods of time as to endanger the health or well-being of the animal
including, but not limited to, extremes of heat or cold, lack of food or water,
or any other circumstance which may cause suffering, disability, injury or
death.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-23   Abandonment Of Animals Prohibited
No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
5-24   Exposing Poison Prohibited
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food
or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal; provided,
that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose common rat poison mixed
only with vegetable substances on his or her own property.
5-25   Accidents Involving Animals; Duties
No person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal, shall
fail to stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, the police, or
the animal control authority for the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009)
5-26   Ear Cropping, Dewclaw Removal, And Taildocking; Prohibition
No person, other than a licensed veterinarian, shall crop the ears, remove the
dewclaws, or dock the tail of an animal.
5-27   Restricted Sale Of Chicks And Ducklings
Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in
quantities of less than three (3) to a single purchaser.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-28   Animals As Prizes Prohibited
No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize
for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or
as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such animal as an
incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the
purpose of attracting trade.
5-29   Performing Animal Exhibitions
   A.   No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which
animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is
likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
   B.   All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in
good working condition.
Article 5-V
Rabies Control
5-30   Rabies Vaccination
5-31   Vaccination Certificate
5-32   Vaccination Certificate; Duty To Exhibit
5-30   Rabies Vaccination
   A.   No owner of a dog, cat or ferret over the age of three (3) months shall
fail to cause the same to be vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed
veterinarian. Owner shall provide proof of vaccination upon request.
   B.   No owner of a dog, cat, or ferret vaccinated as required by subsection
(A) shall fail to have such dog, cat, or ferret revaccinated within ten days of
the expiration date set forth for the original or any subsequent vaccination of
said dog, cat, or ferret.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9965 on 2/27/2024
5-31   Vaccination Certificate
Every veterinarian who vaccinates a dog, cat, or ferret for rabies shall
provide the owner thereof with a certificate showing the date of such
vaccination. A copy of each such certificate or a compilation thereof providing
notification that a vaccination certificate has been issued shall be provided
by each veterinary hospital or veterinary clinic to the City of Grand Island,
or its designee, by the 10th of each month following the date of issuance.
5-32   Vaccination Certificate; Duty To Exhibit
The owner of a vaccinated dog, cat, or ferret shall exhibit the certificate of
vaccination to any animal control officer upon demand.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008)
Article 5-VI
Animal Control
5-33   Stallions, Jacks, And Bulls
5-34   Running At Large; Restraint Required
5-34.1   (Reserved)
5-34.2   Animals Used And Trained For Law Enforcement; Exemption
5-35   Isolation Of Female Animals In Heat
5-36   Dangerous Animals Or Potentially Dangerous Animals On Owner's Property
5-36.1   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous Animals; Actions Required; Costs
5-37   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous Animals Restraint; Impoundment;
Confiscation
5-38   Animal Noise
5-39   Pet Excreta; Removal By Owner
5-40   Wild Animals Prohibited
5-41   Swine Prohibited
5-41.1   Roosters Prohibited
5-42   Impoundment Of Animals At Large
5-43   Rabies Control; Reporting And Impoundment
5-44   Impounded Animals; Disposition
5-33   Stallions, Jacks, And Bulls
No owner of any stallion, jack, or bull shall indecently exhibit the same or
permit any such animal to be bred to any mare, jenny, or cow, except where the
same is not exposed to public view.
5-34   Running At Large; Restraint Required
It shall be unlawful for any owner to suffer or permit any dog, cat, chicken or
other animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City of Grand
Island. "Running at Large" shall mean any dog or other animal off the premises
of the owner and not under the immediate control of a person physically capable
of restraining the animal by holding a leash, cord, chain, rope, cage or other
suitable means of physical restraint or if the animal is out of doors on the
premises of the owner, the animal shall be in an adequate fenced in area or
securely fastened to a leash, chain, or trolley system that is of a size and
weight appropriate to the size, weight and temperament of the animal to prevent
the animal from leaving the owner's premises. It shall be the duty of the
Animal Control Authority or other appropriate city law enforcement officer to
impound any animal found running at large within the City of Grand Island.
Every animal found running at large in violation of this or any other section
of the Grand Island City Code is declared to be a public nuisance and may be
impounded as the discretion of the Animal Control Authority or other
appropriate city law enforcement officer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-34.1   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-34.2   Animals Used And Trained For Law Enforcement; Exemption
Any animal used by law enforcement agencies including but not limited to the
City of Grand Island Police Department, the Hall County Sheriff's Department or
the Nebraska State Patrol shall be exempted from the provisions of the Grand
Island City Ordinances including the Animal Running at Large and Dangerous Dogs
Ordinances while such animal is being trained or used for law enforcement
purposes.
5-35   Isolation Of Female Animals In Heat
No owner of a female cat or dog in heat shall fail to take reasonable measures
to isolate said female from male cats and dogs to prevent contact with such
male animals except for planned breeding.
5-36   Dangerous Animals Or Potentially Dangerous Animals On Owner's Property
   A.   While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or
outdoors in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed
to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the animal from escaping.
The pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into
the ground at a depth of at least one foot. The pen or structure shall also
protect the animal from the elements. The owner of a dangerous animal shall
post warning signs on the property where the animal is kept that are clearly
visible from all areas of public access and that inform persons that a
dangerous animal is on the property. Each warning sign shall be no less than
ten (10) inches by twelve (12) inches and shall contain the words warning and
dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least three (3) inches high on a
black background.
   B.   All pens or structures for confining dangerous animals or potentially
dangerous animals constructed after November 1, 2008 shall be at least ten
(10.0) feet from any privately-owned property abutting the animal owners'
property.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-36.1   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous Animals; Actions Required; Costs
   A.   A dangerous or potentially dangerous animal that has been declared as
such shall be spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification
number by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days after such
declaration. The cost of both procedures shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. Written proof of both
procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the
Animal Control Authority after the procedures are completed not to exceed
thirty (30) days after the declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous
has been made.
   B.   Failure to have the animal spayed or neutered and implanted with a
microchip identification number within thirty (30) days of the declaration will
result in the impoundment of the animal pursuant to §
5-44.
   C.   Failure to provide proof the animal being spayed or neutered and
implanted with a microchip identification number within thirty (30) days of the
declaration will result in the impoundment of the animal pursuant to §
5-44.
   D.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined
pursuant to §
1-7 of this code. If a violation is of a continuing nature, i.e., each day
after the deadline that the animal is not spayed/neutered or microchipped, each
day of the violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-37   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous Animals Restraint; Impoundment;
Confiscation
   A.   No owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall fail to
keep such animal securely muzzled and restrained by a leash or chain whenever
off the owner's property.
   B.   Any dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal in violation of §
5-36 or §
5-37 of the Grand Island City Code may be immediately impounded by animal
control officers. The owner shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the
Animal Control Authority for the care of the dangerous or potentially dangerous
animal confiscated by the Animal Control Authority or for the destruction of
any dangerous or potentially dangerous animal if the action by the Animal
Control Authority is pursuant to law.
   C.   In the event an animal conforming to the definition of potentially
dangerous animal inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans
or domestic animals, the potentially dangerous animal shall be immediately
confiscated by an animal control officer, placed in quarantine for the proper
length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
   D.   An animal conforming to the definition of dangerous animal shall be
immediately confiscated by an animal control officer, placed in quarantine for
the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner.
   E.   Disposition of any animal impounded under this chapter shall be
governed by §
5-44.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9229, effective 09-26-2009)
5-38   Animal Noise
   A.   No owner shall allow conditions to exist on said owner's property
whereby the owner's animal or animals annoy or disturb any neighborhood or any
person by loud, continuous, or frequent barking, howling, yelping, or crowing.
   B.   Owners will be subject to fine pursuant to §
1-7 of this code, or Nuisance Owner declaration pursuant to §
5-46 at the discretion of the Animal Control Authority or other law enforcement
personnel.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-39   Pet Excreta; Removal By Owner
The owner of any animal which, while off the property of its owner, deposits
excreta on public property, or private property, shall be responsible for its
removal. It shall be a violation of this section for the owner to fail to
immediately remove such excreta when notified of its existence and location,
either by the City or by the owner of the property on which the excreta was
deposited.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-40   Wild Animals Prohibited
   A.   No person shall keep, or permit to be kept on their residential
premises any wild animal as a pet, for display, or for exhibition purposes,
except as those on an Approved Animal List to be promulgated and adopted by the
Animal Advisory Board and approved by the Mayor and City Council. Copies of the
Approved Animal List shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Animal
Control Authority, and shall be available for public inspection.
   B.   No person or commercial animal establishment shall offer any wild
animal for sale unless included on the Approved Animal List.
   C.   The owner of any wild animal listed on the Approved Animal List over
the age of six (6) months shall pay an annual wild animal license fee as
adopted and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. The annual
wild animal license, as provided in this section, shall be for the period of
January 1 through December 31 of the licensing year. The wild animal license
provided for by this section shall be secured by each owner or new resident
within thirty (30) days of establishing residency in the City or after
acquiring said animal, notwithstanding the fact that the wild animal may have
been registered within the annual period by a previous owner or that the wild
animal may have been registered in another authority other than the City of
Grand Island. The wild animal license fee shall become due on January 1 of the
licensing year and shall become delinquent on March 1 of each year.
   D.   Failure to obtain a wild animal license will result in a fine as listed
§
1-7 of the City Code.
   E.   In the event a person wishes to keep or permit to be kept on his or her
residential premises, any wild animal not listed on the Approved Animal List,
application in writing may be made to the Animal Advisory Board for adding said
species to the Approved Animal List. The primary factor to be considered by the
Animal Advisory Board in adding a species to the Approved Animal List shall be
whether allowing animals of said species to be kept within the corporate limits
of the City of Grand Island presents a risk to public health, safety and
welfare or the health, safety and welfare of other species already allowed to
be kept as pets.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
5-41   Swine Prohibited
No person shall keep or maintain swine, including the species known as
miniature potbellied pigs, on his or her residential premises within the City.
5-41.1   Roosters Prohibited
No person shall keep or maintain roosters or hens that crow on his or her
property within the city, except for commercial retail establishments who offer
live fowl or chickens for retail sale, and governmental and/or non-profit
educational facilities.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9934 on 7/12/2023
5-42   Impoundment Of Animals At Large
All animals not under restraint may be taken into custody by any animal control
officer and impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in a humane
manner.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008)
5-43   Rabies Control; Reporting And Impoundment
   A.   Any animal which is owned by a person and has bitten any person or
caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall be seized by the animal
control authority for a period of not less than ten days if:
      A.   The animal is suspected of having rabies, regardless of the species
and whether or not the animal has been vaccinated;
      B.   The animal is not vaccinated and is of a species determined by the
State of Nebraska to be a rabid species; or
      C.   The animal is of a species which has been determined by the State of
Nebraska to be a rabid species not amenable to rabies protection by
immunization, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated. If, after
observation and examination by a veterinarian, at the end of the ten-day period
the animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, the animal may be released to its
owner unless otherwise prohibited by law.
   B.   
      1.   Except as provided in subdivision (B)(2) of this subsection,
whenever any person has been bitten or has an abrasion of the skin caused by an
animal owned by another person, which animal has been vaccinated in accordance
with State law or regulation or if such injury to a person is caused by an
owned animal determined by the State of Nebraska to be a rabid species amenable
to rabies protection by immunization which has been vaccinated, such animal
shall be confined by the owner or other responsible person as required by the
animal control authority for a period of at least ten days and shall be
observed and examined by a veterinarian at the end of such ten-day period. If
no clinical signs of rabies are found by the veterinarian, such animal may be
released from confinement unless ownership of the animal is otherwise
prohibited by law.
      2.   A vaccinated animal owned by a law enforcement or governmental
military agency which bites or causes an abrasion of the skin of any person
during training or the performance of the animal's duties may be confined as
provided in subdivision (B)(1) of this subsection. Such agency shall maintain
ownership of and shall control and supervise the actions of such animal for a
period of fifteen days following such injury. If during such period the death
of the animal occurs for any reason, a veterinarian shall within twenty-four
hours of the death examine the tissues of the animal for clinical signs of
rabies.
   C.   Any animal of a rabid species which has bitten a person or caused an
abrasion of the skin of a person and which is unowned or the ownership of which
cannot be determined within seventy-two hours of the time of the bite or
abrasion shall be immediately subject to any tests which the animal control
authority believes are necessary to determine whether the animal is afflicted
with rabies. The seventy-two-hour period shall include holidays and weekends
and shall not be extended for any reason. The tests required by this subsection
may include tests which require the animal to be destroyed.
   D.   All incidents of biting or scratching shall be reported in writing to
the Animal Control Authority by the medical professional treating the injury,
the injured party, or in the case of a minor child, the parent or guardian.
   E.   In the case of domestic or hybrid animals known to have been bitten by
a rabid
animal, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has not been
vaccinated in accordance with State statute, such bitten or exposed domestic or
hybrid animal shall be immediately destroyed unless the owner is willing to
place such domestic or hybrid animal in strict isolation in a kennel under
veterinary supervision for a period of not less than six months; and
      2.   If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has been
vaccinated in accordance with State statutes, such domestic or hybrid animal
shall be subject to the following procedure: (1) Such domestic or hybrid animal
shall be immediately revaccinated and confined for a period of not less than
thirty days following vaccination; (2) if such domestic or hybrid animal is not
immediately revaccinated, such domestic or hybrid animal shall be confined in
strict isolation in a kennel for a period of not less than six months under the
supervision of a veterinarian; or (3) such domestic or hybrid animal shall be
destroyed if the owner does not comply with either subdivision (E)(1) or (2) of
this subdivision.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9229, effective 08-26-2009)
5-44   Impounded Animals; Disposition
   A.   All animals that are not domestic animals, including but not limited to
feral cats, may be humanely euthanized as soon as they are captured or
otherwise taken into custody.
   B.   All animals impounded pursuant to §
5-43 and not euthanized shall be retained until completion of the observation
period and the determination by a licensed veterinarian that said animal is not
infected with rabies, and then may be redeemed by its owner upon payment of the
fees for impoundment and cost of care as adopted by the Animal Control
Authority and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any domestic
animal not claimed within three (3) clear working days after being impounded or
such extended period as is granted in writing by the Animal Control Authority
to allow the animal’s owner to construct a pen or structure in conformance with
§
5-36 or comply with §
5-36.1 shall become the property of the Animal Control Authority and may be
placed for adoption or humanely euthanized by said agency at its discretion.
   C.   Any animals determined to have rabies by a licensed veterinarian shall
be destroyed as soon as possible after that determination is made.
   D.   All domestic animals impounded pursuant to other sections of this
Chapter shall be retained until redeemed by their owner upon payment of fees
for impoundment and cost of care in an amount adopted by the Animal Control
Authority and identified in the Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any domestic animal
not claimed within three (3) clear working days after being impounded or such
extended period as is granted in writing by the Animal Control Authority to
allow the animal’s owner to construct a pen or structure in conformance with §
5-36 or comply with §
5-36.1 shall become the property of the Animal Control Authority and may be
placed for adoption or humanely euthanized by said agency at its discretion.
The foregoing time period shall not include the day of impoundment.
   E.   No dog or cat impounded under this Chapter shall be released until said
animal is vaccinated and licensed as required by the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014)
Article 5-VII
Penalties
5-45   General Penalty
5-46   Nuisance Owner
5-45   General Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to §
1-7 of this code. If a violation is of a continuing nature, each day of the
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
5-46   Nuisance Owner
   A.   Any owner or custodian in possession of any animal or bee hive
regulated by this Chapter may be declared a Nuisance Owner upon written request
by the Animal Control Authority, Animal Advisory Board or Law Enforcement of
the City of Grand Island for any one of the following:
      1.   The owner is convicted of one or more violations of this Chapter on
four (4) separate occasions in a twenty-four (24) month period; or
      2.   The owner has failed to comply with the requirements of §
5-36.1 of City Code after the animal has been deemed Potentially Dangerous or
Dangerous; or
      3.   The owner of a deemed Potentially Dangerous or Dangerous animal has
violated §
5-37 of City Code; or
      4.   The owner of an animal has been convicted of a violation of §
5-22 of City Code;
      5.   The owner of an animal has been convicted of a violation of §
5-23 of City Code; or
      6.   The owner of and animal has been convicted of a violation of any
equivalent State Statute of this or any other State.
   B.   Upon written request by the Animal Control Authority, Animal Advisory
Board or Law Enforcement officials to declare an owner a Nuisance Owner, the
owner must surrender the animal or bee hive(s) to the Animal Control Authority
within five (5) days of receiving notice of Nuisance Ownership. Service of
Nuisance Ownership shall be by personal service or certified U.S. Mail to the
last known address of the owner. The animal or bee hive(s) will be impounded by
the Animal Control Authority until a final determination of Nuisance Ownership
has been made.
   C.   In the event continuation of the nuisance ownership might cause
irreparable harm to the animal or poses a serious threat to public health,
safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of residents of the
property where the animal or bee hive(s) resides, the animal or bee hive(s)
shall be impounded immediately by the Animal Control Authority and held until
final determination of Nuisance Ownership is made.
   D.   The owner may accept the Notice of Nuisance Ownership as a final
determination, or the owner may appeal the Notice of Nuisance Ownership
pursuant to
Article VIII of this Chapter.
   E.   Upon either acceptance of a Nuisance Ownership determination or after
appeal and a determination by the Animal Advisory Board of Nuisance Ownership,
the disposition of the animal or bee hive(s) will be at the discretion of the
Animal Control Authority and what it determines appropriate.
   F.   The owner will be responsible for payment of all impoundment fees as
established by the Animal Control Authority.
   G.   Nuisance owners shall be prohibited from owning or residing with any
animal or keeping bees within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island
for a period of five (5) years from the date of determination. Owners found to
be in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the Animal Control
Authority immediately impounding and disposing of the animal or bee hive(s).
Ultimate disposition of the animal or hive(s) will be at the discretion of the
Animal Control Authority.
   H.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined
pursuant to §
1-7 of this code. If a violation is of a continuing nature, i.e., each day
after the deadline that the animal or bee hive(s) is in the possession of a
prohibited owner, each day of the violation shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9479, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-
2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9965 on 2/27/2024
Article 5-VIII
Appeal Procedure
5-47   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous; Nuisance Owner; Declaration;
Appeal; Disposition
5-47   Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous; Nuisance Owner; Declaration;
Appeal; Disposition
   A.   If it shall appear to an animal control officer that any animal
conforms to the definition of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous
animal, or an owner is a Nuisance Owner pursuant to §
5-46 above, written notice declaring the animal a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal or an owner a Nuisance Owner shall be delivered to the
animal’s owner either by personal service or by Certified U.S. mail addressed
to the last known address of said owner.
   B.   In the case of a dangerous animal, within five (5) days of personal
service or mailing of a notice of declaration to the animal’s owner said owner
shall deliver said animal to the Animal Control Authority for impoundment and
disposition pursuant to §
5-37. In the case of a potentially dangerous animal, within five (5) days of
personal service or mailing of a notice of declaration to the animal’s owner
said owner shall either provide reasonable proof of compliance with §
5-36 and §
5-37 of the Grand Island City Code or shall deliver said animal to the Animal
Control Authority for impoundment and disposition . Refusal or failure by the
owner of any animal declared a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal
to comply with this subsection shall be a violation of the Grand Island City
Code and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance pursuant to §
5-46.
   C.   The owner of any animal declared a potentially dangerous animal or
dangerous animal by an animal control officer, or declaration of a Nuisance
Owner pursuant to §
5-46 above may appeal the decision to the Animal Advisory Board by submitting a
letter of appeal to the City Attorney’s Office within 72 hours of either
receiving personal service or mailing of the written notice of declaration. The
Animal Advisory Board shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) days of delivery
of the letter of appeal to the City Attorney’s Office. The hearing shall be
conducted informally. The animal’s owner and Animal Control Authority shall
present oral or written statements or reasons supporting or opposing the
declaration to the Animal Advisory Board. Statements by each participant shall
be limited to a total time of thirty (30) minutes or less. Upon conclusion of
the hearing the Animal Advisory Board may reverse, modify or affirm the
declaration of the Animal Control Authority. Notice of the determination of the
Animal Advisory Board shall be given to the animal’s owner and the Animal
Control Authority, either personally or by United States Mail.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9933 on 7/12/2023
Article 5-IX
Apiaries
5-48   Hives
5-49   Location Of Hives
5-50   Fencing Of Flyways
5-51   Minimum Area Required
5-52   Standards For Management
5-53   Permits Required
5-54   Falsifying Permits
5-55   Queens
5-56   Nuisance
5-57   Penalty For Violations
5-48   Hives
All bee colonies shall be kept in a hive that is capable of being inspected and
with removable combs, which shall be kept in a sound and usable condition.
5-49   Location Of Hives
No person shall establish or maintain any hive or box where bees are kept, or
keep any bees on the premises within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling (excluding
the dwelling of the owner of such bees) or within fifteen (15) feet of any lot
line, sidewalk, alley, or other public way.
5-50   Fencing Of Flyways
In each instance, the owner shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at
least six (6) feet in height consisting of a solid wall or fence around the
hives or boxes so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least
six (6) feet above ground level in the vicinity of the hive or box.
5-51   Minimum Area Required
No person shall establish or maintain more than two (2) hives or boxes where
bees are kept on any lot.
5-52   Standards For Management
Any person keeping bees shall:
   A.   Minimize swarming of bees;
   B.   Provide an adequate year round source of water on the premises;
   C.   Provide an adequate number of hives or boxes; and
   D.   Maintain and manage such boxes or hives so as not to create a nuisance.
5-53   Permits Required
Anyone desiring to keep bees on their property in the City of Grand Island must
first apply for and be granted a permit. The permit will be issued by the
Central District Health Department or their designee upon payment of a permit
fee as established and adopted by the Board of Health renewable annually,
without inspection, upon showing of no complaints received about the bee
keeping operation and payment of renewal feel as established and adopted by the
Board of Health. If complaints have been received within the prior year, a new
application and application fee shall be submitted. All permit fees paid
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be paid to the Central
District Health Department. Permits shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
   A.   Applicant must be a resident of the City of Grand Island;
   B.   Proof of the specific lot or parcel inclusive of the lot size
(available for free on the City of Grand Island’s website) where the bees are
to be kept;
   C.   Whether or not the lot is the primary residence of the applicant;
   D.   Location of the proposed hives or boxes on the lot or parcel;
   E.   Two (2) forms of contact for the applicant;
   F.   Proof of education on bee keeping which may be proven by;
      1.   Certificate of completion of an educational course including a
minimum of three (3) hours of practical application;
      2.   Certificate of completion of an educational course with a minimum of
three (3) hours of practical application under an established beekeeper in the
State of Nebraska signed by the cooperating beekeeper;
      3.   Affidavit of applicant that the applicant has spent a minimum of
twelve (12) hours of internship under an established beekeeper in the State of
Nebraska signed by the cooperating beekeeper; or
      4.   Affidavit of applicant stating that the applicant has been active in
beekeeping in Nebraska for a period of not less than two (2) consecutive years
and has established hives.
   G.   Enclosure of the hives or boxes by a six (6) foot privacy structure
with a sign posted on the enclosure stating that bee hive(s) are present;
   H.   Year round water source for the bees; and
   I.   Other such information as may be deemed necessary by the issuing
agency.
5-54   Falsifying Permits
All statements on the required permits will be made under oath. Upon showing of
any false statements by the applicant, the applicant shall be guilty of an
infraction punishable by a fine pursuant to §
1-7 of this Code and their hives or boxes will be forfeited to the appropriate
agency. The applicant will be barred from keeping bees for a period of two (2)
years upon proof of falsifying a permit.
5-55   Queens
In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics
by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an
unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to
re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness
and nonswarming characteristics.
5-56   Nuisance
The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the City not in strict compliance
with this section is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a hive
structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony residing
in a standard or homemade hive, which, by virtue of its condition, has
obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is deemed a hazard to the health and
welfare of the community, is unlawful, and may be removed from the City or
turned over to a beekeeper by the Animal Control Authority or their designee.
5-57   Penalty For Violations
Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this Article who
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to perform such duty, or who shall violate any
of the provisions of this Article, shall be fined pursuant to §
1-7 of this Code and be subject to the provisions of §
5-46 Nuisance Owner of this Code. Each day that a violation of any section of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable as such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative
with and in addition to any penalty or forfeiture elsewhere in this chapter
provided.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-2015)
CHAPTER 6
(RESERVED)
(Chapter 6 repealed by Ordinance No. 9043, effective 5-17-2006.)
CHAPTER 7
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 8
BUILDINGS
Article 8-I   General
Article 8-II   Permits Generally
Article 8-III   (Reserved)
Article 8-IV   Moving Buildings
Article 8-V   Razing And Demolishing Buildings
Article 8-VI   Abatement Of Unsafe Buildings
Article 8-VII   Property Maintenance Code
Article 8-I
General
Division 8-I-1   International Building Code
Division 8-I-2   (Reserved)
Division 8-I-3   Swimming Pools
Division 8-I-1
International Building Code
8-1   International Building Code (IBC) Adopted
8-2   International Residential Code (IRC) Adopted
8-3   International Building Code (IBC) And International Residential Code
(IRC); Standards Adopted
8-4   IBC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
8-5   IRC - Certain Sections And Parts Not Adopted
8-6   Building Code Advisory Board
8-7   International Existing Building Code (IEBC) Adopted
8-8   IBC - Amendment Of Section 109; And IRC - Amendment Of Section R108;
Fees; Plan Review Fee
8-9   IBC - Amendment Of Section 110
8-10   IBC - Amendment Of Table 705.5
8-11   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1031.2 And IRC - Amendment Of Section R303
And R310
8-12   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1809.5 And 1809.7
8-13   IRC - Amendment To Sections R403 And R404, And Tables R404.1.1(1) And
R404.1(2)
8-14   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1805 And IRC- Amendment Of R406
8-15   IBC - Amendment Of Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
8-16   IRC - Amendment Of Table R301.2(1) And Table 301.5
8-17   IRC - Amendment Of Section R302.1
8-18   IRC - Amend Section R302.5.1 And R302.13
8-19   IRC - Amendment Of Section R311.7.5.1
8-20   IRC Delete Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinklers
8-21   Buildings Having Historical Significance
8-22   Permits Required; Amendment Of IBC Section 105 And IRC Section R105
8-23   Temporary Retail Buildings; Restrictions
8-24   Commercial Display Buildings; Definition; Restrictions
8-25   Barb Wire And Electrified Fences
8-1   International Building Code (IBC) Adopted
The International Building Code, 2021 Edition, published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted, together with any amendments thereto as may be
made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the City
Code. The following sections of the Appendix shall also be adopted:
Appendix C Group U – Agricultural Buildings Appendix I – Patio Covers
One copy of the International Building Code, 2021 Edition, and all supplements
or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as
provided by law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9802,
effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-2   International Residential Code (IRC) Adopted
The International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted, together with any amendments
thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this
chapter of the City Code.
One copy of the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, and all
supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk as provided by law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9802,
effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-3   International Building Code (IBC) And International Residential Code
(IRC);
Standards Adopted
The following standards shall be used with the International Building Code and
the International Residential Code adopted by §
8-1 and §
8-2 above:
Acceptable Wind Load Design Procedures:
2021 I.B.C. - The Basic Design Wind Speed shall be 125 mph, in risk category
II,III,&IV. Exposure C only
2021 IRC – The Ultimate Design Wind Speed shall be 114 mph, Exposure C only.
Roof Snow Load - 30 pounds per sq. ft. no reductions allowed Frost Depth - 36
inch minimum
Seismic Design Category A, Site Class D
IRC, Table R301.5 Amend live load for sleeping rooms from 30 pounds to 40
pounds per square foot.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-
2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9802, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-4   IBC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of
the International Building Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall
be of no force and effect:
Chapter 1
Section 101.4.1 Gas
Section 101.4.2 Mechanical
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing
Section 101.4.4 Property Maintenance Section 101.4.6 Energy
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency Section 106 Floor and Roof design Loads
Section 107.2.6.1 Design Flood Elevations Section 108 Temporary Structures and
Uses Section 113 Means of Appeals
Chapter 13 – Energy Efficiency Section 1612 Flood Loads
Section 1809.5 – Frost Protection; #2 Constructing in accordance with ASCE-32,
and Exception: 1,2,3.
Chapter 27 – Electrical Chapter 28 – Mechanical
Chapter 30 – Elevators and Conveying Systems
Chapter 32 – Encroachments into the Public Right-of-Way Chapter 33 – Safeguards
During Construction
Chapter 34 – Reserved
Appendix A Employee Qualifications Appendix B Board of Appeals Appendix D Fire
Districts
Appendix E Supplementary Accessibility Requirements Appendix F Rodent Proofing
Appendix G Flood-Resistant Construction Appendix H Signs
Appendix J Grading
Appendix K Administrative Provisions
Appendix L Earthquake Recording Instrumentation Appendix M Tsunami-Generated
Flood Hazard Appendix N Replicable Buildings
Appendix O performance Based Applications
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9802,
effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-5   IRC - Certain Sections And Parts Not Adopted
It is especially provided that the following parts, chapters, and sections of
the International Residential Code are not adopted or approved, and the same
shall be of no force and effect:
Section R105.3.1.1 Determination of Substantially improved or substantially
damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas.
Section R107 – Temporary Structures and Uses Section R109.1.3 – Floodplain
Inspections Section R112 – Board of Appeals
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems Section R322 – Flood-Resistant
Construction
Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; 2. Constructing in Accordance with Section
R403.3
Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; 3. Constructing in Accordance with ASCE
32. Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; Exceptions: 1, & 2
Section R403.3 – Frost Protected Shallow Foundations
Section R403.3.1 – Foundations Adjoining Frost Protected Shallow Foundations
Section R403.3.1.1 – Attachment to Unheated Slab-on Ground Structure
Section R403.3.1.2 – Attachment to Heated Structure
Section R403.3.2 – Protection of Horizontal Insulation Below Ground Section
R403.3.3 – Drainage
Section R403.3.4 – Termite Protection
Section R406.2 – Concrete and masonry foundation waterproofing Part IV - Energy
Conservation
Part V - Mechanical Part VI - Fuel Gas Part VII – Plumbing Part VIII –
Electrical
Appendices, AA, AB, AC, AD, AE, AF, AG, AH, AI, AJ, AK, AL, AM, AN, AO, AP, AQ,
AR, AS, AT, AU, AV, AW & AX
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9802, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-6   Building Code Advisory Board
There is hereby established a Building Code Advisory Board set out as follows:
BUILDING CODE ADVISORY BOARD
The purpose of the Building Code Advisory Board is to determine the suitability
of alternate materials and methods of construction.
Purpose. Whereas, there may arise a design or material that may not meet the
exact criteria of the Building Code, especially in the areas of Energy Related
projects, this Board shall examine the data available, and/or may require any
additional data, to determine that the proposed material or method is at least
equivalent of the purpose as set forth in the Building Codes. The Board may not
waive any requirements of the Building Codes, but only approve in lieu of/
alternate methods of materials.
Member. The Building Code Advisory Board members will be appointed by the mayor
and approved by the city council. They shall be persons who are qualified by
experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building
construction. The Board shall consist of seven members. The chief building
official shall be an ex officio member and will act as secretary of the Board.
One city council member shall also act as an ex officio member. At least four
members of the Board must be present to constitute a quorum and be able to act.
Chairman/Officers; Length of Service. A chairman and vice chairman will be
selected from among the seven members and each will serve a two-year term. The
seven members will serve two-year terms, alternating four and three on a yearly
basis.
Request Procedure. The request process for the Board shall be as follows:
   A.   If an applicant shall be denied a building permit or shall receive
disapproval from the chief building official, the applicant may file a request
on the forms furnished by the Chief Building Official, together with a request
procedure fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, stating
in full detail what the product or project is, the use, sections of the Code
that cannot be fully complied with, what the alternative material or method
will be, and sufficient evidence supporting the request. This shall be filed
with the chief building official who shall then notify the officers of the
Board, who shall set a time of meeting, and the meeting shall be within ten
(10) days of the date of application.
   B.   The meeting of the Building Code Advisory Board shall be presided over
by the chairman.
   C.   The Board shall hear all evidence by the party requesting consideration
and a presentation by the chief building official.
   D.   After hearing all evidence presented, the Board shall determine whether
the proposed alternate method of material is equivalent with the interest and
safety of the Code, or may recommend changes to their satisfaction.
   E.   An order approving such a request shall require a "Yes" vote of four of
the Board members.
   F.   The Board shall render all decisions in writing to the applicant and
the chief building official within a reasonable period of time.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9044, effective 06-7-2006)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-7   International Existing Building Code (IEBC) Adopted
The International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted.
One copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, shall be
filed in the office of the City clerk as provided by law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9802, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-8   IBC - Amendment Of Section 109; And IRC - Amendment Of Section R108;
Fees; Plan Review Fee
Section 109 of the International Building Code and Section R108 of the
International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding the following:
Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid
hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of
the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in
accordance with this code.
The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of
the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan
review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is
done.
The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on
written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days
after the date of fee payment.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-9   IBC - Amendment Of Section 110
8-9.1   IBC - Amend Section 708 By Adding Section 708.9 Tenant Separation
Section 110 of the International Building Code shall be amended to include the
following subsection:
Section 110.7. Reinspections.
A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when
such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when
corrections called for are not made.
This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first
time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this
code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job
is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted
or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of
the building official.
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in
writing on a
form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with
the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-9.1   IBC - Amend Section 708 By Adding Section 708.9 Tenant Separation
A tenant separation wall complying with section 708 shall be required between
any tenant space in all buildings with independent tenants with exits to the
exterior.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9365, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-
2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-10   IBC - Amendment Of Table 705.5
Table 705.5 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding
thereto the following:
The provisions set forth above for RD-Residential Development Zone as
identified in Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code shall be determined not
from the location of a structure from the property line but from the location
of a primary structure to another primary structure located on an adjacent lot.
All requirements pertaining to fire resistant walls and window opening
protection as set forth in Table No. 705.5 shall be complied with when such
adjacent primary structures are closer than ten feet apart. Distance shall be
measured at right angles from the wall of one structure to the closest wall of
an adjacent primary structure.
Footnote h. amend 5’ to 2’.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-11   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1031.2 And IRC - Amendment Of Section R303
And R310
The following are hereby amended to Section 1031.2 exception 3 of the
International Building Code add exceptions:
EXCEPTION: 3. Basements used exclusively for the service of buildings and which
do not exceed 300 square feet.
R303.1 add exception #5. Basements shall be provided with glazed areas of not
less than 2% of the floor area.
Section R310.1 Exceptions: Basements used only to house mechanical equipment
and not exceeding total floor area of 300 square feet.
Section R310.7 add exception #2: In existing single family residential
occupancies other than apartments, a sleeping room may be added in an existing
basement if the following conditions are met:
(1)   The sleeping room must have an openable window.
(2)   Smoke detectors have been installed in the sleeping room, the furnace
room, and in the exitway of the basement.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-12   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1809.5 And 1809.7
Section 1809.7 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding
the following:
Bearing Walls
Bearing walls shall be supported on masonry or concrete foundations or piles or
other approved foundation system which shall be of sufficient size to support
all loads. Where a design is not provided herein, the minimum foundation
requirements for stud bearing walls shall be as set forth in Table No. 1809.7.
Add to following to Section 1809.5 Exception.
Detached accessory buildings one-story wood or metal framed buildings not used
for human occupancy and separated from the principle building by minimum 15’-0”
may comply to the following.
(1)   not exceeding 200 square feet in floor area, may be placed upon a
concrete slab of four inch minimum thickness.
(2)   not exceeding 625 feet in floor area may use a six-inch wide by eighteen
inch deep foundation system with at least twelve inches below grade.
1809.5. Omit 2. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32. Omit Exceptions, 1.2.&
3.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-13   IRC - Amendment To Sections R403 And R404, And Tables R404.1.1(1) And
R404.1(2)
Sections R403 Footings and R404 Foundation Walls of the International
Residential Code are hereby amended by adding the following to read as follows:
Minimum Footing and Foundation Requirements for Residential Construction
(1)   The minimum footing foundation requirement, balanced fill, for a one-
story residence shall be six (6) inches in width by thirty-six (36) inches
below grade, with two #4 horizontal rebar continuous.
(2)   The minimum footing foundation requirement, unbalanced fill, for a one-
or two-story frame residence shall be sixteen (16) inches in width by eight (8)
inches deep, with two #4 rebar continuous and a minimum eight (8) inch wall of
block or concrete.
(3)   In addition to the requirements set forth in subparagraphs (1) and (2)
above, the following reinforcement requirements for wall foundation must be
met:
8" solid concrete from 60" up to 84" unbalanced fill – three #4 horizontal
strands, equally spaced throughout height of wall;
8" block - from 48" to 60" unbalanced fill - one #4 rebar vertical, 4' on
center to grade height;
8" block - from 60" to 84" unbalanced fill - one #4 rebar vertical, 4' on
center to top of foundation.
Add the following to Section R403.1.4.1 Exceptions:
Detached accessory buildings one-story wood or metal framed buildings not used
for human occupancy and separated from the principle building by minimum 15’-0”
may comply to the following
(1)   not exceeding 200 square feet in floor area, may be placed upon a
concrete slab of four inch minimum thickness.
(2)   not exceeding 625 feet in floor area may use a six-inch wide by eighteen
inch deep foundation system with at least twelve inches below grade.
R403.1.6 Foundation Anchorage.
Maximum anchor-bolt spacing shall be 6 feet on center, there shall be a minimum
of two bolts per plate section with one bolt located not more than 12 inches
from each end of the plate section. Bolts shall be at least 1/2 inch in
diameter and shall extend a minimum of 7 inches into masonry or concrete.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-14   IBC - Amendment Of Section 1805 And IRC- Amendment Of R406
Section 1805 of the International Building Code and Section R406 of the
International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding thereto the
following:
1805.2.2 & 1805.2.2.1 Walls. & Surface preparation of walls, and R406, R406.2,
subsurface drainage system shall be included as an alternative to
waterproofing. Add Backplaster and Dampproofing
Exterior foundation walls below grade of any building consisting of masonry
units having a basement shall be backplastered with one-half inch (1/2")
Portland cement and sand mix (1:2 1/2 by volume) or two one-fourth inch (1/4")
coats of Type M mortar, and with an approved dampproofing material. Poured
concrete foundations shall be coated with dampproofing without back plaster.
Alternative dampproofing may be approved by the building official.
1805.4 Delete existing and add Subsurface Drainage Systems
All buildings constructed with basements or floor levels twenty-four (24)
inches or more below the elevation of the center line of the adjacent public
street shall be provided with a subsurface drainage system. A subsurface
drainage system shall consist of the minimum following elements:
(1)   Minimum four (4") diameter perforated or scored drain pipe embedded in
four inches (4") of coarse gravel installed around the inside of the perimeter
footing such that no floor location is greater than ten feet (10') to such
drain pipe.
(2)   Minimum fifteen inch (15") diameter by thirty inch (30") deep sump pump
pit for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area to be
drained.
(3)   Minimum two inch (2") diameter weep holes through the footing at eight
foot (8') on center intervals with a minimum of four inch (4") of gravel cover
on the exterior of the footing.
(4)   Minimum four inch (4") gravel bed under floor slab.
(5)   A 3” minimum diameter pipe shall be installed through the floors and into
the attic, capped and sealed to facilitate a future soil gas ventilation
system.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9481, effective 04-15-2014)
8-15   IBC - Amendment Of Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
Amend Chapter 29 section 2901.1 replace reference to International Plumbing
code to Uniform Plumbing Code and International Private Sewage Disposal Code to
State of Nebraska Title 124.
Amend table 2902.1 footnote e. replace the number 15 to 30. Amend Section
2902.6 to replace the number 15 to 30.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9365, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-
2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-16   IRC - Amendment Of Table R301.2(1) And Table 301.5
Section R301.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended by
adding criteria as set forth in Table R301.2(1). Ground snow load – 25#
Wind Speed – Ultimate Design Wind Speed 114 mph Seismic Design Category A, Site
Class D. Weathering --sever
Frost line Depth --36” Termite -- M/H
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required – NO Flood Hazard – Firm
Air Freezing Index -- >1000-2000 Mean Annual Temp – 49.9 F
Amend Table R301.5 Minimum Uniform Distributed Live Loads – Sleeping Rooms –
40#
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-17   IRC - Amendment Of Section R302.1
Exception #4 within Section R302.1 of the International Residential Code is
hereby amended to read as follows: Detached garages accessory to a dwelling
located within 2 feet of a property line may have roof eaves projections not
exceeding 12 inches.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
8-18   IRC - Amend Section R302.5.1 And R302.13
Section R302.5.1 Opening protection, delete, equipped with a self-closing
device. Section R302.13 Fire protection of floors, delete entire section.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
8-19   IRC - Amendment Of Section R311.7.5.1
Section R311.7.5.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to
reflect that the maximum riser height shall be 8 inches.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9365, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-
2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018)
8-20   IRC Delete Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinklers
8-20.1   Amendment Of IRC Section 908 And IBC Section 1512
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9661, effective 01-01-2018)
8-20.1   Amendment Of IRC Section 908 And IBC Section 1512
IRC Section R908 & IBC Section 1512 Reroofing R908.3.1.1 & 1512.2.1.1 Roof
recover not allowed. Amend by adding #2. Wood, wood shake, asphalt, &
fiberglass. R908.3.1 & 1512.2.1, Roof recover. Delete #1.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9802, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-21   Buildings Having Historical Significance
Buildings or structures which have been designated by official action of the
Grand Island City Council as having special historical or architectural
significance may comply with Chapter 12 of the 2021 International Existing
Building Code for historic buildings.
Historical buildings shall be buildings which are currently listed on the
National Register of Historical Buildings or are at least fifty years old and
have one of the following characteristics: is associated with an important
person or event which has contributed significantly to history, contains
significant architectural or artistic design, or has significant archeological
properties.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9661, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9802, effective 01-01-
2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-22   Permits Required; Amendment Of IBC Section 105 And IRC Section R105
Section 105 of the International Building Code and Section R105 of the
International Residential Code shall be amended by adding the following:
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain
any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure
from the Chief Building Official; provided, no permit shall be issued by the
Chief Building Official unless and until authorized by resolution of the City
Council in any one or more of the following cases:
(1)   Where the real property described in the application for permit does not
front upon a dedicated street or public road;
(2)   Where a subdivision as required by state statutes has not been lawfully
approved and recorded with the Register of Deeds.
(3)   When the City Engineer certifies that surface water drainage is
unavailable or inadequate to drain the public street or road abutting upon the
real property described in the application for permit.
(4)   Where the City Engineer certifies that surface water drainage from the
real property described in the application for permit will create or add to an
impounding of surface water upon a public street or road.
Amend section R105.2 Work exempt from building permit. Buildings 1. Replace 200
square feet with 120 square feet.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9365, effective 03-30-2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-23   Temporary Retail Buildings; Restrictions
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, equip, use, occupy, or
maintain any temporary building or structure in the City or two-mile
jurisdiction or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate
building permit for each such temporary building from the Chief Building
Official.
Temporary buildings shall be those buildings built and designed for use no
longer than 120 calendar days to facilitate special events or annual sales.
Temporary buildings shall be constructed to support required wind load,
adequately anchored, and located in accordance with the requirements of the
2021 IBC Table
705.5 based on the fire-resistance rating of the exterior walls for the
proposed type of construction and the allowable area shall comply with the
adopted building code.
Exiting shall be provided as required for permanent buildings.
Temporary buildings shall not be connected to permanent utilities, e.g., sewer,
water, electric, or gas.
Temporary buildings permits shall be limited to one per tract of land, not to
exceed 120 days per calendar year. The fee for a temporary building permit
shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-24   Commercial Display Buildings; Definition; Restrictions
No person, firm, or corporation shall place upon any property, any commercial
display building without first obtaining a permit from the Chief Building
Official for the placement of such commercial display building(s).
Commercial display buildings shall be those structures which are offered for
sale or used as display or inventory. They shall not be used for any other
purpose, occupied, or used as storage facilities.
Commercial display buildings shall be constructed to support required wind
loads, be adequately anchored, and in all other aspects comply with adopted
building and zoning codes.
Commercial display buildings shall not be connected to permanent utilities.
The fee for commercial display buildings shall be in accordance with the City
of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-25   Barb Wire And Electrified Fences
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, or corporation, either
in person or through his or their employees or agents, to erect or cause to be
erected or to maintain any barb wire or electrified fence or any barb wire or
electrified string along or upon any fence or string as a barrier within the
city limits of the City of Grand Island, except that it shall be permissible to
string not more than three strands of barb wire or electrified fence upon
supports inclined at an angle not greater than sixty degrees with the
horizontal plane, when such wires are strung so that they are suspended above
and within the privately owned enclosed property, and the bottom strand of such
barb wire or electrified fence is not less than six feet above the surface of
the ground.
Division 8-I-2
(Reserved)
Division 8-I-3
Swimming Pools
8-40   Swimming Pool; Definition
8-41   Swimming Pool; Permit Required
8-42   Swimming Pool; General
8-43   Swimming Pool; Conformance With Codes
8-44   Swimming Pool; Enclosure Required
8-45   Swimming Pool; Retroactivity
8-46   Swimming Pool; Discharge System
8-40   Swimming Pool; Definition
Private Swimming Pool means any constructed or assembled pool that is not
publicly owned which is more than 24 inches in depth and has a surface area of
more than 150 square feet and which is used or intended to be used as a
swimming pool.
Storable pool means any inflatable or soft-sided pool that has the ability to
be taken down and stored.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
8-41   Swimming Pool; Permit Required
It shall be required that a permit be issued for the construction or placement
of a private swimming pool from the chief building official prior to such
construction or placement. An application for a permit shall be submitted by
the owner or his agent of the property upon which the pool is to be located.
Such application shall be accompanied by a duplicate set of plans,
specifications, and plot plans. The plot plan shall show the accurate location
of the proposed pool on the property and properly establish distances to
existing lot lines, buildings and fences, and to additional proposed structures
or fences. No permit shall be issued until such plans, specifications and plot
plans have been approved by the chief building official as being in conformance
with all local regulations pertaining to private swimming pools.
Storable pools shall not require a permit as identified by this section.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
8-42   Swimming Pool; General
The pool shall be constructed or assembled so as to be water tight, easily
cleaned and maintained, made of non-absorbent and durable material, and be free
of open cracks and joints.
8-43   Swimming Pool; Conformance With Codes
All building, plumbing, electrical, and other codes as adopted by the City
Council shall be adhered to in the construction or assembly of the private
swimming pool.
8-44   Swimming Pool; Enclosure Required
Every private swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall
not less than four (4) feet in height which shall be of a type which precludes
passage through or under and is not readily climbable by small children. This
shall not mean an additional fence within a completely fenced yard, provided,
the fence meets the stated minimum requirement. All gates shall be equipped
with a latch which is not readily operated by small children.
The main building, or any accessory structure, on the site may form part of the
enclosure. The sides of above-ground pools are acceptable as integral barriers,
provided, that the sides extend not less than four (4) feet above the outside
ground at all points, and provided further, that access steps or ladders are
capable of being rendered inaccessible by being removed or raised more than
four (4) feet above the outside grade.
8-45   Swimming Pool; Retroactivity
The lack of a minimum enclosure as herein described, on any existing pool, is
hereby deemed to be a serious public safety hazard. The owner of the property,
upon which such a pool is located, shall comply with the enclosure requirements
of §
8-44 within thirty (30) days after date of notification to comply.
8-46   Swimming Pool; Discharge System
All private swimming pools constructed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be provided with an approved drainage outlet to the city
sanitary sewage system, or may be used for surface irrigation of the owner's
property, provided, that no water shall overflow onto adjacent private or
public property in a manner as to cause a nuisance.
Article 8-II
Permits Generally
8-51   Buildings Not Otherwise Provided
8-52   Valuation; Commercial And Industrial Buildings
8-53   Review Of Plans By Fire Department; Fee
8-54   Construction Prior To Permit Issuance
8-51   Buildings Not Otherwise Provided
If permits pursuant to the Grand Island City Code are requested for buildings
or structures not otherwise provided for, valuations of the cost of such
building shall be based upon written estimate filed with the Chief Building
Official.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-52   Valuation; Commercial And Industrial Buildings
For commercial and industrial buildings the fees to be collected for permits
pursuant to this article shall be based upon the value as determined by the
figures fixed by the contract for construction.
8-53   Review Of Plans By Fire Department; Fee
In addition to the building permit fee, there shall be a fire plan review fee
in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the fire
department for the review of said plans as required by state statutes.
8-54   Construction Prior To Permit Issuance
When any construction, alteration or repair of buildings shall have been
started before a permit therefor has been issued, an investigation fee in
addition to the building permit fee shall be collected. The investigation fee
shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Article 8-III
(Reserved)
Article 8-IV
Moving Buildings
8-75   Registration Required To Move Buildings
8-76   Insurance
8-77   Permit - Required; Fee
8-78   Height And Width Restrictions; Permits
8-79   Examination Of Building; Denial Of Permit
8-80   (Reserved)
8-81   New Construction Requirements
8-82   To Be Moved On Permitted Streets Only
8-83   Planking Of Streets When Required
8-84   Utility Lines; Mover To Pay Expenses
8-85   Building On Street; Misdemeanor
8-86   Protecting Public During Moving
8-87   Moving Equipment To Be Rubber Tired
8-88   Leave Property In Safe, Clean Condition
8-89   Mover To Disconnect Utilities
8-90   Applicability Of Article
8-91   Penalty For Violation; Continuing Violations
8-75   Registration Required To Move Buildings
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of moving
houses and buildings within the City limits and within two miles of the
corporate boundary of said City without first being registered as such by the
City and paying the fee therefor; provided, however, no registration shall be
required to move a building which has a floor surface of one hundred square
feet or less. Buildings which do not exceed sixteen feet in width or twenty-
four feet in length may be exempted from the requirements of this Article by
the chief building official upon finding that such exemption would not
adversely affect the public interest. Such registration shall be issued by the
chief building official, and the same shall expire on December 31 of the year
the same is issued.
   B.   The registration fee shall be paid in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
8-76   Insurance
   A.   1.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      B.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      C.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Chief Building
Official a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance
coverage.
      D.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9143, effective 01-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-
2010) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-77   Permit - Required; Fee
Before any house or building can be moved, a permit must be issued authorizing
the moving of the same. Upon the granting of a moving permit, the applicant
shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
8-78   Height And Width Restrictions; Permits
No permit shall be issued to move any house or structure if any part thereof
has a loaded height in excess of twenty-six feet, and if any part thereof at
its greatest width is in excess of thirty-four feet; provided, except, the
chief building official may authorize the granting of permits in cases of
buildings exceeding such width or height limitation, or both, when there is
filed and deposited in the office the following:
   A.   An application for a specific permit to move a specific building or
structure, in triplicate, with the following documents attached thereto, to
wit:
      1.   A drawing or chart showing the specific route proposed to be
followed, and exact location of buildings, structures, trees, and other objects
which may interfere with the moving of such building or structure.
      2.   A drawing to scale showing the dimensions of length, width, and
height, and kind of structure proposed to be moved.
      3.   Agreement of all property owners who may be affected by reason of
trimming of trees, or ownership of structures, or device, legally above, upon,
or under the surface of any such street, waiving any and all claims against the
City of Grand Island for damages which may happen to any such trees, pavement,
curb, driveway, pole, structure, or device.
      4.   Statements of the city engineer, utilities director, chief of
police, and fire chief relating to their approval of the arrangements for such
moving.
      5.   Consent to the moving of such building or structure of any affected
telephone company, gas company, telegraph company, railroad(s), and waiver of
every and all claims for damages against the City with regard thereto.
   B.   The permit fee required by §
8-77 of this Code.
   C.   The chief building official may waive any of the foregoing requirements
determined to be inapplicable or unnecessary to protect the public interests.
8-79   Examination Of Building; Denial Of Permit
Before a permit is issued for any of the operations defined by this article and
before any of the operations defined herein shall have begun, the chief
building official shall examine the building, structure or part thereof on
which it is desired to perform such operations, and the chief building official
shall refuse to grant a permit for same if any of the conditions following are
found to exist:
   A.   No building shall be removed from its present location or lot to a new
location or lot so situated that the construction on such new location or lot
of a similar new building would be in violation of any of the provisions of
this article.
   B.   No building shall be moved that is more than fifty percent structurally
deficient.
8-80   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
8-81   New Construction Requirements
No building or structure, regardless of size, which has been moved shall be
placed or located within the city unless it shall comply with the requirements
of new construction.
8-82   To Be Moved On Permitted Streets Only
It shall be unlawful for any such housemover under the permit to move the
structure for which the permit is given, over, upon or along other streets than
those mentioned in the permit.
8-83   Planking Of Streets When Required
It shall be the duty of any person moving any house or structure to plank
streets if and when ordered so to do by the chief building official.
8-84   Utility Lines; Mover To Pay Expenses
It shall be the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to pay all expenses
and costs incurred in the lifting, removal, and restoration of all utility
wires, conduits and poles.
8-85   Building On Street; Misdemeanor
It shall be unlawful for any mover of houses or buildings or the owner of any
house or building being moved under the provisions of this article to allow the
same to remain standing on any street or public grounds longer than is
reasonable and necessary, and any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished as hereinafter
provided.
8-86   Protecting Public During Moving
It shall be the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to exercise due care
at all times to protect the public from injury or accidents. It shall be the
duty of such movers of houses and buildings to provide watchmen to warn the
public if and when any wires, ropes or cables are extending across streets or
alleys or public grounds so that the public will not be injured thereby.
If during the moving of any house or structure it shall become necessary to
leave the same standing on any street, avenue, highway or public place, the
same shall be left standing as near to the right side of the road as possible
in order to leave free passage on the other side thereof. It shall further be
the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to leave lighted flares about
such house or structure or moving equipment left standing over night in any
such street, avenue, highway or public place during the hours between sunset
and sunrise.
8-87   Moving Equipment To Be Rubber Tired
No permit shall be issued by the chief building official to move any house or
structure unless the moving equipment employed by the mover of houses and
buildings is rubber tired in order to safeguard and protect streets, avenues,
alleys, highways and public grounds from being damaged.
8-88   Leave Property In Safe, Clean Condition
It is hereby declared unlawful for any mover or owner of houses and buildings
to move any building or structure in such a manner that there shall remain
holes or depressions dangerous to life or limb; there shall not remain debris
or rubbish from which dust or offensive odors shall emanate detrimental to
public health. Such premises shall be left in a safe, clean, and sanitary
condition. When a building has been moved for the purpose of erecting thereon
another building or structure, the chief building official at his discretion
may permit the owner of such property to maintain for a period not to exceed
six months any remaining hole or depression if the following conditions are
met: Such hole or depression is maintained in a sanitary condition and kept
clean of all rubbish or debris of any nature; that such hole or depression is
surrounded and protected by a strong and suitable barricade not less than five
feet high; that such barricade is maintained in a sound and proper condition;
and that said owner shall covenant for himself, his heirs and assigns, to
properly fill such remaining hole or depression at the conclusion of the said
six month period unless building operations thereat have then been begun;
provided, that the city council may, upon good cause shown, extend the period
of time during which the hole or depression may be maintained, subject to any
conditions that the city council may prescribe.
8-89   Mover To Disconnect Utilities
It shall be the duty of the property owner and the house or building mover to
see that all utilities such as water, gas, sewer and electricity are shut off
either at the street line or in the alley. The sewer service from the house to
the alley shall be properly closed at the main sewer line in accordance with
the ordinances of the City. If the water service to the property is to be
abandoned, the abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements
Chapter 35 of this Code. No permit to move a house or building may be issued
until this section is complied with.
8-90   Applicability Of Article
The provisions of this Article pertaining to the moving of buildings and
structures shall apply with equal force and effect to such operations within
the corporate limits of the City and all that area within two miles of the
corporate boundary of said City.
8-91   Penalty For Violation; Continuing Violations
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon
conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If any such person shall permit
such violation to continue, each day shall be considered a separate offense and
be punished accordingly.
Article 8-V
Razing And Demolishing Buildings
8-97   Registration Required; Fee; Term
8-98   Permit To Raze Building
8-99   Permit To Raze Building; Fees
8-100   Insurance
8-101   Right Of Owner To Raze Own Buildings
8-102   Leave Property In Safe, Clean Condition
8-103   Responsibility To Disconnect Utilities
8-104   Penalty For Violation
8-97   Registration Required; Fee; Term
   A.   Any person engaged in the business of razing and demolishing buildings
and houses in the City and in the area within two miles of the corporate
boundary of said City, shall, before starting such business in the City or
within such two mile area beyond its corporate limits, secure from the chief
building official a certificate of registration to engage in such business.
   B.   The annual registration fee and the renewal fee for such registration,
which shall expire on December 31, following the date of issuance, shall be in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
8-98   Permit To Raze Building
Any person registered under this article to engage in the business of razing
and demolishing buildings and houses shall, before proceeding with such razing
or demolition of any structure in the city or within two miles of the corporate
boundary of said city, secure a permit to do so from the chief building
official. Such permit shall not be granted until after the payment of the
permit fee hereinafter set forth.
8-99   Permit To Raze Building; Fees
It shall be the duty of the chief building official to collect fees for razing
and demolishing of structures in the same manner and in the same amount as set
forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule pertaining to building permit
fees.
8-100   Insurance
   A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      B.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      C.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building
Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance
coverage,
      D.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9143, effective 01-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9162, effective 05-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-
2010) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012)
8-101   Right Of Owner To Raze Own Buildings
Any person may raze or demolish one or two story dwellings, provided he is the
actual owner thereof and does the work himself and for himself without
compensation from others. Such building or buildings must be situated at least
twenty feet from the front lot line and at least eight feet from other
buildings situated on either side or to the rear thereof. It is expressly
provided that any such owner may raze or demolish such dwellings without first
securing the registration provided in §
8-97 hereof; provided, however, such owner must secure a permit so to do from
the chief building official and pay the permit fee and call for inspections by
the chief building official. Such owners must otherwise comply with all of the
other provisions of this article.
It is expressly provided that the right of an owner to raze or demolish his own
dwellings shall include the right to raze or demolish a private garage.
8-102   Leave Property In Safe, Clean Condition
It is hereby declared unlawful for any registrant to raze or demolish any
building or structure in such a manner that there shall remain holes or
depressions dangerous to life or limb. The registrant shall remove from the
site all wood, metal, and foundation and footing materials subject to
decomposition. Concrete, bricks, and concrete blocks may be used as fill
material for holes or depressions; provided, the materials are entirely covered
by fill sand or earth which is then compacted. Holes must be made in concrete
floors to permit passage of water.
8-103   Responsibility To Disconnect Utilities
It shall be the duty of the registrant to see that all utilities such as water,
gas, sewer and electricity are shut off either at the street line or in the
alley. The service sewer from the house to the alley shall be properly closed
at the main sewer line in accordance with the ordinances of the city. The water
service line shall be properly closed at the main water line in accordance with
Chapter 35 of this Code. The registrant must provide certification that the
building has been inspected by a State of Nebraska certified asbestos inspector
or removal contractor and that either no asbestos materials exist or all have
been properly removed. No permit to raze or demolish a house or building may be
issued until after compliance with this section. The city will not burn a house
or building at the owner's request until the owner has complied with this
section.
8-104   Penalty For Violation
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day shall constitute a separate offense
and be punishable as provided in this Code.
Article 8-VI
Abatement Of Unsafe Buildings
8-110   Condemnation Of Unsafe Buildings
8-111   Written Notice; Mailing, Contents
8-112   Notice To Vacate; Posting
8-113   Maintenance Of Public Nuisance Unlawful
8-114   Procedure For Abatement Of Nuisances
8-115   Standards For Repair, Etc.
8-110   Condemnation Of Unsafe Buildings
Any building or other structure, or any part thereof which is in part or in
whole structurally unsafe, dilapidated, defective, unhealthful, insufficient,
or unsafe for the purposes for which it is used, detrimental to the community
for any just cause, or in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building
Code as amended and adopted, is hereby determined to be dangerous and shall be
made safe by the owner of record of the property within the time set forth in
written notice from the Chief Building Official, or his/her designee. Where
immediate action is deemed necessary to protect life, health, or property, the
Chief Building Official, or his/her designee may direct such building or other
structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith, closed and not used or
occupied until made safe as required by the said Chief Building Official, or
his/her designee. Any buildings or other structures, or any part thereof which
is determined after inspection by the Chief Building Official, or his/her
designee to be dangerous as defined above, are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, alteration, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal in accordance with this Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-111   Written Notice; Mailing, Contents
Whenever the Chief Building Official, or his/her designee has inspected any
building or other structure, or any part thereof and determined that such
property is a dangerous building, he/she shall send a written notice to the
owner of record of the property by ordinary first class mail and by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of said owner. The
written notice shall contain the following information:
   A.   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises on which the dangerous property is located.
   B.   A brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the
property dangerous as defined by this Code.
   C.   A brief and concise description of the action required to be taken to
render the property in compliance with this Code.
   D.   A brief and concise statement advising the owner of record that if
required repair, alteration, rehabilitation, demolition or removal work is not
completed within the time specified, the Chief Building Official, or his/her
designee may order the dangerous property vacated and posted to prevent further
occupancy until the work is completed, and may request consent of the mayor to
have the city attorney file an action to abate the public nuisance and charge
the costs thereof against the real estate and the owner of record.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-112   Notice To Vacate; Posting
In the event the Chief Building Official, or his/her designee directs any
building or other structure or any portion thereof to be vacated, a copy of a
notice to vacate shall be served along with the written notice set forth in §
8-111 and shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the property in
substantially the following form:
NOTICE TO VACATE
DO NOT ENTER - UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this property or to remove or deface this notice
to vacate.
Dated                                  .
CITY OF GRAND ISLAND, NEBRASKA,
A Municipal Corporation
By                                                                      
Chief Building Official
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-113   Maintenance Of Public Nuisance Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any owner of record to maintain or permit any person
to occupy any building or other structure or any part thereof which is declared
a public nuisance by the chief building official at the expiration of the time
period specified in the written notice set forth in §
8-111, or to permit any person to occupy any building or other structure or any
part thereof in violation of the Notice to Vacate set forth in §
8-112.
8-114   Procedure For Abatement Of Nuisances
If the owner of record of any property declared to be a public nuisance by the
Chief Building Official, or his/her designee fails to abate said nuisance
within the time specified in the written notice set forth in §
8-111, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the Chief Building
Official, or his/her designee directed to the City Attorney, may proceed to
abate said public nuisance pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate or the owner of record.
In the event continuation of a public nuisance might cause irreparable harm or
poses a serious threat to public health, safety or welfare or the health,
safety or welfare of residents of the property in violation, the written notice
to abate pursuant to §
20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal
action to obtain abatement of the nuisance and the City of Grand Island, with
the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such
temporary or permanent order as is appropriate to expeditiously and permanently
abate said nuisance and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the property in violation.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9958 on 12/20/2023
8-115   Standards For Repair, Etc.
The following standards shall be observed or followed in determining whether a
public nuisance shall be repaired, altered, rehabilitated, demolished or
removed:
   A.   If the building or other structure or any part thereof can reasonably
be repaired, altered, or rehabilitated so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended and
adopted, it shall be ordered repaired, altered, or rehabilitated.
   B.   If the building or the structure or any part thereof is in such
condition that it cannot reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist
in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended and
adopted, it shall be ordered demolished or removed.
   C.   In any case where a building or other structure or any part thereof is
fifty percent damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or
structure, it shall be demolished or removed.
   D.   In any case where a building or other structure or any part thereof is
a fire hazard existing in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building
Code as amended or adopted, or the Statutes of the State of Nebraska, including
but not limited to the Life Safety Code, it shall be demolished or removed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
Article 8-VII
Property Maintenance Code
Division VII-1   Title And Scope 
Division VII-2   Enforcement
Division VII-3   Permits And Inspections 
Division VII-4   Definitions
Division VII-5   Space And Occupancy Standards 
Division VII-6   Structural Requirements
Division VII-7   Mechanical Requirements 
Division VII-8   Exits
Division VII-9   Fire Protection
Division VII-10   Substandard Buildings 
Division VII-11   (Reserved)
Division VII-1
Title And Scope
8-120   Title
8-121   Purpose
8-122   Scope
8-123   Application To Existing Buildings And Structures
8-120   Title
These regulations shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code," may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this code."
8-121   Purpose
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or
limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use
of occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential and commercial
building and structures within this jurisdiction.
8-122   Scope
The provisions of this code shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof.
Such occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in the
Building Code, except such structures as are found to be substandard as defined
in this code.
Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used as a
combination apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this code shall apply to
the separate portions as if they were separate buildings.
Every rooming house or lodging house shall comply with all the requirements of
this code for dwelling.
8-123   Application To Existing Buildings And Structures
   A.   Additions, Alterations or Repairs . For additions, alterations or
repairs, see the Building Code.
   B.   Relocation. Buildings or structures moved into or within this
jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements in the Building Code for new
buildings and structures.
Division VII-2
Enforcement
8-128   General
8-129   Substandard Buildings
8-130   Violations
8-128   General
   A.   Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this code. For such purposes, he shall have
the powers of a law enforcement officer. He is empowered to adopt and enforce
rules and regulations to clarify and expand the provisions of this code in
conformity with the spirit and intent of its stated purpose.
   B.   Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official or his
authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in
any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes
such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official
or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
building official by this code, provided that if such building or premises be
occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if
such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building
official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry.
   C.   Responsibilities Defined. Every owner remains liable for violation of
duties imposed upon him by this code even though an obligation is also imposed
on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement,
imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of
complying with this code.
All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a
safe and sanitary condition. The owner or his designated agent shall be
responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this subsection,
the building may be reinspected.
Every owner, or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his
building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that
part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building
containing two or more dwelling units.
Every owner shall, where required by this code, the health ordinance or the
health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as
required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or
facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where
infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically
made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling
unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his
rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by the health
ordinance and approved by the health officer.
Every occupant shall, where required by this code, the health ordinance or the
health officer, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities
necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary.
8-129   Substandard Buildings
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as
defined in this Code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in
Article VI of Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code.
8-130   Violations
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be
done in violation of this code.
Division VII-3
Permits And Inspections
8-135   General
8-136   Fees
8-137   Inspection
8-135   General
No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished
unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained
from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable
conditions prescribed in the Building Code.
8-136   Fees
Whenever a building permit is required by the Building Code, the appropriate
fees shall be paid to the building official as specified for building permits
in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
8-137   Inspection
All building or structures within the scope of this code and all construction
or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the
building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code
and the Building Code.
Division VII-4
Definitions
8-141   Definitions
8-141   Definitions
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as
specified in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have
their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, copyright 1981, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted
meanings. Words in the singular include the plural, and the plural the
singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine, and the
feminine the masculine.
Building Code is the Building Code adopted by the City of Grand Island.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room
and meeting the requirements of the Building Code Exception.
Health Officer is the legally designated head of the Department of Health of
this jurisdiction.
Hot Water is hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not
less than 110°F.
Mechanical Code is the Uniform Mechanical Code adopted by the City of Grand
Island.
Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
   A.   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.
   B.   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether
in a building, or the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This
includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned
refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or
structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove
a hazard for inquisitive minors.
   C.   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as
determined by the health officer.
   D.   Overcrowding a room with occupants.
   E.   Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
   F.   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
   G.   Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer.
   H.   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings, as determined by the health officer.
Plumbing Code is the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Grand Island.
Workmanlike is executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-9-2006)
Division VII-5
Space And Occupancy Standards
8-145   Location On Property
8-146   Yards And Courts
8-147   Room Dimensions
8-148   Light And Ventilation
8-149   General
8-150   Grading And Drainage
8-151   Accessory Structures
8-152   Insect Screens
8-153   Doors
8-154   Accumulation Of Rubbish Or Garbage
8-145   Location On Property
All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other
buildings on the same property as required by the Building Code.
8-146   Yards And Courts
   A.   Scope. This section shall apply to yards and courts having required
windows opening therein.
   B.   Yards. Every yard shall be not less than 3 feet in width for one-story
and two-story buildings. For buildings more than two stories in height the
minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of 1 foot for each
additional story. Where yards completely surround the building, the required
width may be reduced by 1 foot. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height,
the required width of yard shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories.
   C.   Courts. Every court shall be not less than 3 feet in width. Courts
having windows opening on opposite sides shall be not less than 6 feet in
width. Courts bounded on three or more sides by the walls of the building shall
be not less than 10 feet in length unless bounded on one end by a public way or
yard. For buildings more than two stories in height the court shall be
increased 1 foot in width and 2 feet in length for each additional story. For
buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required dimensions shall be
computed on the basis of 14 stories.
Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for cleaning
purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be provided with a
horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than 10 square feet in area and
leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public way.
The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the court walls of
the building, but in no case shall be less than one-hour fire-resistive.
8-147   Room Dimensions
   A.   Ceiling Heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not
less than 7 feet 6 inches except as otherwise permitted in this section.
Kitchens, halls, bathrooms and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of
not less than 7 feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where
exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center,
ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. Where exposed
beam ceiling members are spaced at 48 inches or more on center, ceiling height
shall be measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members,
provided that the bottom of the members is not less than 7 feet above the
floor.
If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height
for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the
room measuring less than 5 feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling
shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof.
If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in
two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred
ceiling be less than 7 feet.
   B.   Floor Area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one room which
shall have not less than 120 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms,
except kitchens, shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more
than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor
area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in
excess of two.
EXCEPTION: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency
living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements:
      1.   The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet
of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet of superficial floor
area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two.
      2.   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
      3.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be
provided.
      4.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   C.   Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than 7 feet
in any dimension.
Each water closet stool shall be located in a clear space not less than 30
inches in width and a clear space in front of the water closet stool of not
less than 24 inches shall be provided.
8-148   Light And Ventilation
   A.   Natural Light and Ventilation. All guest rooms, dormitories and
habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by
means of exterior glazed openings with an area not less than one twentieth of
the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 5 square feet. All bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided
with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area
not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 1
1/2 square feet. All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a
dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable
exterior openings with an area of not less than one-twentieth of the floor area
of such rooms with a minimum of 5 square feet.
   B.   Origin of Light and Ventilation. Required exterior openings for natural
light and ventilation shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a
yard or court located on the same lot as the building.
EXCEPTION: Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch:
      1.   Abuts a street, yard, or court; and
      2.   Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet; and
      3.   Has the longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed.
A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open
and unobstructed to the sky and not less than 4 feet in least dimension. No
vent shaft shall extend through more than two stories.
For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may
be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one half of the area of
the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less
than one tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet,
whichever is greater.
   C.   Mechanical Ventilation. In lieu of openable windows for natural
ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall
be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guest rooms,
dormitories, habitable rooms, and in public corridors. One-fifth of the air
supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system
connected directly to the outside or into attic space properly ventilated in
compliance with the current building code capable of providing five air changes
per hour, shall be provided.
   D.   Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be
adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the Building Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
8-149   General
   A.   Dwelling Units and Lodging Houses. Every dwelling unit and every
lodging house shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities
consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower.
   B.   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one water
closet and lavatory and one bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional
water closets, lavatories and baths shall be provided on each floor for each
sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional number
thereof in excess of ten. Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "Men" or
"Women."
   C.   Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every
kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of
similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted.
   D.   Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer
or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall
be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and
cold running water necessary for its normal operation.
All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type of a
similarly nonabsorbent material.
   E.   Water Closet Compartments. Walls and floors of water closet
compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the
Building Code.
   F.   Room Separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by
this code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the
occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from
food preparation or storage rooms by a tight-fitting door.
   G.   Installation and Maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be
installed and maintained in safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with
applicable requirements of the Plumbing Code.
8-150   Grading And Drainage
All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
8-151   Accessory Structures
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall
be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
8-152   Insect Screens
During the period from June 1 to October 31 every door, window and other
outside opening used or required for ventilation purposes serving any building
containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any
areas where products used in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition.
EXCEPTION: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other
types of openings which make screening impractical, provided other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
8-153   Doors
All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at
all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guest rooms shall tightly
secure the door.
8-154   Accumulation Of Rubbish Or Garbage
The interior of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of litter,
as defined in §
17-1 of the Grand Island City Code.
Division VII-6
Structural Requirements
8-159   General
8-159   General
   A.   General. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction
permitted by the Building Code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other
structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all
forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall
be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design
criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the Building Code.
Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the Building Code.
   B.   Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide
shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness.
   C.   Protection of Materials. All wood shall be protected against termite
damage and decay as provided in the Building Code.
Division VII-7
Mechanical Requirements
8-163   Heating And Ventilation
8-164   Facilities Required
8-165   Receptacles
8-166   Lighting Fixtures
8-167   Service
8-168   Installation
8-169   Electrical System Hazards
8-163   Heating And Ventilation
   A.   Heating. Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees F.
Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in
accordance with the provisions of the Grand Island City Code, and all other
applicable laws. No unvented or open flame gas heater or apparatus shall be
permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.
   B.   Electrical Equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances
shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all
applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.
   C.   Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas, and for fuel burning
appliances shall be provided as required in the Grand Island City Code.
Ventilating equipment shall be of an approved type, installed and maintained in
a safe manner and in compliance with the current building code and all other
applicable laws. When mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural
ventilation, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in
operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
8-164   Facilities Required
Every building used for human occupancy shall be provided with an electrical
system in compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Code – NFPA
Article 70.
8-165   Receptacles
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and
remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one
grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle.
8-166   Lighting Fixtures
Every public hall, interior stairway, watercloset compartment, bathroom,
laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric lighting
fixture.
8-167   Service
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall be used as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70.
Every dwelling shall be served by a main service which is not less than 60
ampere, three wire.
8-168   Installation
All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe and approved manner.
8-169   Electrical System Hazards
Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
Division VII-8
Exits
8-173   General
8-173   General
Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside or
to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with
exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by the Building Code.
Every sleeping room below the fourth story shall have at least one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units
shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the
use of separate tools.
Division VII-9
Fire Protection
8-177   General
8-177   General
   A.   All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of
fire-resistive construction as required by the Building Code for the
appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property; and shall
be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by the Building Code.
   B.   Smoke Detector; Number; Location; Operation. Smoke detectors shall be
mounted in accordance with the rules and regulations regarding the number and
location of smoke detectors in accordance with the Building Code. When
activated, the detector shall provide and alarm in the dwelling unit, guest
room, dormitory, or mobile home.
   C.   Smoke Detector; Rental Property; Responsibility for Installing,
Maintaining.
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this subsection, the
owner of every apartment house, dwelling, hotel, lodging house, dormitory, or
manufactured home or the owner's authorized agent shall be required to supply,
install, maintain, and test the smoke detectors.
      2.   In case of a dwelling unit, guest room, hotel room, or manufactured
home which is being occupied for one month or more by the same occupant, it
shall be the responsibility of such occupant to perform the tests on the smoke
detector as are recommended by the manufacturer's instructions and immediately
notify, in writing, the owner or authorized agent of any deficiencies. The
owner of the dwelling, apartment house, lodging house, hotel, or manufactured
home shall provide a notice to such occupant containing instructions for the
testing of the device. For purposes of this subsection, deficiencies shall not
include a worn battery or other replaceable energy unit. The occupant shall be
responsible for replacement of the battery or unit, except that such battery or
unit shall be in operating condition at the time the occupant takes possession.
The owner or authorized agent shall correct any reported deficiencies in the
smoke detector and shall not be in violation of this section for a deficient
smoke detector when he or she has not received notice of the deficiency.
      3.   In buildings constructed prior to January 1, 1982, smoke detectors
shall not be required to be attached to a centralized power source.
      4.   Subsection (C) of §
8-177 shall apply solely to rental property.
Division VII-10
Substandard Buildings
8-182   Standards
8-182   Standards
   A.   General. Any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit,
guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in
which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that
endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public,
or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is, declared to be a
substandard building. The extent of danger of life, limb, health, property,
safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be determined
by the chief building official and the health and sanitation officer, and upon
request, the fire chief.
   B.   Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be
limited to the following:
      1.   Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory bathtub or shower in a
dwelling unit or lodging house.
      2.   Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or
showers per number of guests in a hotel.
      3.   Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
      4.   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
      5.   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit or lodging house.
      6.   Lack of adequate heating facilities.
      7.   Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.
      8.   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by
this code.
      9.   Room and space dimensions less than required by this code.
      10.   Lack of required electrical lighting.
      11.   Dampness of habitable rooms.
      12.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the
health officer.
      13.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
      14.   Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
      15.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities
as determined by the health officer.
   C.   Structural Hazards . Structural hazards shall include but not be
limited to the following:
      1.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
      2.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports
      3.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety.
      4.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      5.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
      6.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members with sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
      7.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
      8.   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, due to defective
material or deterioration.
      9.   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to
carry imposed loads with safety.
   D.   Nuisance. Any nuisance as defined in this code.
   E.   Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in
violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or
electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted
construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not
been maintained in good condition or which is not being used in a safe manner
shall be considered substandard.
   F.   Hazardous Plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code
requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not installed in
accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no
codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good condition or
which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be
considered substandard.
   G.   Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment which was
installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally
accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which
has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered
substandard.
   H.   Faulty Weather Protection, which shall include but not be limited to
the following:
      1.   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
      2.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors.
      3.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering.
      4.   Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
   I.   Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus,
equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief
of the fire department or his deputy, is in such a condition as to cause a fire
or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of
fire or explosion arising from any cause.
   J.   Faulty Materials of Construction. All materials of construction except
those which are specifically allowed or approved by this code and the Building
Code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.
   K.   Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Those premises on which an
accumulation of litter, weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris,
garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and
similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards.
   L.   Inadequate Exits. Except for those buildings or portions thereof which
have been provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions
of this code, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were
installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of their
construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number or
width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations,
additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction
shall be considered substandard.
Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of
their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall be considered
substandard when the building official finds that an unsafe condition exists
through an improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of
exits, or where other conditions exist which are dangerous to human life.
   M.   Inadequate Fire-protection or Fire-fighting Equipment. All buildings or
portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or
fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code, except those
buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the
time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-
extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved
in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any
change in occupancy.
   N.   Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for
living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or
intended to be used for such occupancies.
Division VII-11
(Reserved)
(Division 11 deleted pursuant to Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006)
CHAPTER 9
CABLE TELEVISION
9-1   Title
9-2   Construction
9-3   Scope
9-4   Severability
9-5   Definitions
9-6   Statement Of Intent
9-7   Administration; Delegation Of Powers And Authority
9-8   Applicability Of This Ordinance To An MCS Provider
9-9   Exemption From This Ordinance For Certain MCS Providers
9-10   Non-Exempt MCS Providers Seeking Relief From This Ordinance
9-11   Failure Of The Council/Franchising Authority To Enforce This Ordinance
9-12   MCS Providers Or Their Assignees Subject To Present And Future
Ordinances
9-13   Repeal Of Prior Inconsistent Resolutions And Ordinances
9-14   Resolution Of Inconsistencies With Federal Or State Rules, Regulations
Or Laws
9-15   Resolution Of Conflicts Between This Ordinance And An Existing Franchise
Agreement
9-16   Arbitration
9-17   Penalties
9-18   The Council/Franchising Authority's Retained Rights And Authorities
9-19   MCS Provider May Promulgate Rules
9-20   Notices
9-21   Subscriber Fees And Rates
9-22   Through 9-25 (Reserved)
9-26   Indemnity
9-27   Liability Insurance
9-28   Performance And Construction/Completion Bond
9-29   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect To Reports And
Records
9-30   Furnishing Of Reports
9-31   Books And Records
9-32   Through 9-36 (Reserved)
9-37   Annual Compliance Statement Required
9-38   Notification Of Customers And MCS Providers' Rights And
Responsibilities; General Policy
9-39   Notice Of Customer's And MCS Provider's Rights And Responsibilities With
Respect To The Provision Of Multi-Channel Service; Minimum Contents
9-40   Billing Practices
9-41   Billing Credit Or Refunds For Service Outages, Interruptions;
Substandard Signal Or Picture Quality Or Unsolicited Service
9-42   Prohibition Against Multiple Changes Of Service Tiers Or Service
Clusters Within A 365 Day Period
9-43   Customer Service Hours; Capabilities Of Customer Service Office; And
Telephones
9-44   Special Service Requirements For Blind, Hearing-Impaired, Or Ambulatory-
Impaired Customers
9-45   Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
9-46   Use Of Equipment, Return Of Equipment, Security Deposits, And Their
Return
9-47   Service Inquiry Logs
9-48   Through 9-50 (Reserved)
9-51   Restoration Of A Subscriber's Property
9-52   Service Inquiries, Requests, Complaints, And Response Times, And New
Installations Or Reconnections Of Service
9-53   MCS Providers Required To Maintain Sufficient Repair Parts And
Sufficient Repair Personnel
9-54   Disconnection For Non-Payment
9-55   Voluntary Disconnections And Downgrades
9-56   Through 9-61 (Reserved)
9-62   Protection Of Subscriber Privacy
9-63   Resolution Of Complaints/Inquiries
9-64   Policy With Respect To Continuity Of Multi-Channel Service Provisions
9-65   Continued Use Of Individual Antennas Protected
9-66   Periodic Multi-Channel Subscriber Surveys
9-67   Through 9-70 (Reserved)
9-71   Construction Schedule And Construction-Related Requirements
9-72   Construction Of Good Quality
9-73   Conditions On Use Of Streets And Public Ways
9-74   Franchised MCS Provider's Duty To Remove Franchised Properties From The
Public Streets
9-75   Construction Standards
9-76   System Construction Schedule For Franchised MCS Providers
9-77   System Expansion For MCS Providers
9-78   Permits And Licenses
9-79   Through 9-85 (Reserved)
9-86   Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect To Safety
Requirements
9-87   Provisions To Alert Subscribers In The Event Of An Emergency; Standby
Power
9-88   Provisions Concerning Safety Alert Technology
9-89   Implementation Of A Preventative Maintenance Program
9-90   Construction, Fire, And Safety Codes
9-91   Through 9-95 (Reserved)
9-96   Alternative User Charge
9-97   Franchise Required; Exception
9-98   Authority To Grant Non-Exclusive Franchises
9-99   Franchise Agreement; Minimal Requirements
9-100   Extent Of Grant Of Franchise
9-101   Term Of Franchise
9-102   Application For Franchise; Application Fee
9-103   Franchise Fees
9-104   Assignment Or Transfer Of Franchise
9-105   Default Of Franchise; Revocation, Termination Or Cancellation Of
Franchise
9-106   Performance Evaluations
9-107   Through 9-115 (Reserved)
9-116   Specific Additional Rules For MCS Providers Classified As Cable
Operators
9-117   Specific Additional Public, Educational, And Governmental Rules For MCS
Providers Classified As Cable Operators
9-118   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding Local Production
Facilities And Equipment
9-119   The Council/Franchising Authority's Objective With Respect To The
Provision Of Broad Categories Of Video Programming
9-120   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding The Provision Of
Seamless Or "See-Through" Technology
9-121   Through 9-125 (Reserved)
9-126   Miscellaneous Provisions--Tampering And Unauthorized Reception Of
Certain Services
9-1   Title
This ordinance may be known and cited as the Multi-Channel Service Providers
Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Grand Island Nebraska.
9-2   Construction
This ordinance shall be construed in light of applicable Federal and State laws
and regulations governing multi-channel service practices which specifically
includes cable television.
9-3   Scope
This ordinance shall be effective within the geographical limits of the City,
including any areas subsequently annexed by the City.
9-4   Severability
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of
this ordinance, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, such word, phrase,
sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed
application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this
ordinance, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void,
unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. The
Council/franchising authority declares that no invalid or proscribed provision
or application was an inducement to this ordinance, and that it would have
enacted this ordinance regardless of the invalid or proscribed provision or
application.
9-5   Definitions
   A.   A/B switch or Input selector switch means any device that enables a
viewer to select between a multi-channel service and off-the-air television
signals. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch,
may utilize other multi-channel system interface equipment, and may be built
into television receivers.
   B.   Access channel or non-broadcast channel means a government, education,
or public channel which is carried on a multi-channel system, but which is not
part of any institutional network.
   C.   Activated channel means a channel engineered at the headend of the
cable system for the provision of services generally available to residential
subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services actually
are provided, including any channel designated for governmental, educational,
or public use.
   D.   Abandoned calls mean telephone calls that are connected to an MCS
provider's general information and service number, but the caller hangs up
without being attended to by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a
device capable of problem resolution (e. g. accepting a service request or a
work order, directing calls to the appropriate personnel, or such similar
functions or service).
   E.   Alternative user charge means a charge used in place of a franchise fee
that the Council requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets,
easements, public ways, or rights-of-way, of the City in order to construct,
maintain, and operate a multi-channel system. An alternative user fee is not
based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise
fee), but rather is based on the value of the City property that an MCS
provider is using to construct, maintain, and operate its multi-channel system.
   F.   Annual gross revenues means any and all compensation which is derived
from the operation of the MCS system, and which is attributable to the
subscribers or customers within the City, or the grant of a franchise granted
to a franchisee to operate a multi-channel system. Further, "annual gross
revenues" means any, and all, compensation, in whatever form (except as
exempted by this definition), exchange or otherwise derived from all multi-
channel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the City
including, but not limited to, revenues from subscriber rates, pay television,
premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks,
advertising, installations, rebates or commissions received from services
carried or provided on the system, or commercial access. Also, unless
prohibited or preempted by either Federal or State law, "annual gross revenues"
shall mean any, and all, compensation from all ancillary multi-channel
services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the City,
including, but not limited to, sale of MCS or MCS equipment, advertising
stuffers inserted into periodic billing statements or other notices, rental or
sale of video discs, rental or sale of video cassettes, rental or sale of
descrambling converters, or other devices, rental or sale of remote control
devices (including those with volume control), rental or sale of a/b or input
switches, rental or sale of channel lock-out devices or technology, rental or
sale of interactive games or software, rental or sale of digital radio
equipment, sale of satellite antenna dishes, sale of satellite antenna-received
programming for a programmer or distributor of services, or from revenues
received as the billing agent, collector, or retailer of satellite antenna-
received service. However, "annual gross revenues" does not mean, any taxes
imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including State sales taxes, but
excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS provider is obligated
to collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities.
   G.   Applicant means a person submitting an application or proposal to the
City for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multi-channel
system under the terms and conditions set forth in this ordinance, and any
State regulations.
   H.   Application or Proposal are synonymous for the purposes of this
ordinance. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the
applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license or
franchise (where required) for all, or a part, of the City. An "application" or
"proposal" includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and
representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the
Council/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering of
services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multi-
channel system.
   I.   Assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise or Transfer of a
franchised MCS provider's franchise means any transaction or action which
effectively or actually changes operational or managerial control from one
person or entity to another.
   J.   Auxiliary equipment means equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such
as a converter, remote control unit, or input selector switch), which enhances
or assists in the reception or provision of multi-channel service.
   K.   Basic cable television service means any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
   L.   Cable channel or Cable television channel or Data channel means a
portion of the electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum which is capable of
delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC
regulation).
   M.   Cable operator or operator means any person or group of persons who:
      1.   provides cable television service over a cable system and directly
or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
      2.   otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
   N.   Cable service means:
      1.   the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service; and
      2.   subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
of such video programming service.
   O.   Cable system or Cable television system means a facility consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the City. However, such terms do not include the following:
      1.   a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one (1) or more broadcast stations; or
      2.   a facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such
facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
      3.   a facility or a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
of Section 621(c) of the CCPA -- codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such
facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or
service directly to subscribers or;
      4.   any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
   P.   CCPA means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.
   Q.   Charge means a one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the
subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance,
service, or repair of the multi-channel service.
   R.   Cherry-picking or cream-skimming means the process whereby an MCS
provider targets only selected areas of the City for service (either through a
new-build, overbuild, or selective upgrade), and then primarily for reasons of
higher than average density, or the relative affluence of the area.
   S.   City means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or its lawful successor.
   T.   Reserved
   U.   Reserved
   V.   Reserved
   W.   Reserved
   X.   Reserved
   Y.   Collection charge means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS
provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a
past due account.
   Z.   Commercially impracticable means with respect to any requirement
applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for such
an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in
conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the non-
occurrence of which, was the basic assumption on which the requirement was
based.
   AA.   Converter means any electric, electronic, or other device, separate
and apart from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or
changing signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference
within the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an
appropriate channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to
view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such
other reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the
practical use of the signal.
   AB.   Council or Council/franchising authority means the City Council for
the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or its lawful successor, which is the
lawful legislative body for the City.
   AC.   Customer means a subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities
of the multi-channel system provided by an MCS provider.
   AD.   DBS means direct broadcasting satellite.
   AE.   DBS provider or Direct Broadcast Satellite provider means any person
who delivers and/or provides multi-channel services from a satellite to a
subscriber's residence through the use of a small earth or satellite station.
   AF.   Decoder or Descrambler means a device which enables a subscriber to
convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise useable signal.
   AG.   Disaster emergency or Disaster or Emergency means an imminent,
impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health,
safety, or welfare of all, or a representative portion of the residents of the
City is threatened. A "disaster emergency" (by illustration) may include a
snowstorm, flood, tornado, severe thunderstorm, hazardous waste infiltration,
petroleum, munitions, or nuclear explosion, or aircraft crash.
   AH.   Drop means a small branch of cable, or other transmitting medium which
connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder
cable or future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rights-of-way, or
public way.
   AI.   Easement means and shall include any public easement or other
compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public
utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television,
or any other MCS provider. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for
the provision of cable service or any other multi-channel service.
   AJ.   FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the Federal
administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable
television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
   AK.   Fiber cable or Fiber optic cable means very thin and pliable
cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical
equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
   AL.   Franchise means the initial authorization, or subsequent renewal
granted by the Council/franchising authority in order for a person to
construct, operate, and maintain a franchised MCS system in all, or part, of
the City.
   AM.   Franchised MCS provider means a person that is awarded a franchise by
the Council/franchising authority to construct and operate a franchised multi-
channel system, within all, or part, of the City. The term "franchised MCS
provider" specifically includes the term "cable operator".
   AN.   Franchise expiration means the date of expiration, or the end of the
term of a franchised MCS provider, as provided under a franchise agreement.
   AO.   Franchise fee means a fee or charge that the City requires as payment
for the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and
easements of the City in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised
MCS system.
   AP.   Franchising authority or Council/franchising authority means the City
Council for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. This definition specifically
includes the situation wherein the Council in its franchising authority
capacity grants a franchise, or renews a franchise, or approves a franchise
transfer by an applicant for an MCS franchise, or a franchised MCS provider.
   AQ.   Headend means the electronic control center, where incoming signals,
including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated,
filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to
subscribers.
   AR.   Hub means the satellite or remote receiving, processing and/or
transmitting facility, enabling the signal to be extended beyond the physical/
electronic capabilities of the multi-channel electronics and/or to serve as a
remote switching facility.
   AS.   Late charge means a charge which is added to a subscriber's account or
bill for non-payment of a previously due and delinquent account.
   AT.   Reserved
   AU.   Reserved
   AV.   Reserved
   AW.   Reserved
   AX.   Reserved
   AY.   Reserved
   AZ.   Reserved
   BA.   Reserved
   BB.   Reserved
   BC.   Mayor means the Mayor for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or the
Mayor's official designee.
   BD.   MCS means multi-channel service.
   BE.   MCS provider or Multi-channel service provider means any person or
group of persons who:
      1.   provides multi-channel communications service over a multi-channel
system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multi-
channel system; or
      2.   who otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a multi-channel system.
The term "MCS provider" or "multi-channel service provider" specifically
includes the terms "cable operator", "DBS operator" or "direct broadcast
satellite provider", "MDS provider" or "multi-point distribution system
provider", "MMDS provider", and "SMATV operator."
   BF.   MDS means multi-point distribution system.
   BG.   MDS provider or Multi-point distribution system provider means any
person or group of persons who is authorized by the FCC to transmit (via Super
High Frequency) specialized multi-channel programming or data or facsimile
transmission to subscriber-selected locations.
   BH.   Multi-channel programming service or Multi-channel service means:
      1.   the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service; and
      2.   subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
of such video programming or other programming service.
   BI.   Ordinance means the Multi-Channel Service Providers Regulatory
Ordinance for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
   BJ.   Other programming service means information that an MCS provider
(specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers
generally.
   BK.   Reserved
   BL.   Reserved
   BM.   Reserved
   BN.   Reserved
   BO.   Reserved
   BP.   Reserved
   BQ.   Reserved
   BR.   Reserved
   BS.   Pay-per-view or Premium channel means the delivery over the multi-
channel system of audio and/or video signals in an unintelligible form to
subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for standard or
basic service) on a per program, or per channel basis where said unintelligible
or unusable form for viewing is made intelligible only to subscribers paying a
separate fee or charge for the viewing or use of the signals.
   BT.   Person means any individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, association of two (2) or more persons having a joint
common interest, governmental agency, or other legal entity, including the
City.
   BU.   Proposed abandonment of multi-channel service or Proposed withdrawal
of multi-channel service or Proposed cessation of multi-channel service means
the anticipated, imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary)
disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS provider's
operation and provision of multi-channel service from all, or part, of the City
for a projected period exceeding three (3) months in duration.
   BV.   Public, educational or governmental access facilities means:
      1.   Channel capacity designated exclusively for public, educational or
governmental use; and
      2.   facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
   BW.   Public way means any public street, public way, public place, or
rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and
additions thereto, in the area served by the MCS provider.
   BX.   Rate means the monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, annual, or
other periodic price paid by a subscriber in order to receive standard or
basic, tiered, clustered, premium, or pay-per-view multi-channel service.
   BY.   Revocation , Termination , or Non-renewal , means an official act by
the City whereby the Council/franchising authority removes, repeals, or
rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS
provider to conduct the running of a multi-channel system within the City.
   BZ.   Reserved
   CA.   Reserved
   CB.   Reserved
   CC.   Reserved
   CD.   Reserved
   CE.   Reserved
   CF.   Reserved
   CG.   Service cluster means the grouping, aligning, or packaging of one (1)
or more multi-channel programming services by category (such as sports and/or
news), or by rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a
separate price or rate for each service cluster.
   CH.   Service day means any day, other than a Sunday or MCS provider
holiday, in which employees of the MCS provider (including customer service
representatives and service technicians) regularly respond to service requests,
inquiries, and complaints.
   CI.   Service outage means the loss of picture or sound on all standard or
basic subscriber channels, or one (1) or more auxiliary programming channels
(including tiers and clusters), and which is not caused by the subscriber's
television receiver or by the subscriber.
   CJ.   Service tier means a category of multi-channel service or other
programming service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a separate rate
is charged by an MCS provider.
   CK.   SMATV means Satellite Master Antenna Television.
   CL.   SMATV operator or Satellite Master Antenna Television operator means
any person or group of persons who:
      1.   provides multi-channel service over an SMATV system; or
      2.   otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management of an SMATV system.
   CM.   SMATV system means a private multi-channel system not crossing any
public rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving
private dwellings. Multi-channel programming services are obtained via an earth
station, amplification, and a distribution system.
   CN.   Standard multi-channel service means the lowest priced or least
comprehensive service cluster or service tier available to residential
subscribers.
   CO.   State means the State of Nebraska.
   CP.   Street means the surface of, and the space above and below a public
street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the City
(including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the
purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now
or hereafter held by the City (including any easements or rights-of-way
acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning,
entitle the City and MCS provider to use thereof for the purpose of installing
or transmitting multi-channel system transmissions over poles, wires, cable,
conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to
a multi-channel system.
   CQ.   Subscriber means a person lawfully receiving multi-channel service
delivered by the MCS provider.
   CR.   USC means United States Code.
   CS.   User means a person or organization utilizing a multi-channel system
and/or its equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of
material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
   CT.   Video programming means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
9-6   Statement Of Intent
   A.   The Council recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving
the CCPA (expressed in Section 601 -- codified at 47 USC 521). As such, the
Council reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as part of the City's
intent with respect to cable television and expands its intent to cover all MCS
providers.
   B.   As expressed by Congress, and adopted by the Council, its intent is as
follows:
      1.   establish a local policy concerning communications and technologies;
      2.   establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are
responsive to the needs and interests of the City;
      3.   establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with
respect to the regulation of cable systems;
      4.   assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged to
provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the public;
      5.   establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects
cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator's past
performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the
CCPA, and this ordinance; and
      6.   promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary
regulation that would impose an undue economic burden on cable systems.
   C.   In addition to principles and ideals listed in subsection (B), the
Council also expresses that its intent covers the following:
      1.   to create a set of regulations, standards, and procedures for MCS
providers;
      2.   to create a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection
policy for MCS providers;
      3.   to provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books and
records in order to monitor compliance of local, State, and Federal laws, and
any franchise agreement (if one has been granted);
      4.   to create a thorough construction and installation policy for an MCS
provider's system;
      5.   to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
the City in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation, and
maintenance;
      6.   to provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of
the City may be warned of a potential, imminent, actual disaster or emergency
situation that exists in the area;
      7.   to provide for the introduction and installation of an in-home
signal or safety alert technology in order to notify both subscribers and non-
subscribers to an MCS provider's service of imminent disaster emergencies;
      8.   to create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring
franchise fees and alternative user charges;
      9.   to create a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees,
or their collection, or method of computation are ruled invalid, unenforceable,
or unconstitutional;
      10.   to create a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed
and franchised MCS providers;
      11.   to provide for continuity of services in the event of City
acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation,
termination, non-renewal, or expiration of an MCS provider; and
      12.   creating a performance review procedure in order to assist the City
in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's performance.
9-7   Administration; Delegation Of Powers And Authority
   A.   The Council/franchising authority is hereby designated the officer of
the City which is responsible for the continuing administration of this
ordinance.
   B.   Unless prohibited by federal or State law, the Council/franchising
authority may delegate its powers and authorities with respect to an MCS
provider to a duly authorized representative of the City, including the Mayor,
the City Manager, a City Cable Advisory Committee, or an outside consultant.
   C.   However, the City/franchising authority may never delegate its
franchising or revocation power to another person.
9-8   Applicability Of This Ordinance To An MCS Provider
Unless exempted entirely from this ordinance, or exempted under one (1) or more
provisions of this ordinance, or granted relief (by the Council/franchising
authority) from one (1) or more provisions and/or requirements of this
ordinance, then this ordinance shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this
ordinance shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety. Moreover,
a non-exempt MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this ordinance no
later than six (6) months after this ordinance becomes effective, except where
a different compliance date is given or noted.
9-9   Exemption From This Ordinance For Certain MCS Providers
   A.   Recognizing the inherent technological differences between various
types of MCS providers, and taking into account a number of financial,
operational, and maintenance considerations, the Council/franchising authority
exempts certain MCS providers from complying with the provisions contained in
this ordinance.
   B.   MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of
this ordinance are as follows:
      1.   an MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of
an applicable FCC ruling; or
      2.   an MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of
an applicable judicial ruling.
   C.   It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains
exempted only as long as it meets one (1) or more of the specifications of this
particular section.
   D.   It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a
qualified MCS provider is only for this ordinance. Consequently, such an
exempted MCS provider is expected to abide by, and comply with, any other
applicable City, State, or Federal laws and regulations, including any
applicable federal, or State consumer protection, or customer service laws and
regulations.
9-10   Non-Exempt MCS Providers Seeking Relief From This Ordinance
   A.   Any MCS provider affected by this ordinance may file a written
petition, at any time, with the Council/franchising authority seeking relief
from one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance. The relief requested may
specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS
provider only) of one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance.
   B.   In order to receive any relief from one (1) or more of the provisions
of this ordinance, a non-exempt MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to
the Council/franchising authority that at least one (1) of the following facts
exist:
      1.   the provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by Federal
law, the FCC, or State law; or
      2.   where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects,
and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an
existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise);
or
      3.   that the imposition of such provisions and/or requirements will
create such an undue economic hardship on an MCS provider so as to imperil or
eliminate an MCS provider's ability to provide multi-channel service to a
majority of current subscribers; or
      4.   that the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance,
operation, or customer service policy, which the Council/franchising authority
deems comparable to, or exceeding, any provision and/or requirement from which
the MCS provider seeks relief.
   C.   Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the City, the
Council/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of determining
whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance, operation, or customer
service policy, is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this
ordinance.
   D.   As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an MCS
provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect that
one (1) or more provisions or sections of this ordinance has on the petitioning
MCS provider.
   E.   In accordance with this ordinance, the Council/franchising authority
may charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing
such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are
retained by the City to review an MCS provider's petition.
   F.   In those instances where the Council/franchising authority grants an
exemption, or relief, or clarification, to a franchised MCS provider, or deems
a franchised MCS provider's operational policy to be comparable to an ordinance
provision, then the franchise agreement (initial, existing, or renewal) shall
be amended within thirty (30) days to reflect the exact extent of such
exemption and/or relief. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of
such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy extends only to the
MCS provider granted such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable
policy.
9-11   Failure Of The Council/Franchising Authority To Enforce This Ordinance
A non-exempt MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements of this ordinance, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this
ordinance, by any failure of the Council/franchising authority on any one (1)
or more occasions to seek, or insist upon compliance with such requirements or
provisions.
9-12   MCS Providers Or Their Assignees Subject To Present And Future
Ordinances
   A.   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to, and expected to comply with, all ordinances now or hereafter
adopted and in effect within the City, including this ordinance, to the extent
that said MCS provider has not received an exemption or relief from said
ordinance(s).
   B.   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to, and expected to comply with, all Federal and State Laws, and with
all rules issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in
existence.
   C.   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to all lawful exercise of the City's police power.
   D.   With respect to future ordinances noted in this Section, nothing
contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any, and all, of its
administrative, and legal rights as to the constitutionality, applicability,
and enforceability of said future ordinances.
9-13   Repeal Of Prior Inconsistent Resolutions And Ordinances
To the extent that there is any prior resolution or ordinance which in part, or
in whole, is directly inconsistent with this ordinance, then such part, or such
whole, of the prior resolution or ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency.
9-14   Resolution Of Inconsistencies With Federal Or State Rules, Regulations
Or Laws
   A.   In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section
of this ordinance, and any provision or section of a Federal or State rule,
regulation, or law, then the Federal or State rule, regulation, or law shall
not only supersede the effect of the ordinance, but also control in any local
application.
   B.   The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an
applicable Federal or State judicial decision creates an actual inconsistency
with any provision or section of this ordinance. In such a situation, the
Federal or State judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of the
ordinance, but also control in any local application.
9-15   Resolution Of Conflicts Between This Ordinance And An Existing Franchise
Agreement
   A.   Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this ordinance
and an existing and applicable franchise agreement, the ordinance shall
control, and prevail, unless administratively, or judicially determined
invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional.
   B.   In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption,
relief, or clarification from one (1) or more provisions or Sections of this
ordinance, or has one (1) or more of its policies deemed comparable to a
provision contained in this ordinance, then the franchise should specifically
note such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy, and to the
extent that such an exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy, is
inconsistent with a provision contained in this ordinance, then the
specifically noted exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy
language contained in the franchise agreement controls.
9-16   Arbitration
If the Council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider agree to
such, and the federal or State law does not expressly prohibit such, then
arbitration or settlement mediation may be used to resolve any dispute that
arises out of this ordinance or franchise agreement. The terms and conditions
relating to the arbitration or settlement mediation process (including possible
cap on costs expended by both parties, composition of the hearing panel, and
liability, if any for costs expended) shall be stated with specificity in the
franchise agreement.
9-17   Penalties
Any violation or failure to abide by, and comply with, any provision or
requirement of this ordinance shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall
be subject to any civil remedies provided by State law, including (where
permissible) the imposition of monetary fines, but excluding incarceration.
9-18   The Council/Franchising Authority's Retained Rights And Authorities
   A.   Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or
any other Federal or State governmental entity or agency, the Council/
franchising authority retains the authority to provide for:
      1.   the regulation and control of any multi-channel system within the
geographical limits of City, and within the limits prescribed by applicable
law;
      2.   the award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequent
to review of an application or proposal by the Council/franchising authority;
      3.   the periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all, or part, of
this ordinance; and
      4.   if mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic
review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.
   B.   The Council/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by Section
623 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 543), retains the power to approve the
rates or charges associated with the providing of multi-channel service
classified as cable service by an MCS provider classified as a cable operator.
   C.   Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC, or
any other Federal or State governmental entity or retains the jurisdiction to
enforce all laws and regulations relating to multi-channel customer service
practices and consumer protection.
9-19   MCS Provider May Promulgate Rules
To the extent that they are consistent with the requirements and
responsibilities detailed in this ordinance, an MCS provider is authorized to
promulgate such rules and internal practices as shall be necessary to enable it
to exercise its rights and perform its duties under this ordinance, the state,
and the rules of any federal agency charged with the responsibility of
regulating MCS providers.
9-20   Notices
   A.   Both the Council/franchising authority and each non-exempt MCS provider
shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact person
designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other
correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact person
by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a signed
receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. All other filings,
reports, records, documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any
permissible means including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission
("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or package delivery; or delivery
via cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other
correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt (unless
otherwise designated by State law).
   B.   If the non-exempt MCS is required to maintain a franchise, then the
designation of such contact person for notice purposes, may be contained within
a franchise agreement.
9-21   Subscriber Fees And Rates
   A.   It is the intention of the City, by the adoption of these provisions,
to follow the regulations established by the Federal Communications Commission
for the regulation of rates.
   B.   The initial fees to be charged to subscribers for all services,
including installation fees and other one-time charges, shall be specified in
any franchise agreement issued pursuant hereto.
   C.   Those fees and charges subject to regulation by the City pursuant to
state and federal law shall not be increased without prior review by the City.
   D.   In order to obtain City review for rate increases, the franchisee shall
file a revised schedule of rates with the City at least thirty days in advance
of a proposed rate increase. This filing shall specify the rates or fees to be
increased and associated regulations which may affect charges to the subscriber
and the justification for said increases and charges. The franchisee shall
promptly submit any additional supporting information requested by the City.
   E.   Within thirty days of the rate increase filing, the City shall schedule
two public meetings before the Council to hear ratepayer and franchisee comment
on the proposed increase. Following the public meeting, the Council may
determine whether or not to grant the proposed increase or a portion thereof
prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period, unless the thirty-day
deadline is tolled by the City for an additional ninety days to consider the
request.
   F.   At least thirty days prior to the proposed rate increase, each
ratepayer or subscriber shall be notified in writing by the franchisee of the
changes in rates proposed.
   G.   Rates and charges may be reduced at any time without prior City
approval, provided that the reductions do not result in rates which are
unreasonably discriminatory to any subscriber or class of subscribers. Where
temporary reductions are put into effect for promotional purposes for a
specified time period, the return to the permanent rates shall not be
considered a rate increase for purposes of this chapter. The City shall be
notified of all reductions in rates, whether permanent or temporary.
   H.   Rates and charges not subject to regulation by the City under state or
federal law or regulation may be changed by the franchisee following a minimum
thirty days prior notice to the City and the subscribers.
9-22   Through 9-25 (Reserved)
9-26   Indemnity
   A.   To the extent permitted by law, a non-exempt MCS provider shall at all
times defend, indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless, and exempt the City,
the Mayor, the City Administrator, the Council/franchising authority, their
officers, agents, servants, and employees from any, and all, penalty, damage,
or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of
damages whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either
at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may
arise out of, or be caused by, the construction, erection, location, products
performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal
or restoration of the multi-channel system within the City by a negligent act
or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors,
subcontractors, independent contractors, or implied or authorized
representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced
herein, attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are
included as those costs which may be recovered by the Council/franchising
authority.
   B.   The City, Mayor, and the Council/franchising authority specifically
reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense.
   C.   If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the City, the Mayor, or the
Council/franchising authority, then any one of them shall have the right to
approve counsel.
   D.   Neither the City, the Mayor, nor the Council/franchising authority
shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.
   E.   With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions, noted in
this Section, it is understood, that such MCS provider reserves the right to
select and retain, without the Council/franchising authority's approval,
counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such provider's expense.
   F.   Where arbitration is permitted in a franchise agreement, or agreed to
in writing by the MCS provider and Council/franchising authority, the
arbitration provisions shall specify to what extent costs are to be borne by
either the Council/franchising authority, and the MCS provider.
9-27   Liability Insurance
   A.   An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
multi-channel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage
insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:
      1.   Public liability: $2,000,000.00 per person/per occurrence;
      2.   Property damage: $2,000,000.00 per any one (1) claim;
      3.   Umbrella liability: $4,000,000.00 with up to a $50,000.00 deductible
and/or base insurance.
   B.   An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage
insurance policy shall specifically include the City, the Mayor, the Council/
franchising authority, their officials, agents, employees or representatives as
additional insureds.
   C.   The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed
to do business in the State, and which has one (1) of the three highest or best
ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company, and which is acceptable to the City/
franchising authority, or has been rated acceptable by the State.
   D.   Whenever needed to protect the interests of the citizens of the City,
the Council/franchising authority may require an MCS provider to provide
insurance for greater amounts than already listed.
   E.   The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain
an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the Council/
franchising authority with at least thirty (30) days written notice in advance
of the cancellation of the insurance.
   F.   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to
the Council/franchising authority at least fifteen (15) days before the
expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or replace.
   G.   Before a multi-channel system provides multi-channel service to
subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates
representing the insurance to the Council/franchising authority, and each
policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of
the premium thereon.
   H.   If the State permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS
provider may exercise its right and self-insure as long as the minimal
insurance amounts outlined in this section are met and maintained.
9-28   Performance And Construction/Completion Bond
   A.   An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority, in
an amount totaling at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), a
performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business
in this State. The purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of
any requirements imposed by this ordinance on an MCS provider. Further, the
purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any
obligations imposed by this ordinance (or where applicable a franchise
agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any
monetary losses incurred by the City.
   B.   An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority, a
construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction,
upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction
cost or outlay exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in value. The
amount of the bond shall equal at least ninety percent (90%) of the projected
capital construction cost or outlay. The construction/completion bond shall
remain in force at all times, unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule
is detailed in an agreement between the Council/franchising authority, and the
MCS provider.
   C.   The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction, upgrade,
rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multi-channel system and/or any
timetable for technical and service improvements or additions to the multi-
channel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time by the
Council/franchising authority and MCS provider.
   D.   If the City draws on a performance or completion bond, or cash deposit,
or letter of credit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely
discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multi-
channel system, or failure to complete a multi-channel system upgrade or
rebuild or repair/maintenance, then the MCS provider shall be required, within
thirty (30) days to replenish the completion and performance bond or security
bond to the minimal level required by the Council/franchising authority.
   E.   Based upon such reasons as the Council/franchising authority might feel
are necessary to protect the public interest, and welfare, the Council/
franchising authority may raise the minimal amount of the performance bond.
   F.   The performance bond or security bond, shall be in force at all times
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement,
between the MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.
   G.   In lieu of a performance bond, and construction/completion bond, the
Council/franchising authority may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider
pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should there be
a breach in a material franchise term, or failure to meet any construction
schedule.
9-29   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect To Reports And
Records
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that advances in
technology, and the adoption and application of multi-channel laws, rules,
regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an
MCS provider in any given year.
   B.   Consequently, it is incumbent that the Council/franchising authority
take measures to reduce the risk that multi-channel service or the multi-
channel system will be adversely affected in any given year.
   C.   Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, and character
qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a constant undertaking on the
part of the City. As a result, the Council/franchising authority requires that
the operator maintain and retain all records and reports necessary for a City/
franchising authority to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on
an MCS provider, and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical,
financial, and character) qualifications. The information is primarily intended
to assist the MCS provider to maximize service, rather than to identify
incidents of non-compliance.
9-30   Furnishing Of Reports
   A.   At any time the FCC or another Federal or State agency requires or
requests the submission of reports, data, or other information by a non-exempt
multi-channel service provider, then such MCS provider shall, at the same time,
without a separate or specific request, submit those reports, data, or other
information to the Council/franchising authority. However, unless specifically
authorized by the State, an MCS provider shall not be required to submit state
or federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal privacy laws,
including Section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551).
   B.   With respect to the reports required by this ordinance, it is noted
that a non-exempted MCS provider shall timely submit any required report
including, but not limited to the following:
      1.   an annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this
ordinance;
      2.   a periodic gross revenue report in the manner set forth in this
ordinance;
      3.   preventative maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this
ordinance;
      4.   copies, if applicable, of the MCS provider's FCC Form 395-A (or
successor form), or any supplemental forms relating to equal employment
opportunity, and fair contracting practices; and
      5.   any other reports or information required by another Section of this
ordinance, or by the Council/franchising authority which are necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.
9-31   Books And Records
   A.   An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and
records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, the MCS
system.
   B.   The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to review
(either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all records (pertaining
to an MCS provider's cable and/or multi-channel operations) on seven (7) days
written notice, unless specifically exempted by the Council/franchising
authority. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered,
should occur within the MCS provider's regular office hours.
   C.   The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its
own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or
financial expert, to review the books and records of an MCS provider. If after
a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts
owed to the City, then the City may require the MCS provider to reimburse the
City for the actual cost of the audit.
   D.   A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by
an MCS provider, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material
violation of this ordinance.
   E.   An MCS provider, at the local office shall keep complete and accurate
books and records of the key aspects of the multi-channel system's operation
for at least the preceding three (3) years in such a manner that all matters
pertaining to the City, can be easily produced and/or verified at the City's
request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep, at its local office any other
applicable records and information that may be required by any other Federal or
State agency having jurisdiction over MCS providers.
9-32   Through 9-36 (Reserved)
9-37   Annual Compliance Statement Required
   A.   Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that this ordinance
becomes effective, the Council/franchising authority shall develop an MCS
provider's compliance statement in an effort to determine whether such MCS
provider is complying with the various provisions and/or requirements of this
ordinance.
   B.   Prior to December 1, of each calendar year, the City shall furnish to
each MCS provider, a compliance statement.
   C.   Prior to December 31, of each calendar year, each non-exempt MCS
provider shall return to the Council/franchising authority a completed and
executed (by owner or officer) compliance statement.
   D.   There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual
compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider supplies incomplete
information which requires independent verification by the City or a consultant
hired by the City, then the MCS provider may be required to reimburse the City
for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure
to submit a statement by the deadline, or the provision of false information
within a statement, may subject an affected MCS provider to any, and all,
penalties and fines listed in this ordinance.
9-38   Notification Of Customers And MCS Providers' Rights And
Responsibilities; General Policy
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a
customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights and
responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with respect to the
provision, maintenance, and repair of multi-channel service.
   B.   Further, the Council/franchising authority believes that if sufficient
information is provided to a customer on certain customer service practices
such as rates, billing periods, number and types of services provided, and
rules concerning equipment use and return, then that customer will have the
information necessary to make an informed decision on what, if any, multi-
channel services to subscribe to, and receive.
   C.   In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to
make an informed decision, and to ensure that customers are notified of their,
and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the multi-
channel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written "Notice
of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to
the Provision of Multi-Channel Service."
   D.   The "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and
Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service" shall
be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a subscriber shall
be provided with a written "Notice" at least once every twelve (12) months. If,
however, an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes
other changes to any customer service practice that is required in this
ordinance, then said MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written
notification at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such
amendment, repeal, addition, deletion, modification, or other change.
9-39   Notice Of Customer's And MCS Provider's Rights And Responsibilities With
Respect To The Provision Of Multi-Channel Service; Minimum Contents
   A.   At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual
"Notice", such "Notice" shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   an up-to-date listing of the specific multi-channel services
provided--clearly indicating and isolating the standard and/or basic, premium,
and informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or service
clusters offered;
      2.   notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease, from
the MCS provider, a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which
will prohibit the viewing of a particular multi-channel service during a period
selected by the subscriber;
      3.   pursuant to FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing or
using an A/B or input selector switch;
      4.   a comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges
(including rates for standard or basic and premium channels/services,
particular service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional
fees, installation charges, and security deposits, if any);
      5.   if service clustering is available, then a description and
explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within sixty
(60) days of the "Notice") service clustering changes or differing alignments,
or other pertinent information;
      6.   a comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options
available;
      7.   the customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a
manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;
      8.   the billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent with
the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;
      9.   the specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is
adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the
parameters set forth in this ordinance;
      10.   if applicable, and permitted, the rules and regulations for using
any facilities, including a studio or mobile van of an MCS provider;
      11.   the method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner
consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;
      12.   the extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with
the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;
      13.   the equipment use and return policy together with any required
security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in
this ordinance; and
      14.   the additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory
impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in
this ordinance.
   B.   The "Notice" shall be written in plain, simple to understand English.
The "Notice" shall contain no fine print, and any exclusions, limitations, or
caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the "Notice".
   C.   The "Notice" shall be delivered to a subscriber via an insert in the
subscriber's periodic invoice or through a special mailing.
9-40   Billing Practices
   A.   Within the "Notice" that is required by this ordinance, subscribers
shall be informed of at least the following practices of an MCS provider:
      1.   billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service);
      2.   payment due and delinquent dates;
      3.   amount or percentage of late charges, if any;
      4.   advance billing options;
      5.   resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and
inquiries;
      6.   refund policy for service interruptions, substandard signal quality,
or uncontracted service;
      7.   current service rates in a detailed and understandable format;
      8.   procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of an
MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment;
      9.   current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and
      10.   any lower-income or fixed-income rates together with any
qualifications to obtain such rates.
   B.   All bills shall plainly state that service may be paid for on an
individual monthly basis, by the end of the month for which the service was
delivered, with no late penalty or charge assessed.
   C.   Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in
subsection (A) at least once every 12 months.
   D.   Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least
thirty (30) days before such billing practices or payment requirements become
effective.
   E.   In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of
service within thirty (30) days after the notification of a scheduled rate or
charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for the newly implemented
rate or charge shall cease from the moment that the rate or charge adjustment
becomes effective.
9-41   Billing Credit Or Refunds For Service Outages, Interruptions;
Substandard Signal Or Picture Quality Or Unsolicited Service
   A.   An MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with credit or a rebate for
a service outage or interruption exceeding eight (8) hours in duration, which
credit, for purposes of determining the amount of the credit or rebate, shall
be deemed to be equivalent to or the same as a twenty-four (24) hour service
outage.
   B.   Where not expressly prohibited by the State, the Council/franchising
authority may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber in cases of
substandard signal or picture quality.
   C.   In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall
provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available
billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider
a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.
9-42   Prohibition Against Multiple Changes Of Service Tiers Or Service
Clusters Within A 365 Day Period
   A.   To prevent "bait and switch" tactics, and to promote stability with
respect to multi-channel services provided on a multi-channel system, an MCS
provider may not switch any particular multi-channel service from one (1)
service tier or service cluster more than twice during any three hundred sixty
(365) day period.
   B.   Nothing contained in this Section should be construed as mandating any
particular programming service being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this
Section be construed as requiring any particular programming service be
provided on a particular tier or cluster. Rather, this Section is designed to
promote tier or cluster stability, so that a subscriber may choose a tier or
cluster that best suits the subscriber's individual programming and
informational needs.
9-43   Customer Service Hours; Capabilities Of Customer Service Office; And
Telephones
   A.   In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS
provider shall maintain a customer service office which is both within the
City, and easily accessible to customers.
   B.   The customer service office shall be open at least forty (40) hours per
week (exclusive of holidays).
   C.   Within the forty (40) hours per week that a customer service office
must be open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two
(2) evenings (after 5 p.m.), or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if not prohibited
by State law).
   D.   The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable
staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer service inquiries,
specifically including, but not limited to: billing inquiries, refunds, service
outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges, and
inquiries from disabled or physically-impaired customers.
   E.   MCS providers shall for a reasonable charge, provide customers with a
monthly, bi-monthly, or weekly multi-channel programming service guide, listing
and/or detailing the programs and services available during the time period. In
lieu of providing a programming service guide via the mail, or a newspaper, or
third party, the MCS provider may disseminate the information over a channel
designated as a program preview or program listing channel.
   F.   At least annually, any MCS provider shall certify to the Council/
franchising authority that each customer service representative (CSR) has taken
and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train CSRs to handle
their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner.
   G.   An MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) toll-free and/or local
telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.
   H.   An MCS provider shall maintain a separate twenty-four (24) hour toll-
free telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and
extended interruption of service. During any hours that the customer service
office is open, the MCS provider must have or make available in-house personnel
to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be
manned by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an answering
device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS
provider within ninety (90) minutes, in order to at least determine the extent
of the outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person
telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds sixty (60) calls per
hour, and shall not be required to make such calls between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for situations other than reports of service outages.
   I.   A non-exempt MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension
lines (except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles,
and service outages) in order to handle call to the general information number
to the following specifications:
      1.   Eighty-five percent (85%) of all customer calls received in a year
shall be attended within three minutes by a representative of the MCS provider,
or by a device that is capable of complaint or inquiry resolution; and
      2.   The rate of abandoned calls shall not be greater than fifteen
percent (15%) over any consecutive six (6) month period of time. "Abandoned
calls" shall in no event be deemed to include calls in which the caller hangs
up within forty-five (45) seconds of making the call.
   J.   With respect to the specifications listed in subsection (I) of this
Section, it shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to quarterly certify to
the Council/franchising authority that the affected MCS provider is meeting the
minimal specifications.
9-44   Special Service Requirements For Blind, Hearing-Impaired, Or Ambulatory-
Impaired Customers
In addition to any other requirements mandated by this ordinance, or by Federal
or State law, an MCS provider shall comply with the following special service
requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers:
   A.   provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service
office;
   B.   for any customer declared legally blind by the State, an MCS provider
must provide, if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice
synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills, and other pertinent
multi-channel system information;
   C.   provide at a non-discriminatory cost, a special closed-captioned
converter for the hearing impaired;
   D.   provide at a non-discriminatory cost, a remote control device and/or
converter for wheelchair subscribers or subscribers with a permanent medical or
physical ambulatory impairment;
   E.   where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of
equipment by individuals who have physical impairments; and
   F.   in times of a disaster emergency or other instances requiring an
emergency alert, mandating an all channel video blanking capability, so that
all channels would be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert signal, in
order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sight-impaired customers
would be alerted.
9-45   Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
   A.   An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make,
allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject
any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed,
color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of
residence.
   B.   Consistent with Section 621 (a) (3) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541
(a) (3)), MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny cable
service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of potential
residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the
local area in which such group resides.
   C.   Consistent with subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, an MCS
provider shall not provide multi-channel service in a "cherry-picking" or
"cream-skimming" manner or fashion, to the exclusion of other residents based
on the excluded residents' income.
   D.   Subsection (A) of this Section, however, does not prohibit an MCS
provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as
long as the rate or charge does not exceed three hundred seventy (370) days in
length. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering special
incentive rates such as one (1) month basic service free, if twelve (12) months
of basic service are paid in one payment or within a certain time-frame.
   E.   Subsection (A) of this Section, also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement
(if applicable).
   F.   Subsection (A) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service
cluster for "lower income", and/or fixed income individuals.
   G.   Subsection (A) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from making agreements or entering into multi-channel service agreements with
multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel, and manufactured home
park owners) to provide multi-channel service under a bulk billing or other
type of arrangement.
9-46   Use Of Equipment, Return Of Equipment, Security Deposits, And Their
Return
   A.   Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary
equipment (such as a converter, input selector switch, or video control
recorder) to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative
sample (at least one percent (1%)) of such equipment to make sure that it is in
proper working order.
   B.   If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, an MCS
provider shall deliver to a customer, handwritten or typed instructions
detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless
required by another Section of this ordinance, an MCS provider may comply with
this Section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer.
   C.   An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a
customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment.
   D.   An MCS provider shall comply with any, and all, applicable State rules
concerning security deposits.
   E.   If the State is silent on the security deposit for a particular piece
of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any
security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the MCS
provider.
   F.   As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be prohibited
from charging any security deposit for multi-channel service which exceeds
twice the basic monthly rate.
   G.   An MCS provider shall return a security deposit (together with any
interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned, or the
subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no
payment delinquencies within the preceding twelve (12) month period).
   H.   A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS
provider in good working order, and operate such equipment only in the manner
specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the equipment.
   I.   A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any
damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the customer's
failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment.
   J.   A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an
MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to a
hidden or latent defect in the equipment, or for equipment which fails to
operate, or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the
normal wear and tear of such equipment, or for equipment damaged or destroyed
by an act of nature, and which is not covered by a customer's home or apartment
insurance policy.
9-47   Service Inquiry Logs
   A.   An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry
logs, subject to any limitations imposed by State or Federal law, including
(for MCS providers classified as cable operators) any subscriber privacy
limitations imposed by the CCPA.
   B.   The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the City in
assessing the type, degree, and rate of resolution of customer service
requests, inquiries, and complaints.
   C.   At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:
      1.   the time and date of initial receipt of any service request,
inquiry, or complaint, together with the time and date of initial response to
that service request, inquiry or complaint;
      2.   the nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint;
      3.   the precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the
service inquiry, request, or complaint;
      4.   whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by
allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and
      5.   the area, location, or quadrant of the City where the service
request, inquiry, or request was generated.
   D.   In addition to any other right of inspection that the Council/
franchising authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and
inspect a compilation of such logs. However, the Council/franchising authority
shall not have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service
inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are
otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by State or Federal law.
   E.   This Section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry
logs on scheduled installations.
9-48   Through 9-50 (Reserved)
9-51   Restoration Of A Subscriber's Property
   A.   At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate, and maintain a multi-channel system), disturbs the yard, residence, or
other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS provider shall ensure
that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other personal property is returned,
replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the
condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
   B.   The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider. This
subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a subscriber or private
property owner, for any damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor,
or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a
subscriber or private property owner's property.
   C.   The types of acts specifically included in this Section are the
following:
      1.   removal of a subscriber's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers,
trees, driveway, or fence to install, trench, repair, replace, remove, or
locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;
      2.   installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS
provider within a subscriber's residence which requires drilling, excavating,
plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider;
      3.   temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or
heating unit, or the like), in order to perform some sort of construction,
maintenance, or repair on the multi-channel system; or
      4.   permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to
either the revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchise (if
applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation, of multi-channel
service to any portion of the City.
   D.   The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any
subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to
perform the tasks outlined in this Section.
   E.   In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the authority and
responsibility to diligently trim trees of a private property owner (including
a subscriber), but only to the extent necessary to prevent the branches of the
trees from coming in contact with the MCS provider's wires and cables.
9-52   Service Inquiries, Requests, Complaints, And Response Times, And New
Installations Or Reconnections Of Service
   A.   Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency, or an appointment
scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall
respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers,
within such MCS provider's normal business or service hours, and within the
time schedules detailed in subsections (B) through (I) of this Section.
Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the
customer whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or
evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged, then the
MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as
possible, and if desired by the subscriber shall reschedule the service call
for a time within twenty-four (24) hours of the cancellation.
   B.   In the case of a signal or service interruption, a non-exempt MCS
provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to resume the
signal or service to the subscriber within twenty-four hours (24) from the time
the non-exempt MCS provider first received notification of the signal or
service interruption.
   C.   In the case of a "blank" or "no-picture" situation of any given level
of billing or service, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make
repairs as are necessary to return the multi-channel service system picture
within twelve hours (12) from the time the non-exempt MCS provider first
received notification of the "blank" or "no-picture" situation.
   D.   In the case of a defective, improperly operating, or non-operating
piece of equipment, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make
repairs as are necessary to correct the problem within twenty-four (24) hours
from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the defective,
improperly operating, or non-operating piece of equipment.
   E.   In the case of repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's
residence, or repair to the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent),
the repair should be completed, and the situation resolved, at the conclusion
of the first service visit. If the repair is not completed and resolved within
three (3) visits, and if as a result of the insufficient repair, a situation
remains wherein there is a visually or audibly detected degradation of a multi-
channel signal by human eye or ear, then the MCS provider must immediately, and
completely replace all drop cable (coaxial, fiber or its functional
equivalent), and/or any necessary MCS provider equipment at no charge.
   F.   In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry go
unresponded or unattended to for more than twelve (12) hours from the time the
MCS provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request.
Moreover, except in emergency situations, all requests and inquiries shall be
handled or corrected within thirty-six (36) hours from the time the MCS
provider first received notification. If a cancellation of a service call
occurs, then the MCS provider shall re-schedule the call in a manner consistent
with the guidelines expressed in subsection (A) of this Section.
   G.   A complaint/inquiry regarding loss of all channels comprising a service
level, cluster, or tier will be responded to, and corrected, within six hours
(6) from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the loss of
all channels comprising a service level, or service tier, or service cluster.
   H.   In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider
received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS
provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at
all, the Council/franchising authority shall reserve the right and authority to
settle such a dispute.
   I.   New installations, upgrades, or reconnections of multi-channel service
by an MCS provider shall be performed and completed within seven (7) days of a
customer requesting such a new installation, upgrade, or reconnection.
9-53   MCS Providers Required To Maintain Sufficient Repair Parts And
Sufficient Repair Personnel
   A.   Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider
shall, at all times, have access to, and be able to secure, sufficient
maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system, so that the MCS
provider can respond to, and correct, all subscriber service interruptions
within the time periods specified in this ordinance.
   B.   Having access to, and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and
repair parts and equipment, is necessary to promptly restore a subscriber's
multi-channel service, and avoid delays caused by having to obtain needed parts
and equipment.
   C.   Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, or strike (whose
duration has been less than seventy-two (72) hours), an MCS provider shall have
sufficient maintenance and repair personnel, so that the MCS provider can
respond to, and correct, subscriber service interruptions within the time
periods specified in this ordinance.
   D.   An MCS provider shall annually certify to the Council/franchising
authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS provider-
implemented course designed to train service technicians to handle their jobs
in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. Also, the course should be
designed to provide continuing education to service technicians in changes in
technology, repair/maintenance procedures and related matters.
   E.   Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions in this Section,
an MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) service technician on call
twenty-four (24) hours per day.
9-54   Disconnection For Non-Payment
   A.   A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at
least forty-five (45) days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber, and
payment has not been received by an MCS provider.
   B.   Before disconnection of a subscriber's multi-channel service (either
physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:
      1.   the subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of multi-
channel service; and
      2.   at least five (5) days have elapsed after a separate written notice
of impending disconnection has been personally served upon the subscriber; or
      3.   at least eight (8) days have elapsed after mailing a separate
written notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or
      4.   at least five (5) days have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for or, refused to accept, a separate written notice of impending
disconnection.
   C.   The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state
the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum
amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and place where
such payment must be made.
   D.   An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment including
converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner), from a subscriber,
must do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours of an MCS
provider.
   E.   Receipt of a "bad check" from a subscriber, in response to a written
notice of disconnection, does not constitute payment, and the affected MCS
provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting
multi-channel service.
   F.   An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and any
applicable State regulations, are followed.
   G.   Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made
within sixty (60) days of the disconnection for non-payment.
9-55   Voluntary Disconnections And Downgrades
   A.   At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier,
service cluster, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or the
entire multi-channel service be disconnected.
   B.   Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a downgrade
from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive level of service, or
a less expensive level of service.
   C.   From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a
disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have seventy-two (72)
hours or three (3) service days, whichever is longer, to disconnect or
downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational
service, or entire multi-channel service. In the event that an MCS provider
does not disconnect or downgrade service within seventy-two (72) hours, a
subscriber's obligation to pay for such service shall cease, or in the case of
a downgrade, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or
higher priced service shall cease.
   D.   For a service tier, service cluster, premium channel or informational
service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber shall pay a pro rata
share of the monthly rate for such service tier, service cluster, premium
channel or informational service.
   E.   No separate disconnect or downgrade charge may be passed on to a
subscriber if it chooses to take advantage of a lower-priced service tier/
cluster or an optional service tier/cluster. However, to prevent subscriber
abuse of this voluntary disconnection, or downgrade policy, a subscriber shall
be charged a minimum one (1) months full rate for any one service tier/cluster
which is disconnected and/or downgraded at least three (3) times within a span
of one hundred eighty (180) days.
   F.   If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been damaged by a
subscriber, prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the
subscriber with the entire cost for such damage, provided that the MCS provider
notifies the subscriber within ten (10) days of the disconnection. A subscriber
shall not be required to pay for equipment failure, if the circumstances fall
within the normal wear and tear guidelines established in this ordinance.
   G.   Any refund due a subscriber after disconnection (both for non-payment
and voluntary) shall be made within sixty (60) days after such disconnection.
   H.   In no event will this Section be viewed as abridging or otherwise
limiting the rights and remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry
resolution process outlined in this ordinance.
9-56   Through 9-61 (Reserved)
9-62   Protection Of Subscriber Privacy
   A.   An MCS provider shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules
or regulations of the Federal, or State governments.
   B.   For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall
also abide by, and comply with, any subscriber privacy protection requirements
and procedures listed in Section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551).
9-63   Resolution Of Complaints/Inquiries
   A.   An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations
outlined in this ordinance.
   B.   An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any person. In
any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the manner that
is prescribed by this ordinance.
   C.   The Council/franchising authority shall establish a neutral, third-
party appeal process, to handle complaints/inquiries that are not
satisfactorily resolved at the MCS provider level.
   D.   An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at
least the following minimal standards:
      1.   the initial response to a complaint/inquiry shall occur no later
than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
      2.   every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry within
twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
      3.   complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service
inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this ordinance;
      4.   informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is
consistent with this ordinance, and any applicable State regulations; and
      5.   informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is
consistent with this ordinance, and any applicable State regulations.
9-64   Policy With Respect To Continuity Of Multi-Channel Service Provisions
   A.   The Council/franchising authority declares that as part of its right to
establish multi-channel customer service guidelines, it has the duty to ensure
continuity of multi-channel service for all subscribers. In that light, the
Council/franchising authority also determines that it may take appropriate
measures in order to ensure that no portion of the City is threatened or faced
with a disruption, interruption, or discontinuance of multi-channel service due
to the actions of any MCS provider.
   B.   In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in subsection (A),
the Council/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the
following:
      1.   to provide for continuity of multi-channel service in the event of
acquisition by the City;
      2.   to provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed
abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service by an MCS
provider;
      3.   to provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation,
termination, or non-renewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise;
      4.   to provide for continuity of service in the event that a transaction
occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider, such as an
assignment, sale, transfer, or merger;
      5.   to provide for continuity of service in the event of an expiration
of a franchise;
      6.   to prevent disruption of multi-channel service which would provide a
hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multi-channel system as their
primary or secondary source for information; and
      7.   to prevent the interruption or cessation of multi-channel service
which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed
by subscribers of a multi-channel system, and thereby restricting their ability
to receive information.
   C.   In any situation (including those mentioned above) which threatens the
City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-
channel service, then the MCS provider shall provide the Council/franchising
authority with at least forty-five (45) days notice (except in extreme
circumstances) prior to the effective date of any action which would cause a
loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service. The purpose of
the notice is to apprise the Council/franchising authority of the possibility
of such loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, so
that it might explore its options and take appropriate measures.
   D.   Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above) which
threatens the City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the
continuity of multi-channel service, then the Council/franchising authority may
direct the MCS provider for a period of up to twenty-four (24) months to do
everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous,
uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s)
regardless of the circumstances.
   E.   During the interim period, the Council/franchising authority shall work
with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multi-channel system owner, or
rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at the
earliest possible instance.
   F.   During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to
provide multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to
all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including franchise fees,
alternative user charges, and taxes) to the City or to other persons.
   G.   In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved
within twenty-four (24) months, then the Council/franchising authority may
extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is
satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the Council/franchising
authority may adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that
the subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of
the same quality, mix, and level(s).
9-65   Continued Use Of Individual Antennas Protected
   A.   The Council/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the
erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the City so
long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable
zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required
to receive multi-channel service, or to physically connect to a multi-channel
system.
   B.   It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through
either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants, or other type of
agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multi-channel service, or
physically connecting to a multi-channel system.
9-66   Periodic Multi-Channel Subscriber Surveys
   A.   At least every three (3) years after the adoption of this ordinance,
the City and any affected MCS provider shall conduct a survey of current
subscribers of that particular MCS provider in order to ascertain the degree of
customer satisfaction/dissatisfaction with the subscriber sensitive aspects of
the multi-channel system including (but not limited to) billing practices,
response times, programming choices available and receivable, responsiveness to
inquiries, and use, availability, and accessibility of any customer service
office.
   B.   If the survey results indicate or demonstrate that the customer service
practices set forth in this ordinance are not sufficient to meet reasonable or
identified projected City needs, then the Council/franchising authority may
take whatever measures are appropriate in order to rectify the deficiency or
insufficiency in a particular customer service practice by one or more MCS
providers.
9-67   Through 9-70 (Reserved)
9-71   Construction Schedule And Construction-Related Requirements
   A.   In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the Council/
franchising authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal
construction schedule and construction-related requirements:
      1.   construct, install, maintain, and repair the multi-channel system in
accordance with the requirements noted in this ordinance;
      2.   use streets and public ways, as set forth in this ordinance;
      3.   where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as
set forth in this ordinance;
      4.   adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this ordinance;
      5.   adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this
ordinance;
      6.   adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this ordinance;
      7.   abide by, and act in strict accordance with, all current technical
codes adopted by the City, or the State, or the United States, as noted in this
ordinance; and
      8.   maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this ordinance.
9-72   Construction Of Good Quality
During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the
multi-channel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and durable
quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable
manner.
9-73   Conditions On Use Of Streets And Public Ways
   1.   All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent),
and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located,
constructed, installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily
interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets,
rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.
   2.   In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe
condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then at its own
expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the
Council/franchising authority, remove that part of the system that creates the
hazardous condition from the subject property.
   3.   An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with
the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or
with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater lift stations, or any other
service or facility that benefits the City's or its residents' health, safety,
or welfare.
   4.   An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect, rights-of-way, easements, and support or temporarily
disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of
such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of:
      1.   traffic conditions;
      2.   public safety;
      3.   a street closing;
      4.   street construction or resurfacing;
      5.   change or establishment of street grade;
      6.   installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift
stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or
      7.   any improvement, construction or repair related to the City's or its
residents health safety, or welfare.
   5.   It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in
conjunction with another person) to locate and mark or otherwise visibly
indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial,
fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent
contractors of such MCS provider, install cable in the marked-off area.
   6.   An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the
moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the
person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The
affected MCS provider shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days notice of
a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes.
   7.   For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this
ordinance, and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the multi-
channel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional
equivalent) shall be placed underground. Further, where both power and
utilities are presently underground, multi-channel system cable shall be placed
underground also.
9-74   Franchised MCS Provider's Duty To Remove Franchised Properties From The
Public Streets
   1.   This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the City.
   2.   Whenever the following occurs:
      1.   a franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all, or part, of the
multi-channel system for a continuous period of six (6) months;
      2.   a franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multi-
channel system outlined in the application, or proposal for renewal, or renewal
franchise agreement;
      3.   the Council/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise
pursuant to the provisions set forth, in this ordinance; or
      4.   the franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this ordinance;
Then-unless the City or another MCS provider uses such multi-channel system,
under the continuity provisions outlined in this ordinance, the affected
franchised MCS provider shall promptly remove its multi-channel system property
from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the City.
   3.   If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the
Council/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if
removal of the property is not accommodated within two hundred seventy (270)
days, or substantial progress towards removal is not made within two hundred
ten (210) days, then the Council/franchising authority may direct officials or
representatives of the City to remove such franchised MCS provider's system
property at that franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or
construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith
and credit guarantee required as set forth in this ordinance shall be available
to pay for such work.
   4.   If officials or representatives of the City remove a franchised MCS
provider's system property, and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the
property within ninety (90) days of its removal, then the Council/franchising
authority may take whatever steps are available under State law to declare the
property surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale (if permitted by
State law) going to the City.
   5.   When such franchised MCS provider removes its multi-channel system
property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the
City, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner
approved by the Council/franchising authority, replace and restore such public
or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the
disturbance was done.
9-75   Construction Standards
   1.   Methods of construction, installation, maintenance repair of any multi-
channel system shall comply with the most current editions of the National
Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electric Code, as affects the
construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and
communication lines and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are
inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or State, or local law, then
the more stringent shall govern in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
   2.   All installations shall treat the aesthetics of the property as a
priority, shall not substantially affect the appearance of the structure, and
shall not be installed on the bias across property or the face or side of a
home or building without the owner's permission.
   3.   No home/building within 150 feet of the system shall be served by a
drop with any pole span being longer than 150 feet without the owner's
permission.
   4.   All underground drops shall follow property lines and cross property
only at right angles, unless otherwise permitted by the owner.
9-76   System Construction Schedule For Franchised MCS Providers
   1.   This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate with the City.
   2.   A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multi-channel
system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a form and format
determined by the Council/franchising authority.
   3.   A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system construction
schedule shall be handled in the manner allowed under either this ordinance, or
where applicable, a franchise agreement.
9-77   System Expansion For MCS Providers
   1.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary
purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest diversity of
programming sources be available to the greatest number of City residents. The
Council/franchising authority is also cognizant that an MCS provider may have
some constitutionally protected rights with respect to when and what areas of
the City are provided service.
   2.   In order to balance those interests, the Council/franchising authority
sets the minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part of a
franchised MCS provider.
   3.   A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within six (6) months of the
effective date of this ordinance, a detailed plan for multi-channel system
expansion to any area not presently served within the City. Provided, however,
no such plan shall be accepted by the Council/franchising authority as to any
area less than the entire City limits if a non-exempt MCS provider has already
submitted such a plan as part of a franchise. Such plan should not be construed
as a requirement for universal service, but rather as a means for achieving the
Council/franchising authority's goals, mentioned in Subsection (A). However, at
a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend multi-channel service to any
area within the City that has a density of ten (10) homes or building passings
per mile, or fractional equivalent thereof, as measured from the extremity of
the system nearest the unserved area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed
subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation,
except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers, so long as
the system expansion is technically feasible.
   4.   The detailed plan must include criteria for:
      1.   extending the provision of service to isolated subscribers;
      2.   extending the provision of service to new or existing developments
with overhead cable construction; and
      3.   new or existing developments with underground cable construction.
   5.   The detailed plan must be reviewed and approved by the Council/
franchising authority.
   6.   For purposes of this Section, "isolated subscribers'" means any
potential customer of a franchised MCS provider who dwells in a house more than
one-half (1/2) mile from the nearest franchised MCS provider connection.
9-78   Permits And Licenses
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by law, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full
force and effect, for as long as required.
9-79   Through 9-85 (Reserved)
9-86   Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect To Safety
Requirements
   A.   The Council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's
construction, operation, and maintenance of the multi-channel system meet
certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and
lessen the likelihood of interruption of multi-channel service.
   B.   Consequently, the Council/franchising authority requires any non-exempt
MCS provider to adopt the following safety requirements:
      1.   emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
ordinance;
      2.   minimum standby power as noted in this ordinance;
      3.   the provision of an indoor signal or safety alert technology in the
manner noted in this ordinance;
      4.   implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program as set
forth in this ordinance;
      5.   follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative
leakage index (CLI) limits; and
      6.   comply with, and abide by, any construction, safety or fire codes as
noted in this ordinance.
9-87   Provisions To Alert Subscribers In The Event Of An Emergency; Standby
Power
   A.   In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending,
imminent or actual, natural or man-made emergency, then all MCS providers shall
ensure that the multi-channel system providing multi-channel service to all, or
part, of the City is designed so as to permit an authorized official of the
City to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or
functional equivalent) from any location.
   B.   In addition to any other requirements listed in this Section, an MCS
provider shall:
      1.   designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of
both audio and video;
      2.   inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel at least
daily on at least one (1) channel of the multi-channel system;
      3.   maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the
needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers;
      4.   test the emergency override system not less than once a month;
      5.   cooperate with the City on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system; and
      6.   develop a plan (with the City's concurrence) in order to provide
continuity of multi-channel service, and response to service calls in the event
of a natural or man-made emergency.
   C.   As one method of providing continuity of multi-channel services in the
event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless
exempted by the Council/franchising authority, have the capacity for four (4)
hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cable, and
all headends, hubs, and receive sites associated with the distribution of cable
service to, and throughout the City.
9-88   Provisions Concerning Safety Alert Technology
   A.   The Council/franchising authority considers the need for an indoor
signal or safety alert technology, available to both subscribers and non-
subscribers of an MCS provider's lowest level of programming service, of
paramount interest and need, and as such should be an integral part of an MCS
provider's system. Though in some ways similar to the concept of emergency
alert override, signal alert technology is different and distinct in that it
may be used by both subscribers to basic service and non-subscribers to the
basic service of an MCS provider's system. Moreover, such safety alert
technology is connected to the National Weather Service twenty-four (24) hour
radio service including its new WRSAME/"Site Select" weather and warning
system, which specifically allows for an indoor warning and notification via an
audio alert voice path, regardless of whether an individual has a television
receiver or monitor, or an FM receiver, and, moreover, can provide effectively
instantaneous alert and warning, as well as needed instructions, in addition to
allowing key community-oriented entities to communicate with both the general
populace and selected (i.e. target) segments of the community.
   B.   In realization and recognition of the preceding, a non-exempt MCS
provider shall offer for use throughout the City (within twelve (12) months of
the effective date of this ordinance) a signal or safety alert monitoring
technology for purposes of alerting both subscribers and non-subscribers of a
multi-channel system to impending or occurring disaster emergencies, and
allowing the City to communicate with both subscribers and the public as the
need to do so may exist at any time.
   C.   A non-exempt MCS provider shall cooperate with the City and the
provider of said technology in the marketing and distribution of the necessary
on-premises alert receiving devices, including the installation, and
replacement of such, as may be needed from time to time.
   D.   A non-exempt MCS provider shall install the necessary electronics,
processing, and distribution equipment in the MCS provider's headend, and will
ensure the maintenance, operating condition, and replacement of such equipment,
as is necessary to protect its continued use.
   E.   Notwithstanding the preceding, a non-exempt MCS provider has no
responsibility for repair of such equipment beyond obtaining (in a timely
manner) replacement from the manufacturer for inoperable components.
   F.   It is explicitly understood that one need not be a subscriber to a
multi-channel system to use the safety alert device, and receive the safety
alert service, so long as a drop is installed into the address to which said
device is attached. It is also understood that the user need not have a
television receiver.
   G.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes the positive effect on the
safety of the public in general, and the ability to save lives, and property,
of those who would otherwise be prevented from receiving the most expeditious
warning or alert possible without such a device and technology. Consequently,
the Council/franchising authority requires that all non-exempt MCS providers
shall participate in a periodic public awareness campaign as deemed appropriate
by the Council/franchising authority, in cooperation with the Council/
franchising authority and the manufacturer, to inform the citizenry and non-
cable subscribers of the availability and capability of such safety alert
technology.
   H.   An MCS provider shall assure that all subscribers to multi-channel
service receive printed material, fully describing the technology and its
benefits, at least annually and at the time of installation.
   I.   An MCS provider shall allow non-subscribers of Basic Cable Service the
choice of purchasing or leasing the necessary equipment, which shall include
the cost of installation on a non-discriminatory basis, and so inform such
persons of both options.
   J.   Given the significant public safety and life and property saving
benefits of this technology, and the resultant need of as much of the general
public as possible to be protected from the otherwise unnecessary greater risk
to life, limb and property associated with other alert/warning systems, an MCS
provider shall assure that the service is placed on the same level of service
and is priced commensurate with that for like technology/service in the Mid-
Western United States.
   K.   Given the importance and critical nature of preventing the loss of life
and property, and the need and ability of the Council/franchising authority to
communicate directly with the public in any number of situations, including but
not limited to those potentially involving matters of life and death, and as
this technology is clearly not a programming service, the Council/franchising
authority deems it appropriate to designate the use of the capability of such
technology as a governmental use of the system, and it is the intent of the
City that it be made available to all subscribers.
9-89   Implementation Of A Preventative Maintenance Program
   A.   It shall be the duty of an MCS provider (that has more than three
hundred fifty subscribers) to devise and implement a quarterly preventative
maintenance program for the multi-channel system in order to ensure that there
is no material degradation of the multi-channel system that would affect the
citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality of
multi-channel services being provided.
   B.   Before the MCS provider implements such a program, it shall be reviewed
and approved by the Council/franchising authority. Within forty-five (45) days
after the completion of the quarterly preventative maintenance program, the MCS
provider shall prepare and submit a written report to the Council/franchising
authority detailing the results of the tests conducted, and all items performed
or addressed during the quarterly program. Although not exhaustive, the
following areas should be included in a preventative maintenance program, and
subsequent report:
      1.   inspection, and repair if needed, of the headend;
      2.   inspection, and repair if needed, of the antenna tower;
      3.   requiring weather-proofing and protection of the antenna lead
connectors, and on any other exposed fittings;
      4.   requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in
accordance with FCC requirements;
      5.   removing tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with, or
come in contact with, the MCS provider's cable;
      6.   requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the
MCS provider's equipment including equipment on service vehicles, and field
test equipment;
      7.   employing a status monitoring system to identify problems or
situations in which the multi-channel system electronics are operating outside
pre-programmed parameters;
      8.   testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will
function properly during an emergency situation; and
      9.   testing of the safety alert system or technology.
9-90   Construction, Fire, And Safety Codes
   A.   An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove,
replace, or restore the multi-channel system in strict compliance with all
current technical codes adopted by the Council/franchising authority, the
State, or the United States.
   B.   The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to,
construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes.
9-91   Through 9-95 (Reserved)
9-96   Alternative User Charge
   A.   This Section is applicable to any unfranchised, but otherwise
authorized MCS provider, and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise
ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS
providers the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable.
   B.   Where not specifically prohibited by Federal or State law, and as an
alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this
ordinance, the Council/franchising authority may impose, extract, and collect,
a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the
streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.
   C.   The alternative user charge shall be based on the following
mathematical mode:
      1.   determine the present value of all public streets, rights-of-way,
easements, and public ways of the City in which are located multi-channel
system facilities and equipment of the affected MCS provider;
      2.   take the average percentage increase in land appraisals within the
City (as determined by the Property Appraiser for the City, for the five
preceding years);
      3.   take the average percentage increase for the five preceding years
and use it to determine the dollar amount of property value increase for the
remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable, then use five
years);
      4.   add the present value to the dollar amount of property value
increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable
then use five years);
      5.   divide the adjusted value by the remaining number of years on the
term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years);
      6.   multiply that figure by five percent (5%) to arrive at the annual
user charge that is to be collected from the affected MCS provider.
For purposes of illustration only, the formula reads as follows:
present value = the dollar amount of the property value increase for remaining
term of the franchise (based on average percentage increase of land appraisals
for past years of franchise term; divide the adjusted present value by the
remaining years on the term of the franchise; multiply that figure by five
percent (5%), = (equals) the annual alternative user charge.
   D.   The Council/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user
charge in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's
use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be
obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MCS provider's annual gross
revenues. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge
that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenues, as long as that charge
did not exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was
assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a percentage of an affected MCS
provider's annual gross revenues.
   E.   It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user
charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time, for the
same period.
   F.   An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to
pay an alternative user charge that exceeds the maximum amount previously
allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a
percentage of such MCS provider's gross revenues (as defined by this ordinance)
for any particular reporting period. In the event that the alternative user
charge does exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was
assessed as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues,
then such alternative user charge should be reduced to reflect an amount not
greater than the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed
as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues.
   G.   An affected MCS provider shall pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the
alternative user charge at the end of every three (3) months.
9-97   Franchise Required; Exception
   A.   Except as provided in subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, no
person, or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a
multi-channel system which requires the laying or positioning of cable
(coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the City,
without having first obtained a franchise, and then entering into a franchise
agreement with the City.
   B.   Pursuant to the CCPA, a local government may own and operate a multi-
channel system classified as a cable system. Consequently, should the Council/
franchising authority directly, or indirectly, through any legal means
available to the Council/franchising authority, decide to purchase, acquire,
construct, lease, control, or otherwise own a cable system within the
territorial limits of the City, then the Council/franchising authority shall
not be required to submit a proposal for, or receive, a franchise in order to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the geographical limits
of the City.
   C.   In the case of a person or MCS provider lawfully providing multi-
channel service on July 1, 1984, then such person or MCS provider shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, and enter into a franchise agreement unless the
Council/franchising authority expressly requires the person or MCS provider to
do so.
   D.   If, as a result of annexation (either previous to, or subsequent to,
the effect date of this ordinance), an MCS provider comes under the
jurisdiction of the City, then such MCS provider shall be subject to the
provisions of this ordinance, including (if applicable) obtaining a franchise.
Any such franchise shall extend only to the territory comprising the annexed
area. The provisions of Section
9-10 and
9-15 of this ordinance do not apply to this subsection.
   E.   Where a person or MCS provider is required by the Council/franchising
authority to obtain a franchise, then the Council/franchising authority shall
notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the
Council/franchising authority's formal action.
   F.   After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider has
ninety (90) days to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same
form and format as required by the Council/franchising authority. Then, the
affected person or MCS provider's application will be handled as set forth by
either State or local law.
9-98   Authority To Grant Non-Exclusive Franchises
   A.   Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541),
the Council/franchising authority may award one (1) or more non-exclusive
multi-channel service franchises within its geographical limits. With the
exception of existing non-exempt MCS providers in an area annexed by the City
and subject to Section
9-77 of this ordinance, the Council/franchising authority shall not award a
franchise for a service area comprising less than the entire City limits. Note
well, however, that existing non-exempt MCS providers as of the effective date
of this ordinance may, but are not required to, serve any subsequently annexed
area of the City in a manner consistent with line extension policies outlined
in this ordinance, and which are specifically noted in the MCS provider's
franchise agreement. The provisions of Section
9-10 and
9-15 of this ordinance do not apply to this subsection.
   B.   A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public
proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the City and the
applicant, and after which, if the applicant is selected as a franchised MCS
provider, then such applicant will enter into a franchise agreement with the
City, pursuant to the provisions of federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
9-99   Franchise Agreement; Minimal Requirements
   A.   If the Council/franchising authority awards an applicant a franchise to
construct, operate, or maintain a multi-channel system within the City, or
approves a proposal for a renewal of a franchise, then within one hundred
eighty (180) days, an applicant or a renewal franchised MCS provider and the
City shall enter into a franchise agreement which details the rights, duties,
responsibilities, and liabilities of both parties.
   B.   A newly franchised MCS provider may not lay any cable (coaxial, fiber,
or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the
newly franchised MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.
   C.   A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly
delineate the rights and duties of the franchised MCS provider, and the
Council/franchising authority.
   D.   At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the
following:
      1.   a detailed definition of "annual gross revenues" or "gross revenues"
which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base
for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative
user charge;
      2.   the term or duration of the franchise;
      3.   indemnity and hold harmless clauses;
      4.   insurance;
      5.   performance and completion bonds or security deposits;
      6.   construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;
      7.   franchise fees;
      8.   continuity of multi-channel programming service;
      9.   repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements; and
      10.   a severability clause.
9-100   Extent Of Grant Of Franchise
   A.   Upon an award of a franchise, and the subsequent execution of the
franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a
franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace,
remove, or restore a multi-channel system within the geographical limits set
forth in the franchise agreement.
   B.   The franchised multi-channel system may be located in, upon, along,
across, over, and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways
of the City.
   C.   If necessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private
property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be
that of a franchised MCS provider.
   D.   A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multi-channel system on, or
within, the property of such utility company. This provision specifically
includes MCS providers classified as cable operators.
9-101   Term Of Franchise
   A.   The term of an initial renewal franchise may be for a period not to
exceed fifteen (15) years from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is
approved by the Council/franchising authority.
   B.   If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six (6)
years or less, then the franchise agreement shall detail the reasons for
granting the shorter franchise term.
   C.   The reasons for a franchise term of six (6) years or less, include, and
are limited to, the following:
      1.   multiple or repeated violations of the prior franchise agreement;
      2.   multiple or repeated violations of this ordinance, or any mandated
provisions of the CCPA;
      3.   a continuing and documented pattern of substandard or non-responsive
service;
      4.   reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City;
      5.   failure to comply with any construction, rebuild, or upgrade
schedule; and
      6.   failure to timely pay in their entirety any franchise fees, or
taxes, or other charges due to the City.
   D.   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to grant a
franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term wherein the initial or
renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to exceed fifteen (15)
years total) upon the franchised MCS provider attaining an "excellent" rating
during the course of a periodic performance evaluation.
   E.   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to grant a
franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term (wherein the initial or
renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to exceed fifteen (15)
years total) should the franchised MCS provider consistently and continually
meet the Council/franchising authority's objectives with respect to the
provision of broad categories of video programming as noted in this ordinance.
   F.   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to reduce the term
of the franchise by one (1) year for each material, repeated occurrence of an
uncured/unremedied violation of the franchise or this ordinance, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section
9-105 of this ordinance, or when the MCS provider fails to attain a minimum
rating of "adequate" (on a scale of "excellent", "adequate" and "poor") for any
two (2) successive periodic performance reviews, as set forth in Section
9-106 of this ordinance.
   G.   Should the highest court of the nation, or State, invalidate, void as
unenforceable or unconstitutional, the concept of a franchise or franchise
duration, then the Council/franchising authority may adopt emergency rules and
regulations in order to preserve and protect the rights and duties of both the
Council/franchising authority and any franchised MCS provider. During the
interim, the invalid franchise may be considered (unless prohibited by the
State) and interpreted in the same manner and fashion as a business license or
other comparable authorization. Upon the adoption of emergency rules, the
Council/franchising authority should enter into a new agreement which describes
which terms and conditions of the franchised MCS provider's system may be
reviewed and examined, and under what circumstances may a franchised MCS
provider forfeit its right to operate a multi-channel system within the City.
9-102   Application For Franchise; Application Fee
   A.   The Council/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations
with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise.
Such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal,
financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant.
   B.   Unless prohibited, an applicant shall pay an application fee which
shall be equal to the administrative and consulting costs associated with
processing an application for a franchise. The total application fee must be
paid, unless waived, regardless of whether the applicant receives, or does not
receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived) prior
to the Council/franchising authority's formal action on the applicant's request
for a franchise.
9-103   Franchise Fees
   A.   Any non-exempt franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS
provider classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal
franchise after the date this ordinance becomes effective, shall pay to the
City for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and
public ways, and other facilities of the City in the operation of the multi-
channel system, and for the City's supervision thereof during the term of the
franchise, a sum equal to five percent to (5%) of the annual gross revenues of
such non-exempt franchised MCS provider. Such fee shall explicitly be separate
from, and in addition to, any fees or charges for the use or occupancy of any
municipally-owned poles, conduits or other facilities owned by a municipally-
owned utility.
   B.   If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over
multi-channel service ever allows a governmental entity or Council/franchising
authority to increase the franchise fee beyond five percent (5%), then the
Council/franchising authority shall have the authority to increase the
franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable.
   C.   It is intended that the franchise fees will promote the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the City. Therefore, the five percent (5%)
franchise fee shall be deposited into the general revenues of the City, unless
specifically authorized elsewhere.
   D.   A non-exempt franchised MCS provider shall file with the Council/
franchising authority, within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each
of the franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and
revenue report clearly showing the gross revenues received by such franchised
MCS provider during the preceding quarter and certified by a certified public
accountant or officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy,
completeness, and veracity of the revenue figures. Such report shall be in the
form and format determined by the Council/franchising authority. Such report
shall include revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived
from, or allowed, or caused to be derived from, or applicable to the operation
of the multi-channel system, or the provision of any multi-channel service by
or to the multi-channel system. Revenue will be reported by service category,
type, and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for
all sources, levels, tiers, and types of service and other revenue sources of
all kinds and types.
   E.   Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered
to the City at the time the revenue report is filed.
   F.   In the event that payment is not made within forty-five (45) days after
the date specified in this Section, then such franchised MCS provider may be
declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked,
terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this ordinance.
   G.   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a
franchised MCS provider books, if the Council/franchising authority deems it
necessary. If such audit discovers an underpayment of franchise fees that
exceeds two percent (2%) of the total fee paid for any reporting quarter, then
the affected franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the City for the cost of
such an audit. It is specifically understood that the right of audit and
recomputation of any, and all, amounts paid under a franchise fee, shall always
be accorded to the Council/franchising authority.
   H.   All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees,
will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider, and such
provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of said report, to be
produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the
Council/franchising authority.
   I.   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an
accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the City might have for further or
additional sums payable under the terms of this ordinance, or for any other
performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.
   J.   Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the City,
pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be considered in addition
to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees,
other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently
adopted.
   K.   A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Section 622 (g)
(2) (D) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 542 (g) (2) (D)).
   L.   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Council/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of
any kind, on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to
multi-channel service or other programming or communications service provided
by such person over a multi-channel system for which charges are assessed to
subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of
illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation(s) where a
premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider
merely acts as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a
subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells
advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or
through a third party.
   M.   For any twelve (12) month period, the fees paid by any person subject
to subsection (L) who provides any such multi-channel service shall not exceed
five percent (5%) of such person's gross revenues derived in such period from
the provision of such service over the multi-channel system.
   N.   If at any time, the highest court of the nation, or the highest court
of the State, invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of
franchise fees, then the Council/franchising authority may impose an
alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, in the manner set forth
in this ordinance.
9-104   Assignment Or Transfer Of Franchise
   A.   Where required for operation, an MCS provider's franchise may not be
assigned or transferred in whole, or in part, by the affected MCS provider,
without the prior express written approval by the Council/franchising
authority.
   B.   Any attempted assignment or transfer without such prior written consent
shall constitute a default of such franchise.
   C.   In the event of such a default, the Council/franchising authority shall
proceed according to the procedure set forth in this ordinance, and any
applicable State law.
   D.   At least ninety (90) days before a proposed assignment or transfer of
an MCS provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised
MCS provider shall petition in writing for the Council/franchising authority's
written consent for such a proposed assignment or transfer.
   E.   The Council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its
consent to such an assignment or transfer. However, in making such a
determination, the Council/franchising authority may consider the following:
      1.   experience of proposed assignee or transferee (including conducting
an investigation of proposed assignee or transferee's service record in other
communities);
      2.   qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee;
      3.   legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee;
      4.   financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee or
transferee;
      5.   if requested by the Council/franchising authority, submittals from
the proposed assignee or transferee, on what, if any, changes it intends to
make in the operation and maintenance of the present multi-channel system;
      6.   the corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS
provider, and proposed assignee or transferee;
      7.   the economic viability or non-viability of the multi-channel system
in the future, based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase
price on the City and/or the proposed assignee or transferee; and
      8.   any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or
transferee's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizenry of City as it relates to the operation of the multi-channel
system.
   F.   A copy of the completed sales agreement, or a functionally equivalent
instrument, between the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or
transferee shall be provided to the Council/franchising authority, so that the
Council/franchising authority may discover the assumption of obligations by the
franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee with respect to the
multi-channel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the Council/franchising
authority may accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above
referenced parties.
   G.   Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the Council/franchising
authority, the proposed assignee or transferee shall execute an affidavit,
acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by both this
ordinance, and the applicable franchise agreement.
   H.   In the event of any approved assignment or transfer, the assignee or
transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former
franchised MCS provider, except as noted in subsection (I).
   I.   An assignment or transfer shall not relieve the former franchised MCS
provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment
actually takes place, or unless specifically relieved by Federal, or State law,
or unless specifically relieved by the Council/franchising authority at the
time an assignment or transfer is approved.
9-105   Default Of Franchise; Revocation, Termination Or Cancellation Of
Franchise
   A.   When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS
provider) occurs which represents a violation of an integral provision of this
ordinance, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or
technical integrity and/or stability of the multi-channel system or the
franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the subscribers
and users are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be
considered a major breach of this ordinance. Under such circumstances, the
Council/franchising authority shall notify the affected MCS provider in
writing, of the specific breach, and direct such franchised MCS provider to
comply with all such provisions of its proposal, franchise agreement, or this
ordinance.
   B.   For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include,
but are not limited to: bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or
franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable), failure
to receive written Council/franchising authority approval for an assignment or
transfer, or failure to abide by the integral terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement, or integral provisions of this ordinance.
   C.   Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the
enumerated conditions, within sixty (60) days, then in no event shall the
enumerated condition be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any
subsequent review of franchise performance.
   D.   A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety
on the performance bond.
   E.   Within seventy-five (75) days, after such written notice is mailed to a
franchised MCS provider, the Council/franchising authority shall conduct a
public hearing on the matter.
   F.   The Council/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a
franchised MCS provider, and the surety, of the time and place of said public
hearing in a manner consistent with either State law, or approved by the
Council/franchising authority.
   G.   At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may
present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the
franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved, or steps are being
taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider should present
the information at the hearing.
   H.   If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing,
and has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised MCS
provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of
the matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise agreement.
   I.   After the public hearing, the Council/franchising authority may
determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss the
matter, or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any non-compliance and
thereby dismiss the matter. However the Council/franchising authority may
determine that an ordinance violation exists and remains uncured. Consequently,
upon a finding that the MCS provider violated an integral ordinance provision,
or failed to cure an outstanding ordinance violation, the Council/franchising
authority may direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective
action within a specified period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS
provider in default of the franchise agreement, and thereafter may revoke,
terminate, or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS provider presents
sufficient mitigating circumstances.
   J.   If the Council/franchising authority directs corrective action to take
place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in
default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be reduced to
writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such
franchised MCS provider, and surety, within fifteen (15) days of the Council/
franchising authority's action.
   K.   If within forty-five (45) days, the affected franchised MCS provider,
or surety does not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a
plan detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then
the Council/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise,
and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider, and surety forthwith,
unless there are mitigating circumstances.
9-106   Performance Evaluations
The Council/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance
evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised
MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the franchise and this
ordinance. Moreover, the Council/franchising authority may periodically review,
and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal,
and character qualifications continue to meet required operational,
maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure the uninterrupted
provision of multi-channel services. Such performance evaluations may be
conducted every three (3) years during the franchise term, and may done as part
of any required survey.
9-107   Through 9-115 (Reserved)
9-116   Specific Additional Rules For MCS Providers Classified As Cable
Operators
   A.   In addition to any requirements contained within this ordinance, all
non-exempt MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be
expected to abide by, and comply with, all applicable provisions of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984.
   B.   The specific provisions of the CCPA include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   cable channels for public, educational, or governmental use (Section
611 CCPA--codified at 47 USC 531);
      2.   cable channels for commercial use (Section 612--47 USC 532);
      3.   general franchise requirements (Section 621--47 USC 541);
      4.   franchise fees (Section 622--47 USC 542);
      5.   regulation of rates (Section 623--47 USC 543);
      6.   regulation of services, facilities, and equipment (Section 624--47
USC 544);
      7.   modification of franchise obligations (Section 625--47 USC 545);
      8.   franchise renewal (Section 626--47 USC 546);
      9.   conditions of sale of a franchise (Section 627--47 USC 547);
      10.   subscriber privacy (Section 631--47 USC 551); and
      11.   equal employment opportunity (Section 634--47 USC 554).
   C.   Further, as an additional requirement, before the second anniversary of
the effective date of this ordinance, any non-exempt MCS provider classified as
a cable operator and providing cable service within the City shall have
designed, built and activated a multi-channel system with a channel capacity of
at least sixty (60) channels.
   D.   Further, the Council/franchising authority is committed that the goal
of the CCPA, as set forth in Section 601(4) of the Act (codified at 47 USC 521
(4)), is met at all times. As a result, the Council/franchising authority
expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of
high definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any
subsequently developed technological advancement affecting channel capacity or
needed bandwidth for any video programming source or service, the cable
operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or
quantity of programming services carried on the cable system for reasons of
lack of adequate channel capacity.
   E.   Additionally, the Council/franchising authority, in the interests of
minimizing on-going operating costs to the cable operator and the resultant
increases in rates and charges paid by subscribers is committed to the
introduction of technological advancements that could realize such benefits to
both the cable operator and subscriber. Therefore, unless an operator can
demonstrate that it is both technologically and economically unfeasible, the
affected cable operator shall within eighteen (18) months of the effective date
of a franchise renewal agreement, or at the time of initial construction under
a new franchise agreement, introduce addressable technology allowing cable
service levels to be changed without the expense (either to the operator or
subscriber) of a separate trip or call.
9-117   Specific Additional Public, Educational, And Governmental Rules For MCS
Providers Classified As Cable Operators
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 611 of
the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 531), the Council/franchising authority has
certain power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or
governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS providers classified as cable
operators.
   B.   To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the Council/
franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental
(PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range needs of the City, the
Council/franchising authority adopts the following:
      1.   At the time of an initial application for an MCS franchise for a
cable system, and contained within any renewal franchise agreement, an MCS
provider classified as a cable operator shall pledge to include the following
guarantees:
         a.   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at
its own expense, one (1) twelve (12) hour educational channel; and
         b.   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at
its own expense, one (1) twelve hour (12) governmental channel that is
available for providing coverage of Council meetings, and other related
programming offered or designed by the City Manager, or designated official,
including department heads; and
         c.   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at
its own expense, one (1) twelve (12) hour public access channel that is
available for use by various community groups and organizations.
      2.   At such time as the Council/franchising authority determines the
need for more channel time to exist on any given access channel, an MCS
provider shall make any or all of the access channels available for more than
twelve (12) hours per day upon thirty (30) days written notice.
      3.   Both the Council/franchising authority and the affected cable
operator shall review use after every six (6) months, including the percentage
of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each six (6) month period, the
Council/franchising authority shall evaluate the response and actual use of
such channels. If, after any six (6) month period, the percentage of use for
any required PEG channel drops below twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
time allocated, then the required number of hours shall be reduced to a number
that most closely approximates the average hours of use per day. If the
Council/franchising authority determines the average hours of use per day for
any required PEG channel is less than one (1) hour, then the requirement for
that channel's availability shall cease, and an affected cable operator may use
such channel for any lawful purpose, unless and until the Council/franchising
authority determines that need for the use of the channel again exists.
      4.   If, at any time, ninety percent (90%) of the total time allocated
for any required PEG channel is consistently used five (5) days a week for a
period of three (3) months, then the cable operator shall provide an additional
PEG channel.
      5.   A cable operator shall provide mobile, portable, and stationary
equipment to be used for PEG access, together with the aid of technical and
production assistance provided by the cable operator. A cable operator shall
provide equipment that can store programs for delayed cable-casting. There will
be no cost for technical production assistance for PEG access use to any one
user provided that such use does not exceed fifty (50) actual production man-
hours. Moreover, the cost of maintenance of a PEG access studio, and equipment
required to run the studio shall be borne by the cable operator.
      6.   The City Council/franchising authority may require a cable operator
to provide live cable-casting of City Council meetings and School Board
meetings, as the need may be determined by the respective bodies, and the
operator shall comply with the request to do so within thirty (30) days of
notification by the City Council/franchising authority.
9-118   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding Local Production
Facilities And Equipment
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that certain
needs of the City and the public regarding the transmission and receipt of
information can be met by a local production facility. In order to meet those
above-noted needs, the Council/franchising authority may require, after a
public hearing, that any MCS provider:
      A.   provide and equip, a facility that will enable the City, the public,
and non-profit organizations or agencies to produce and originate video and
audio programming from a fixed studio location.
      B.   equip such facility so as to permit a complete and full array of
production, editing, and program insertion capabilities and functions, as may
be deemed necessary for maximizing the system's capabilities, taking into
account the cost of such requirement.
      C.   activate the system in a bi-directional mode, so as to allow the
live or taped insertion of programming from remote locations throughout the
City for distribution to any and/or all locations within the City, in a time-
frame determined by the City.
      D.   maintain and replace, as needed, any and all, production-related
equipment provided or purchased by the operator in a timely manner, upon
demonstration of the need for such and upon request by the City.
      E.   provide additional production-related equipment, from time-to-time,
as may be deemed necessary for the City to fulfill its goal of maximizing the
capabilities of a system in meeting identified community needs.
9-119   The Council/Franchising Authority's Objective With Respect To The
Provision Of Broad Categories Of Video Programming
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 624 of
the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 544), the legal power of local government is
severely restricted in requiring and/or demanding that particular video
programming or other services be provided to subscribers over the multi-channel
system.
   B.   Nevertheless, the Council/franchising authority recognizes that it
should strive to ensure that its citizens receive the widest, and most diverse
selection of video programming possible. Consequently, for those MCS providers
required to maintain a franchise, the Council/franchising authority states as
its objective to such franchised MCS providers, that the provision of services
and video programming categories to subscribers should include at least the
following broad categories:
      1.   local broadcast stations;
      2.   two (2) distant carriage signals, or satellite fed broadcast
stations;
      3.   PEG programming on the lowest offered and/or available tier;
      4.   sports programming services (regional and/or national);
      5.   news, information, or public affairs/interest programming services;
      6.   financial/consumer-oriented programming services;
      7.   scientific and/or cultural programming services;
      8.   children's programming services; and
      9.   ethnically sensitive programming services.
9-120   The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding The Provision Of
Seamless Or "See-Through" Technology
   A.   The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that it is in the
public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber
receiving equipment, without having to incur additional costs to obtain the
same functions. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may require
that:
      A.   unless an MCS provider can demonstrate to the City that it is
technically or economically unfeasible or commercially impracticable, then such
MCS provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in
subscriber equipment in a seamless or "see-through" manner which allows:
         1.   the use of any built-in remote control capability of a
subscriber's television for the control of any, and all, television channels
provided by the MCS provider without the use or necessity of additional
equipment; and
         2.   the ability to record video programming on any channel provided
by the MCS provider, while watching programming on any different channel,
without the use or necessity of any additional in-home equipment other than the
television receiver/monitor and a recorder.
9-121   Through 9-125 (Reserved)
9-126   Miscellaneous Provisions--Tampering And Unauthorized Reception Of
Certain Services
   A.   Consistent with Section 633 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 553), no
person shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or receiving any
communications service offered over a multi-channel system, unless specifically
authorized to do so by an MCS provider, or as may otherwise be specifically
authorized by law.
   B.   For the purpose of this Section, the term "assist in intercepting or
receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended
by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the unauthorized
reception of multi-channel service as noted in subsection (A) of this Section.
   C.   Without securing permission from an MCS provider, or making payment to
an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection,
whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with
any part of an authorized or franchised multi-channel system for the purpose of
receiving or intercepting, or assisting others to receive or intercept any
cable service provided lawfully by the MCS provider.
   D.   No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove, or
damage any cable, wires, equipment, or facilities used for the distribution of
multi-channel services.
   E.   Any, and all, MCS providers are encouraged to work with the Council/
franchising authority in developing and implementing a plan designed to control
and eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain cable services within the
City.
CHAPTER 10
CEMETERY
Article 10-I   General
Article 10-II   Cemetery Lots
Article 10-I
General
10-1   Cemetery -- Defined
10-2   Administration
10-3   Platting
10-4   Records; Duties Of City Clerk
10-5   Fees; Collection
10-6   Cemetery Fund -- Established
10-7   Cemetery Fund; Use
10-8   Burial And Disinterment
10-9   Burial And Disinterment; Fees
10-10   Vaults; Standards
10-11   Burial Equipment
10-12   (Reserved)
10-13   Burial; In Church Yards, Etc.
10-14   Burial; Limitations
10-15   Surface Burial Vaults
10-16   Mausoleums
10-17   Tombstones, Monuments, Copings, Etc.
10-18   Trees, Shrubbery And Fences
10-19   Miscellaneous Offenses
10-20   Destruction Of Cemetery Property
10-21   Penalties
10-1   Cemetery -- Defined
The city cemetery shall consist of all those certain tracts, lots, and parcels
of land described as the Grand Island City Cemetery by Ordinance No. 3690, a
copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and all lands
acquired after the passage of Ordinance No. 3690 and designated as cemetery
grounds by the Mayor and City Council.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008)
10-2   Administration
   A.   The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the general care,
management and supervision of the city cemetery.
   B.   The City may employ a cemetery superintendent under the direction of
the Parks and Recreation Director. The cemetery superintendent shall have such
general supervisory authority over the daily operations of the cemetery as is
delegated by the Parks and Recreation Director or granted by the Mayor and City
Council. The Parks and Recreation Director shall perform the duties of the
cemetery superintendent during any period that the superintendent is absent or
such position is vacant.
   C.   The city council shall have the power and authority to adopt such rules
and regulations as may be required therefor, and may repeal or amend the same
at pleasure; provided, however, that no such rule or regulation shall become
operative until a copy thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008)
10-3   Platting
In laying out and platting any part of the cemetery grounds, the corners of the
principal subdivisions shall be indicated by boundary markers, fixed
permanently in the ground as starting points for future measurements and
surveys, and such boundary markers shall be plainly indicated on such plat.
Such plat, when completed, shall be certified by the surveyor or engineer who
made same, subscribed by the mayor, acknowledged before any officer authorized
by law to take acknowledgments of deeds, and shall be filed for record in the
office of the county clerk and in the office of the county register of deeds,
and the filing of such plat shall operate as a legal vacation of any former
plat or subdivision of such grounds and of any streets, roads or avenues
passing through such grounds.
10-4   Records; Duties Of City Clerk
All records, plats and papers, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, in
regard to the cemetery, shall be kept in the city clerk's, office or such other
office as designated by the City Clerk, and the city clerk, or designee, shall
perform such duties in regard to the cemetery as may be prescribed by this
chapter or under any rules and regulations adopted by the city council
governing the cemetery.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-5   Fees; Collection
The Cemetery Division of the Parks Department, shall collect all fees and
charges provided for by this chapter.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-6   Cemetery Fund -- Established
The proceeds described by §
10-5, together with the amount provided by tax levy for cemetery purposes,
shall constitute the "cemetery fund" of the City.
10-7   Cemetery Fund; Use
The cemetery fund established pursuant to §
10-6 shall be used to defray the expenses arising from the purchase, laying
out, improvement, ornamentation and care of the city cemetery and to the
payment of any liabilities and charges that may be incurred in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the cemetery, and for no other purpose whatever.
10-8   Burial And Disinterment
Application for permission to bury or disinter a body at the city cemetery
shall be made at the cemetery office. Application for burial of a body, or for
burial of ashes of a cremated body, must be accompanied by proper information
to complete a burial permit. An application for disinterment must be
accompanied by a proper certificate of authority. Upon proper application, the
Cemetery Division of the Parks Department shall issue a burial permit, which
permit shall indicate the lot upon which the burial or disinterment is done,
and the Cemetery Division shall, at the same time, collect the fees prescribed
in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
For the opening and preparation of a grave prior to interment, the cemetery
shall be given a minimum of 24 hours notice in summer and 36 hours notice in
winter when the ground is frozen. Also, a minimum of 48 hours shall be given on
any Saturday or day preceding a legal city holiday.
The lot owner or funeral home representative shall designate the location of
the grave on the lot to the cemetery and any change of location made after the
opening of the grave has begun shall not be at the expense of the cemetery.
When definite information for locating a grave is not available in ample time
for grave preparation as requested above, the cemetery will exercise its best
judgment in order to meet the requested interment time. The City assumes no
responsibility for any error in such location and an additional charge will be
made for any change requested.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-9   Burial And Disinterment; Fees
The fee for opening graves shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island
Fee Schedule.
10-10   Vaults; Standards
All cemetery vaults, except those used for children under the age of six years,
or for ashes of a cremated body, shall be made of cement composition or metal
and of a type now in common use or of such materials and construction to meet
the following minimum standards:
   A.   0.05 inch maximum deflection under normal burial conditions;
   B.   5000 pound per square inch minimum tolerance on cross section of
container;
   C.   125 foot-pound minimum impact force tolerance at 20 degrees Fahrenheit
without failure.
10-11   Burial Equipment
The fee for the use of the City's tents and burial equipment for cemetery
services shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
10-12   (Reserved)
10-13   Burial; In Church Yards, Etc.
No burial of a human body shall be made in any church yard or in any other
place within the city except in the city cemetery or other authorized cemetery.
10-14   Burial; Limitations
No burial of other than a human body or parts thereof shall be made in the city
cemetery.
10-15   Surface Burial Vaults
No person shall construct any surface burial vault upon any burial lot in the
city cemetery, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
use of cement or concrete burial vaults which shall be completely covered with
earth and at the required depth below the surface of the ground.
10-16   Mausoleums
No mausoleum shall be constructed in the city cemetery until an application
therefor has first been presented to and approved by the Parks and Recreation
Director with the concurrence of the Building Department Director of the
structural integrity of such mausoleum. Such application shall be accompanied
by detailed plans and specifications of the proposed mausoleum and shall
designate the kind of natural stone to be used in the construction thereof. Any
mausoleum hereafter erected shall be constructed above the ground and shall be
properly ventilated.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8804, eff. 4-23-2003)
10-17   Tombstones, Monuments, Copings, Etc.
No tombstone, monument, gravemarker or vases shall be erected in the city
cemetery except those that meet the approval of the cemetery and the following
provisions:
   A.   All markers in the South Block of Section J shall be set flush with the
turf with the exception of rows 170-339, 169-340, 168-341, and 167-342.
   B.   A minimum five-inch wash shall be used on all new or reset stone or
monument work, and all spaces of 38 inches or less between stones or monuments
shall be filled with concrete on new or reset work.
   C.   No stone or monument shall extend beyond the property boundary of the
lot owner.
   D.   No lot or grave copings, curbs, or above-ground corner stones shall be
constructed within the cemetery.
   E.   Footstones shall not be used.
   F.   Permanent vases shall not be allowed in alleys in front of stones or
monuments, nor shall they be allowed on the grave side of an individual pre-
need marker. Permanent vases shall only be allowed on the ends of stones or
monuments in Sections M, N and P of the cemetery.
   G.   It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to reset any stones,
monuments, or vases removed by the cemetery to allow room for a burial.
   H.   The maximum width of any stone or monument, including the wash, shall
be 26 inches. No stone or monument requiring more than 26 inches for width
shall be delivered to the cemetery without the prior written approval of the
cemetery superintendent.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9491, effective 06-17-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-18   Trees, Shrubbery And Fences
No trees or shrubbery shall be planted and no fences shall be erected upon any
lot or upon any part of a lot, nor upon or along any street, avenue or alley in
the city cemetery, by any private party or lot owner, except such plantings and
fences as shall be made or approved in advance by the City cemetery
superintendent.
10-19   Miscellaneous Offenses
   A.   No person shall drive any vehicle, automobile or motorcycle within the
limits of the city cemetery at a higher rate of speed than ten miles per hour.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to be in the city
cemetery between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
10-20   Destruction Of Cemetery Property
No person shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any
tombstone, monument, grave stone, fence, building, or other structure placed in
the city cemetery. No person, except City personnel in the discharge of their
normal duties, shall take, carry away, destroy, or injure, without the consent
of the owner thereof, any flowers, shrubbery or trees in the cemetery, and no
person shall knowingly trespass upon or drive across any lot in the cemetery
with any vehicle.
The City reserves the right for its workmen, equipment, and those persons
necessary in the performance of normal cemetery operations to enter upon or
cross over any lot in the cemetery in the performance of such duties.
10-21   Penalties
Any person violating any of the provisions of any section of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If such misdemeanor is occasioned by a
violation of the provisions of §§
10-14 to
10-18, the person committing such misdemeanor shall be ordered to remove any
human body, animal carcass, surface burial vault, mausoleum, tombstone,
monument, grave marker, coping, curb, vase, or corner stone, tree, shrubbery or
fence constructed, erected, planted or placed in violation of the provisions of
such sections.
Article 10-II
Cemetery Lots
10-22   Conveyances, Transfers, And Titles
10-23   Lot Ownership; Restrictions
10-24   Abandonment
10-25   Lots; Certificate Of Ownership
10-26   Burial Spaces; Prices
10-27   Fractional Lots; Prices
10-28   Permanent Care
10-29   Permanent Care Fund
10-30   "A" Lots
10-22   Conveyances, Transfers, And Titles
The Cemetery Division is hereby authorized to convey lots in the city cemetery,
by certificate, signed by the mayor and attested by the Cemetery
Superintendent, specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the
owner of the lot or lots described therein by number as laid down on the plat
adopted by the city council, for the purpose of interment of human bodies and
the ashes of cremated human bodies, and such certificate shall vest in the
purchaser, and purchaser's heirs or assigns, a right to such lot or lots, for
the sole purpose of such interment, under the rules and regulations governing
such cemetery, and for no other purpose. Transfers of such lots may be made by
surrendering such certificate thereof to the Cemetery Division, who shall
cancel the same, and note such cancellation on the permanent cemetery records,
and issue a new certificate to the assignee in lieu thereof. For each of such
new certificates and services the Cemetery Division shall receive, for the use
of the city a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-23   Lot Ownership; Restrictions
Burial lots in the city cemetery shall not be held or used for purposes of
speculation, and no individual shall be permitted to hold more than two lots at
any one time, and no lot owner shall permit interment for compensation in or
upon any lot owned; provided, however, that any fraternal or religious
organization may purchase, at any one time, or hold, not to exceed seventy-two
lots, which, however, must be in one body. The certificate to be issued by the
Cemetery Division for such lots shall specifically state that such fraternal or
religious organization shall not sell such lots for more than the scheduled
price thereof as shown by the records in the Cemetery Division’s office.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-24   Abandonment
The ownership or right in or to an unoccupied cemetery lot, part of a lot,
lots, or parts of lots, in the city cemetery shall, upon abandonment, revert to
the city. The continued failure to maintain or pay for the permanent care for a
cemetery lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots, in the city cemetery for a
period of ten years shall create and establish a presumption that the same has
been abandoned.
Abandonment shall not be deemed complete unless, after such ten year period,
there shall have been given by the city to the recorded owner, or if the owner
be deceased or whereabouts unknown, to the heirs of such deceased person,
notice declaring the lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots to be
abandoned. The notice may be served personally upon the owner or heirs or may
be served by the mailing of the notice by registered or certified mail to the
owner or heirs, as the case may be, to their last known address. In the event
that the address of neither the owner nor the owner's heirs can be established,
then notice of such abandonment shall be given by publishing the same one time
in a legal newspaper published in and of general circulation in the county.
If, within one year from the time of serving or publishing such notice, the
record owner or heirs shall give notice in writing to the city that in fact
there has been no such abandonment, then a presumption of abandonment shall no
longer exist. In case abandonment has been complete as hereinbefore provided,
the city may sell and convey title to any such abandoned lot, part of a lot,
lots, or parts of lots. Any funds realized from the sale of such lot, part of a
lot, lots, or parts of lots, shall be handled as provided by this chapter, and
shall be accounted for accordingly.
10-25   Lots; Certificate Of Ownership
The prices of lots in the city cemetery shall be fixed by the city council, and
a schedule of prices shall at all times be publicly exhibited in the City Fee
Schedule giving the prices in full, and no certificate of ownership for any lot
shall be issued until the price for each lot selected shall be paid in full to
the Cemetery Division. No change in such schedule of prices shall be made
except upon a majority vote of the council.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-26   Burial Spaces; Prices
The prices for burial spaces in the city cemetery includes the price of
permanent care. The Cemetery Division is hereby ordered to collect amounts for
such burial spaces in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
The fees for burial spaces set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
shall be waived, with title retained by the City, for any burial spaces
designated by the cemetery superintendent for the burial of paupers by Hall
County.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
10-27   Fractional Lots; Prices
Any fractional or partial lots in the city cemetery shall be sold at the same
proportional price as full lots based upon the number of square feet contained
in such fractional or partial lots.
10-28   Permanent Care
Permanent care shall include the care of cemetery lots for all time to come, by
providing maintenance found necessary in the judgment of the City to keep the
lots in a neat and presentable condition. No lot, lots, or parts of lots shall
be sold without payment for permanent care.
10-29   Permanent Care Fund
Forty (40) percent of the amount collected for a burial space or spaces shall
be deposited in the city cemetery permanent care fund.
10-30   "A" Lots
All twelve foot streets and alleys running from north to south and extending
through the city cemetery grounds in Section 29 and Fractional Section 30 in
Township 11 North, Range 9 West of the Sixth P.M., known as the "Old Cemetery,"
shall be vacated as driveways. Such streets and alleys, so vacated, shall
hereafter be known as "A" lots, and shall be designated by the number of the
lot lying east thereof, with the addition of the letter "A", thus, lot number
"1A", and so on, and for pricing purposes shall be considered as half lots in
size.
CHAPTER 11
(RESERVED)
(Chapter 11 Repealed by Ordinance No. 9053, effective 7-26-2006)
CHAPTER 12
CIVIL SERVICE
12-1   Terms; Defined
12-2   Appointing Authority
12-3   Civil Service Commission Created
12-4   Commission's Powers And Duties
12-5   Civil Service Positions
12-6   Compensation
12-7   Disciplinary Actions; Defined
12-8   Disciplinary Actions; Procedure
12-9   Disciplinary Actions; Reasons
12-10   Disciplinary Actions; Classes I And II
12-11   Disciplinary Actions; Election
12-12   Disciplinary Actions; Class II Response
12-13   Disciplinary Actions; Class I; Hearing
12-14   Disciplinary Actions; Review
12-15   Commission Investigation; Demand
12-16   Commission Investigation; Time
12-17   Commission Investigation; Documents
12-18   Commission Hearing; Notice
12-19   Commission Hearing; Procedure
12-1   Terms; Defined
Civil Service Act shall mean the Civil Service Act of the State of Nebraska,
Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1825, et seq., as amended.
Commission shall mean the Civil Service Commission of the City of Grand Island.
Mayor shall mean the Mayor of the City of Grand Island and shall include any
person acting in the capacity of the office.
12-2   Appointing Authority
The appointing authority of the City of Grand Island for the positions of
Police Chief and Fire Chief is the Mayor of the City of Grand Island with the
approval of the City Council. The appointing authority for all other positions
is the Mayor of the City of Grand Island.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07-17-2012)
12-3   Civil Service Commission Created
There is hereby created a Civil Service Commission of the City of Grand Island
pursuant to the Civil Service Act. Said Commission shall have three (3) members
who shall qualify, be appointed, and serve as provided by the Civil Service
Act.
12-4   Commission's Powers And Duties
The Commission shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations, exercise
powers, and perform duties as provided by the Civil Service Act.
12-5   Civil Service Positions
The following official job classification titles are designated for employment
positions subject to the Civil Service Act:
Police Department:
Police Chief
Police Captain
Police Lieutenant
Police Sergeant
Police Officer
Fire Department:
Fire Chief
Fire Division Chief
Fire Shift Commander
Fire Captain
Fire Fighter EMT-P
Fire Fighter EMT-B
The number of employment positions within each job classification shall be as
from time to time determined by the Mayor. The Mayor shall have the authority
to create additional employment positions and to eliminate any or all
employment positions in each said job classification except Police Chief and
Fire Chief.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9253, effective 03-24-10) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9429, effective 06-04-13) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9741, effective 07-24-19)
12-6   Compensation
The salary and compensation range of all civil service job classifications
shall be established by the general salary ordinance of the City. The salary
and compensation of each employee shall be within the applicable range of the
employee's job classification. Movement of an employee's salary and
compensation upward or downward within the applicable range shall not be
considered an appointment, promotion, removal, suspension, demotion, or
discharge.
12-7   Disciplinary Actions; Defined
The various disciplinary actions shall be divided into classes as follows:
   A.   Class I - Termination; suspension without pay for more than thirty (30)
days; demotion of more than one (1) job classification rank.
   B.   Class II - Suspension without pay for thirty (30) days or less;
demotion of one (1) job classification rank.
   C.   Class III - Reduction of salary or compensation not exceeding one (1)
pay step within the applicable salary or compensation range established for the
employee's job classification.
   D.   Class IV - Written reprimand filed in employee's permanent personnel
file.
Disciplinary actions do not include: layoffs; denial of leave requests,
promotions or pay increases; changes in shifts, work hours, or work schedules;
decreases in pay or benefits made pursuant to collective bargaining;
terminations or demotions during an employee's probationary period; temporary
duty assignments to a different job classification.
12-8   Disciplinary Actions; Procedure
   A.   The Mayor is authorized to impose disciplinary actions of all classes.
   B.   The chief of the department and/or the police captain, the fire
operation division chief, the fire training division chief, or the fire
prevention division chief are authorized to impose Class IV disciplinary
actions upon employees of the department.
12-9   Disciplinary Actions; Reasons
   A.   Class I and Class II disciplinary actions may be based upon any of the
reasons set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1832, as amended.
   B.   Class III disciplinary actions may be based upon any of the reasons set
forth in subparagraphs one (1) through five (5) inclusive of Neb. Rev. Stat.
19-1832, as amended.
   C.   Class IV disciplinary actions may be based upon departmental,
Commission, or City rules, regulations, policies or procedures, as determined
necessary and appropriate by the chief of the department, and/or the police
captain, the fire operation division chief, the fire training division chief,
or the fire prevention division chief.
12-10   Disciplinary Actions; Classes I And II
Prior to imposition of a Class I or Class II disciplinary action, an Accusation
shall be prepared and signed by the chief of the department, the Mayor, or any
citizen or taxpayer, stating the act, duty, conduct or situation causing
consideration of disciplinary action and the reason or reasons which authorize
the disciplinary action under the Civil Service Act. A copy of the Accusation
shall be delivered to the employee either personally or by delivery to the
employee's last known place of residence at least seventy-two (72) hours prior
to imposition of the disciplinary action. The time and date of delivery shall
be stated on the copy of the Accusation.
12-11   Disciplinary Actions; Election
Upon receipt of an Accusation for disciplinary action the employee may elect to
waive further Civil Service Act rights and proceed under the Personnel Rules of
the City of Grand Island. Such election shall be made in writing within 72
hours after delivery of the Accusation.
12-12   Disciplinary Actions; Class II Response
When the Accusation states a proposed Class II disciplinary action, the
employee shall have seventy-two (72) hours after delivery of the Accusation to
file a written response thereto in the office of the Mayor. After the 72 hour
period, the Mayor shall review the investigation, the Accusation, and the
response, and shall make a determination to dismiss the Accusation, modify the
disciplinary action, impose the disciplinary action or order preparation of a
new Accusation. Notice of the determination shall be given to the employee in
writing, either personally or by United States mail.
12-13   Disciplinary Actions; Class I; Hearing
Upon delivery of an Accusation stating a proposed Class I disciplinary action,
the employee shall be placed on administrative leave with pay. Such
administrative leave with pay shall continue until a final determination of the
Accusation is made by the Mayor, not to exceed twenty (20) days. This provision
for automatic leave with pay shall not apply to an Accusation which has not
been signed by the chief of the department or the Mayor.
The employee shall have seventy-two (72) hours after delivery of an Accusation
to request a hearing before the Mayor. Such request shall be in writing and
delivered to the office of the Mayor.
Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Mayor shall within five (5) days
cause to be set a time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held
within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request for hearing. The hearing
shall be conducted informally. The supervisory official, department head, city
attorney, or city administrator shall present an oral or written statement or
statements of the information and reasons supporting disciplinary action. Such
statements shall be limited to a total time of one (1) hour or less. The
accused employee, the employee's representative, or other persons on the
employee's behalf, may present an oral or written statement or statements in
response to the proposed disciplinary action. Oral statements shall be limited
to a total time of one (1) hour or less.
After 72 hours, if no hearing is requested, or upon conclusion of the hearing,
the Mayor shall make a determination to dismiss the Accusation, modify the
disciplinary action, impose the disciplinary action, or order preparation of a
new Accusation. Notice of the determination shall be given to the employee in
writing, either personally or by United States mail.
12-14   Disciplinary Actions; Review
   A.   Class I and Class II disciplinary actions may be investigated and heard
by the Commission pursuant to the Civil Service Act.
   B.   Class III and Class IV disciplinary actions shall not be subject to
investigation or hearing before the Commission. The procedures governing
notice, response, and review of Class III and Class IV disciplinary actions
shall be as provided in the Personnel Rules of the City of Grand Island.
12-15   Commission Investigation; Demand
Upon issuance of a determination by the Mayor imposing a Class I or Class II
disciplinary action, the Mayor shall cause a copy of the Accusation and the
determination to be filed with the Commission's secretary. Upon filing of a
timely demand for investigation of the action, which demand shall be made
within ten (10) days after being notified by the appointing authority of such
discipline, the Commission's secretary shall cause copies of the Accusation,
determination, and demand for investigation to be delivered to each Commission
member.
12-16   Commission Investigation; Time
Upon receipt of the demand for investigation, the chairperson of the Commission
shall set a time and date for filing investigation documents which shall be
within ten days after filing of the demand for investigation. Notice shall be
delivered to the City Attorney and the subject employee.
12-17   Commission Investigation; Documents
All investigation documents shall be filed with the Commission's secretary at
or before the time stated, with copies to the opposing party.
The investigation documents shall include a list of all witnesses to be called
by the party with a summary of the witnesses' pertinent testimony, a copy of
all documents, correspondence, records, files, and other materials to be
offered at the hearing, a list of all statutes, cases, ordinances, rules and
regulations to be offered in support of a position and subpoenas for all
persons requiring subpoena for attendance at the Commission hearing.
The Commission secretary shall deliver to each Commission member a copy of all
investigation documents. The investigation of the Commission shall be completed
by delivery of the investigation documents. No additional documents or
witnesses shall be offered at the hearing by either party except for good cause
shown.
12-18   Commission Hearing; Notice
After receipt of a demand for investigation, the chairperson of the Commission
shall set a time, date, and place for hearing. Such date shall be subsequent to
the date for completion of the investigation and shall be in accordance with
the Civil Service Act. Notice shall be delivered to the City Attorney and the
subject employee at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.
12-19   Commission Hearing; Procedure
The hearing before the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with the
Civil Service Act. The parties to the hearing shall be the City of Grand Island
and the employee subject to disciplinary action. All evidence shall be
submitted under oath and subject to cross-examination. The hearing shall be
transcribed by a qualified court reporter.
CHAPTER 13
DOWNTOWN AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Article 13-I   Business Improvement Districts Generally
Article 13-II   Metered Parking System
Article 13-III   (Reserved) 
Article 13-IV   (Reserved) 
Article 13-V   (Reserved)
Article 13-VI   Right-Of-Way Usage Regulations 
Article 13-VII   Parking Ramp Regulations
Article 13-VIII   Fonner Park Business Improvement District 
Article 13-IX   Fourth Street Business Improvement District 
Article 13-X   (Repealed)
Article 13-XI   South Locust Business Improvement District 
Article 13-XII   Business Improvement District No 8
Article 13-XIII   Vehicle Off-Street Parking Districts
Article 13-I
Business Improvement Districts Generally
13-1   Purpose
13-2   Taxation
13-3   Governance
13-4   Reserved
13-5   Reserved
13-6   Reserved
13-7   Reserved
13-8   Reserved
13-9   Reserved
13-10   Reserved
13-1   Purpose
The Mayor and Council find it necessary for the promotion and maintenance of
the welfare and general interest of the City, its trade, commerce and
inhabitants that the City establish Business Improvement District(s) in such
areas and numbers as deemed necessary, in accordance with the applicable state
statutes as now existing or hereafter amended. Each District shall be
established by separate ordinance and incorporated into City Code. In the event
a District is dissolved it shall be removed from City Code, but the
establishing Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect until such time as
all business related to the District has concluded.
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
Amended by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-2   Taxation
   A.   Assessment
      1.   On or before the first day of July each year, expect the initial
creating year, a proposed budget shall be prepared by the District Board for
the ensuing fiscal year to commence on the first day of October and end on the
following last day of September.
      2.   Said proposed budget shall be considered by the City Council during
open session at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting. Following such
consideration, a proposed assessment schedule shall be prepared.
      3.   The costs and expenses for the activities proposed to be performed
within the district will be funded through special assessments, as authorized
by the Business Improvement District Act, against the property in the district
based upon the special benefits of the property and shall be fairly and
equitably equalized by the City Council sitting as a Board of Equalization.
   B.   Determination, computation and objections
      1.   The special assessments on each property will be levied annually
based upon the assessed value of individual property divided by total assessed
value of all taxable property in the district times total special assessment
equals individual special assessment.
      2.   The assessed values to be used shall be the values as shown in the
office of the Hall County Assessor in effect on the first day of January of the
current year.
      3.   Notice of the proposed assessment shall be published as required by
Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-4030, as amended.
      4.   Any objection or protest to the proposed assessment shall be heard
pursuant to the hearing date and notice as scheduled in accordance with Neb.
Rev. Stat. §19-4030, as amended.
   C.   Collection, disposition of tax
      1.   All special assessments shall be liens upon the property assessed.
The special assessments provided herein shall be a lien on the property
assessed superior and prior to all other liens except general taxes and other
special assessments, which shall be of equal priority. No special assessment
made hereunder shall be void for any irregularity, defect, error, or
informality in procedure, in levy or equalization thereof.
      2.   Such liens shall be certified for collection and collected in the
same manner as special assessments for improvements and street improvement
districts of the City are collected.
   D.   Failure to pay tax; penalty
      1.   All assessments shall be payable in one installment to become
delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy.
      2.   Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in
Neb. Rev. Stat. §45-104.01, as amended.
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
Amended by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-3   Governance
   A.   Composition
      1.   Each District Board shall have a minimum of five (5) members and no
more than nine (9) members.
      2.   The District Board shall not have an even number of members.
      3.   The final number of District Board members shall be determined by
the by-laws.
   B.   Duties
      1.   It shall be the duty of each District Board to make recommendations
to the City Council on the following matters:
         a.   Any proposed changes to the boundaries of the District.
         b.   Plans for improvements in such District.
         c.   The use of any revenue collected under the authority of State
statutes applicable to the District.
         d.   Proposed budgets for the District.
         e.   The necessity of creating any parking district within the
boundaries of the District.
         f.   Any other matter reasonably related to any power which may be
exercised under the State statutes applicable to the District.
      2.   It shall be the duty of each District Board to provide notice to the
City Council in the event the District takes any of the following actions:
         a.   Incorporation of the District as an independent legal entity.
         b.   The distribution of any funds to an outside entity for purposes
of administering District business.
         c.   Any amendments to the District's governing documents or bylaws.
         d.   The appointment or removal of board members.
      3.   Frequency of Report
         a.   Each District shall submit a report of activity to the City
Council not less than once per year and may report more frequently as
determined by the Board.
   C.   Meetings
      The District shall have a minimum of six meetings per year.
   D.   By-laws
      The District shall create and keep By-laws current.
   E.   Reporting to Council
      The District shall report to Council with an update of District
activities at least once a year.
   F.   Insurance
      1.   The Districts shall maintain insurance at the levels required by the
City for outside contractors as may be effective on October 1 of each year. In
the event the District did not utilize employees, contractors or subcontractors
in the preceding fiscal year, and certifies to Council that they will not
utilize the same during the subsequent fiscal year, the District may request
Council waive some or all of the City's insurance requirements while approving
their annual budget. If, at any time following approval of the budget the
District engages in activities which necessitate said coverage be reinstated,
the District shall obtain insurance at least thirty (30) days prior to said
activity.
   G.   Incorporation as their own entity; independent operation
      1.   Any District wishing to govern itself independently may seek
incorporation as may be required by law. The District shall govern itself in
all manners as if they were a political subdivision including compliance with
all applicable state and federal law.
      2.   In the event the District maintains its own financial resources or
records, the District must provide all written financial control procedures to
the City simultaneously with the presentation of their annual budget and must
impose said controls immediately and consistently.
   H.   Commitments
      1.   The method of raising revenue shall be fair and equitable.
      2.   If a general occupation tax is used, the tax shall be based
primarily on the square footage of the owner's and user's place of business.
      3.   If a special assessment is used, the assessment shall be based upon
the special benefit to the property within the Business Improvement District.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8839, effective 10-1-2003)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8934, effective 10-1-2004)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9004, effective 10-1-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9139, effective 10-1-2007)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9185, effective 10-1-2008)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9234, effective 10-1-2009)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9270, effective 10-1-2010)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9319, effective 10-1-2011)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9398, effective 10-1-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9445, effective 10-1-2013)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9496, effective 10-1-2014)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9603, effective 10-1-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9650, effective 10-1-2017)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
Amended by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-4   Reserved
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-5   Reserved
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-6   Reserved
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-7   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8793, effective 2-12-2003)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-8   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8793, effective 2-12-2003)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-9   Reserved
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
13-10   Reserved
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9718 on 1/23/2019
Article 13-II
Metered Parking System
13-11   Metered Parking System
13-12   Parking Fee - Metered Zone
13-13   Parking Fee - Express Zone
13-14   Time Metering And Billing
13-15   Responsibility Of Vehicle Owner
13-16   Fees Payment; Delinquent; Collection
13-17   Congested Parking Area
13-18   Traffic And Safety Fund
13-19   Immobilization Authorized
13-20   Impoundment After 24 Hours
13-21   Policies And Procedures
13-11   Metered Parking System
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to establish a system of parking
meters as herein defined, and to take all actions necessary or appropriate for
the acquisition, establishment, erection, maintenance, and operation of such
system. The metered parking system shall be operated under the supervision of
the Police Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005)
13-12   Parking Fee - Metered Zone
The metered zone parking fees set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule are found and determined to be a reasonable fee for those who park
vehicles for the specified periods of time in parking spaces designated to be
within a Metered Zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., on any day
except Sunday, or a holiday designated by the mayor.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002)
13-13   Parking Fee - Express Zone
The express zone parking fees set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule are found and determined to be a reasonable fee for those who park
vehicles for the specified periods of time in parking spaces designated to be
within an Express Zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., on any day
except Sunday, or a holiday designated by the mayor.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002)
13-14   Time Metering And Billing
A City parking attendant shall monitor the parking of vehicles within
designated Metered Zones and Express Zones and shall meter the time a vehicle
is parked within a space in such zones. If a vehicle is parked for a period of
time which incurs a parking fee, the parking attendant shall place a deposit
envelope upon the vehicle stating the amount of the fee due.
13-15   Responsibility Of Vehicle Owner
The registered owner of any vehicle parked within a Metered Zone or Express
Zone shall be responsible for the payment of all parking fees incurred by such
vehicle.
13-16   Fees Payment; Delinquent; Collection
Fees may be paid by placing the amount of the fee due in the deposit envelope
and depositing the envelope in a City parking fee deposit box, or by delivering
or mailing same to the city treasurer. All parking fees shall be due
immediately as accrued and shall become delinquent seven (7) days thereafter.
Fees not paid within thirty (30) days shall be referred to the city attorney
for collection.
13-17   Congested Parking Area
13-17.1   Special Employer/Employee And Residential Parking Permit
The following areas of the City are found and determined to be areas where
congestion of vehicular traffic is such that the public convenience and safety
require regulation of parking by a parking meter system:
   A.   Third Street between Elm Street and Sycamore Street;
   B.   Second Street between Elm Street and Pine Street;
   C.   Cedar Street between Second Street and Third Street;
   D.   Walnut Street between First Street and South Front Street;
   E.   Wheeler Street between First Street and Third Street;
   F.   Locust Street between First Street and South Front Street;
   G.   Pine Street between Second Street and South Front Street;
   H.   The southern most row of parking stalls in the public parking lot on
the south side of South Front Street and east of vacated Wheeler Street;
   I.   The public parking lot on the north side of Second Street and Walnut
Street;
   J.   The western most row of parking stalls in the public parking lot on the
east side of Pine Street, south of South Front Street; and
   K.   The north side of First Street between Wheeler Avenue and Sycamore
Street.
All city-owned parking spaces located within said congested parking area shall
be designated Metered Zone or Express Zone and subject to the parking meter
system except those parking spaces reserved for handicapped parking only. One
or more Express Zone spaces shall be located on each side of each block of on-
street parking within the congested area and shall be designated by posted
signs and/or pavement markings.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002)
13-17.1   Special Employer/Employee And Residential Parking Permit
A special parking permit may be issued to employers and employees of certain
businesses and for residents of the downtown area for use at the 2-hour parking
lot located on the north side of the 300 block of West Second Street, commonly
known as the "Chamber Lot" under the following conditions:
   A.   Employers must have a business, and employees must be employed by a
business whose street addresses are in the following blocks: the 100 and 200
blocks of North Wheeler Street; the 100 and 200 block of North Walnut Street;
the 200, 300 and 400 blocks of West Second Street, and the south side of the
300 block of West Third Street.
   B.   Residents of the downtown area must have a residential address with a
street address in the following blocks: the 100 and 200 blocks of North Wheeler
Street; the 100 and 200 blocks of North Walnut Street; the 200, 300 and 400
blocks of West Second Street, and the south side of the 300 block of West Third
Street.
   C.   Applicants requesting an Employer/Employee Parking permit must pay a
nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for
each parking permit. Each parking permit commences upon issuance and expires on
December 31 of each year. Application for or renewal of each parking permit
requires the completion of an application form, the approval of such
application, and payment of the fee set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule. Applications for renewal of the parking permit shall be made with the
Grand Island Police Department.
   D.   The parking permit provided by the Downtown Improvement Board must be
placed on the rearview mirror and must be visible at all times while the
vehicle is parked in the "Chamber Lot".
   E.   The parking permit is valid in the "Chamber Lot" only. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005)
13-18   Traffic And Safety Fund
There is hereby established a Traffic and Safety Fund. All parking fees
collected shall be deposited by the city treasurer into said fund. The Traffic
and Safety Fund shall be appropriated and expended as follows: first, for the
purpose of the acquisition, establishment, erection, maintenance, and operation
of the parking meter system; second, for the purpose of making the system
effective; and third, for the expenses incurred by and throughout the City in
the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking, traffic relating to
parking, traffic safety devices, signs, signals, markings, policing, lights,
traffic surveys, and safety programs.
13-19   Immobilization Authorized
Any vehicle which has incurred parking fees which remain unpaid thirty-one (31)
or more days after becoming due may be subject to immobilization and
impoundment in the manner and form provided in this Article and
Chapter 22, Article VII, Division 3 of this Code. Immobilization of an
offending vehicle shall be accomplished by the Police Department applying a
device to one or more of the vehicles wheels. The vehicle shall be released
upon payment of all parking fees incurred by such vehicle and due prior to
immobilization.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005)
13-20   Impoundment After 24 Hours
In the event a vehicle has been immobilized for 24 hours or more and the
parking fees remain unpaid, the vehicle shall be removed and impounded by the
Police Department in accordance with
Chapter 22, Article VII, Division 3 of this Code. The vehicle shall be
discharged or removed from impoundment upon payment by the owner, operator, or
driver of such impounded vehicle of the parking fees, plus impoundment fees and
towing and storage charges. Further, no vehicle shall be released from
impoundment unless the vehicle is in compliance with the motor vehicle
registration statutes of the State of Nebraska.
13-21   Policies And Procedures
The Downtown Improvement Board is authorized to promulgate and adopt such
polices as are reasonable and are prudent to carry out the purposes of this
Code, including but not limited to establishing a minimum amount of delinquent
parking fees which may be incurred by a vehicle prior to enforcement action, as
well as immobilization, impoundment, and receipt of payment procedures.
Article 13-III
(Reserved)
Article 13-IV
(Reserved)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-16-2008)
Article 13-V
(Reserved)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9187, effective 10-01-2008)
Article 13-VI
Right-Of-Way Usage Regulations
13-50   Sidewalk Usage; Regulations
13-50   Sidewalk Usage; Regulations
All sidewalk displays, sandwich board signs, vending carts, and sidewalk cafes
located within or directly abutting Business Improvement District No. 2 shall
comply with Public Right-of-Way Usage Regulations to be promulgated and adopted
by the Downtown Business Improvement District Board. Copies of the Public
Right-of-Way Usage Regulations shall be on file with the City Clerk, and shall
be available for public inspection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005)
Article 13-VII
Parking Ramp Regulations
13-55   Parking Ramp Regulations
13-55   Parking Ramp Regulations
The Downtown Improvement Board is authorized to promulgate, subject to the
approval and adoption by the City Council, such regulations and rates as are
necessary and convenient to lease to the public the parking spaces in the
public parking ramp on the east side of Locust Street, north of First Street.
Said regulations and rates shall be enacted by resolution. The rates shall be
set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Article 13-VIII
Fonner Park Business Improvement District
13-60   Creation Of District
13-61   Purpose
13-62   District Boundaries
13-63   Special Assessments
13-64   Assessment Method
13-64.1   Enforcement and Penalties
13-64.2   Governance
13-65   (Reserved)
13-60   Creation Of District
There is hereby created and established a business improvement district
pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as
amended to be known as Fonner Park Business Improvement District of the City of
Grand Island, Nebraska. Notice of hearing was given pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat.
§19-4029.01 and a public hearing was held on February 17, 2017. Creation of the
District was established by the Grand Island City Council by passage Ordinance
9622 on February 17, 2017, with the effective date March 1, 2017.
Superseded by Ordinance No. 9622
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-61   Purpose
The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district
shall be: promotional activities; maintenance and improvement of the landscaped
greenway; maintenance, repair, improvement and replacement of the sprinkler
system in the greenway; regular mowing and trimming of the greenway; all facets
of the purchase, care and replacement of trees, shrubs and grass and other
decorative improvements; snow removal from sidewalks parallel of South Locust;
employment of or contracting for personnel, purchase of equipment, materials,
supplies or other expenses that accomplish the purposes of the district; other
incidental or ongoing expenses as needed for the maintenance, improvement and
beautification of the green belt area and to accomplish the goals and
objectives of the Business Improvement Board of the district ("activities") in
the district.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-62   District Boundaries
The outer boundaries of Fonner Park Business Improvement District are described
as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven
(11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M. in Grand Island, Hall County,
Nebraska; thence west on the south line of said Section Twenty One (21) to a
point one hundred (100) feet west of the Southeast corner; thence north on a
line one hundred (100) feet west of and parallel with the line common to
Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) and Section
Twenty Two (22), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) to the north line
of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven
(11) North, Range Nine (9); thence east on the north line of the Southeast
Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven (11) North, Range
Nine (9) a distance of one hundred (100) feet to the line common to Section
Twenty One (21), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) and Section Twenty
Two (22), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9); thence continuing east on
the north line of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section Twenty Two (22),
Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) for a distance of one hundred (100)
feet; thence south on a line one hundred (100) feet east of and parallel with
the line common to Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven (11) North, Range
Nine (9) and Section Twenty Two (22), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine
(9) to the south line of Section Twenty Two (22), Township Eleven (11) North,
Range Nine (9); thence west on the south line of Section Twenty Two (22),
Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) to the point of beginning.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-63   Special Assessments
The real property located within the boundaries of Fonner Park BID shall be
subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 1, Article 40, Revised
Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement
District Act and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13 Article I Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-64   Assessment Method
The costs and expenses for the activities proposed to be performed within this
business improvement district will be funded through special assessments
against the property in the district based upon the special benefits to the
property as fairly and equitably equalized by the City Council sitting as a
board of equalization. The special assessments on each property will be levied
annually as a percentage of the property's frontage feet to the total frontage
feet in the district.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-64.1   Enforcement and Penalties
Enforcement and Penalties shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-2(C) and
13-2(D).
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-64.2   Governance
The District shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-65   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 13-IX
Fourth Street Business Improvement District
13-66   Creation Of District
13-67   Purpose
13-68   District Boundaries
13-69   Special Assessment
13-70   Assessment Method
13-71   Enforcement and Penalties
13-72   Governance
 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-16-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-66   Creation Of District
There is hereby created and established a business improvement district
pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as
amended to be known as Fourth Street Business Improvement District of the City
of Grand Island, Nebraska. Notice of hearing was given pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. §19-4029.01 and a public hearing was held on August 22, 2023. Creation of
the District was established by the Grand Island City Council by passage
Ordinance 9941 on August 22, 2023, with the effective date October 1, 2023.
Superseded by Ordinance No. 9941
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-67   Purpose
The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district
shall be:
   1.   Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area,
including landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security
purposes, and plantings and maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any
improvements or facilities authorized by the Business Improvement District Act,
including, but not limited to, planters, tree grates, foliage and flowers,
pedestrian areas, streetscape, signage and other attractions.
   2.   District activities shall include: District beautification and
maintenance, business retention and recruitment, District events/promotions,
support for paid and volunteer staff, and strategic planning and
implementation.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-68   District Boundaries
The outer boundaries of Fourth Street Business Improvement District are
described as follows:
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the east line of Eddy Street and
the north line of Fourth Street; thence northwesterly along the east line of
Eddy Street to a point 132 feet north of the north line of Fourth Street;
thence northeasterly on line 132 feet north and parallel to the north line of
Fourth Street to a point 132 feet north of the north line of 4th street along
the west line of Kimball Ave; thence southeasterly on a line 132 feet along the
west line of Kimball Ave to a point on the south line of Fourth Street; thence
southeasterly on a line to a point 132 feet south of the south line of 4th
street and along he west line of Kimball Ave; thence southwesterly on a line
132 feet south and parallel to the south line of Fourth Street to a point on
the west line of Sycamore Street; thence southeasterly on the west line of
Sycamore Street to a point 425 feet south of the south line of Fourth Street;
thence southwesterly on a line 425 feet south of and parallel to the south line
of Fourth Street to a point on the extension of the east line of Locust Street;
thence northwesterly on the extension of the east line of Locust Street to a
point 280 feet south of the south line of Fourth Street; thence southwesterly
on a line 280 feet south and parallel to the south line of Fourth Street to a
point 175 feet east of the east line of Walnut Street; thence southeasterly on
a line 174 feet east and parallel to the east line of Walnut Street to a point
345 feet south of the south lne of Fourth Street; thence southwesterly on a
line 345 feet south of and parallel to the south line of Fourth Street to a
point on the extension of the east line Cedar Street; thence northwesterly on
the east line of Cedar Street and the extension thereof to a point 148 feet
south of the south line of Fourth Street; thence southwesterly on a line 148
feet south and parallel to the south line of Fourth Street to a point 100 feet
east of the east line of Eddy Street; thence southeasterly on a line 100 feet
east and parallel to the east line of Eddy Street to appoint 280 feet south of
the south line of Fourth Street; thence southwesterly on a line 280 feet south
of the south line of Fourth Street; thence southwesterly on a line 280 feet
south and parallel to the south line of Fourth Street to a point on the east
line of Eddy Street; thence northwesterly on the east line of Eddy Street to
the Point of Beginning.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-69   Special Assessment
The real property located within the boundaries of Fourth Street BID shall be
subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 1, Article 40, Revised
Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement
District Act and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13 Article I Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-70   Assessment Method
The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as
follows:
   A.   The costs and expenses for the activities proposed to be performed
within this business improvement district will be funded through special
assessments, as authorized by the Business Improvement District Act, against
the property in the district based upon the special benefits to the property
and shall be fairly and equitably equalized by the City Council sitting as a
Board of Equalization.
   B.   The special assessments on each property will be levied annually based
upon the assessed value of individual property divided by total assessed value
of all taxable property in the district times total special assessment equals
individual special assessment. The assessed values to be used shall be the
values as shown in the office of the Hall County Assessor in effect on the
first day of January of the current year.
   C.   Based upon the recommendation of the Business Improvement District
Board, owner-occupied residential properties that are not obviously being used
for commercial purposes within the district will be assessed at 70% of assessed
valuation based on their primary benefit from the beautification and
maintenance programs beginning October 1, 2024. Beginning October 1, 2024, for
mixed-use properties that combine owner-occupied residential and other uses,
the property owner may submit evidence supporting a pro-rated split of the
assessed value (between owner-occupied residential and other uses) for the City
Council to consider when sitting as a Board of Equalization.
   D.   Owners of property exempt from ad valorem taxes are encouraged to
support District activities, promotions and improvements, but property exempt
from ad valorem taxes will not be subject to special assessment for the
District. Property owned by the Federal Government, State of Nebraska or
political subdivisions thereof shall not be subject to special assessment for
this District.
   E.   The City Council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the
special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the
method of assessment provided above. If the City Council finds that the
proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of
apportioning costs, then it may assess the cost under such method as the City
Council finds to be fair and equitable.
   F.   Said assessments shall be payable in one installment to become
delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy. Delinquent payments
shall draw interest at the rate specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. §45-104.01, as
amended. All special assessments together with interest and penalties shall be
liens upon the property assessed until paid.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-71   Enforcement and Penalties
   Enforcement and Penalties shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-2(C) and
13-2(D).
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-72   Governance
   The District shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
Article 13-X
(Repealed)
13-73   (Reserved)
13-74   (Reserved)
13-75   (Reserved)
13-76   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Repealed by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
13-73   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
13-74   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
13-75   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
13-76   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 13-XI
South Locust Business Improvement District
13-81   Creation Of District
13-82   Purpose
13-83   District
13-84   Special Assessments
13-85   Assessment Method
13-86   Enforcement and Penalties
13-87   Governance
 
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
13-81   Creation Of District
There is hereby created and established a business improvement district
pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as
amended, to be known as South Locust Business Improvement District of the City
of Grand Island, Nebraska. Notice of hearing was given pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. §19-4029.01 and a public hearing was held on February 14, 2017. Creation
of the District was established by the Grand Island City Council by passage
Ordinance 9623 on February 14, 2017, with the effective date March 1, 2017.
Superseded by Ordinance No. 9623
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-82   Purpose
The South Locust Street Business Improvement District is hereby created and
established effective on March 1, 2017, for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of the landscaped greenway; maintenance, repair, improvement and
replacement of the sprinkler system in the greenway; regular mowing and
trimming of the greenway; all facets of the purchase, care and replacement of
trees, shrubs and grass and other decorative improvements; snow removal from
sidewalks parallel of South Locust Street; employment of or contracting for
personnel, purchase of equipment, materials, supplies or other expenses that
accomplish the purposes of the district; other incidental or ongoing expenses
as needed for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of the green belt
area and to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement
Board of the district activities in the district.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-83   District
The properties included within the district properties are those lying within
the following area:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven
(11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M., Hall County, Nebraska; thence
west on the south line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11)
North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M. for a distance of Two Hundred Feet
(200'); thence northerly on a line two hundred feet (200') west of and parallel
to the east line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North,
Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M. to the north line of Section Twenty-Eight
(28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M.; thence
east on the north line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11)
North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M. to the northeast corner of Section
Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th
P. M.; thence continuing East on the north line of Section Twenty-Seven (27),
Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M. for a distance
of Three Hundred Seventy-Five Feet (375'); thence south on a line Three Hundred
Seventy-Five Feet (375') east of and parallel to the west line of Section
Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th
P. M. to the south line of Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11)
North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P. M.; thence west on the south line of
Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of
the 6th P. M. for a distance of Three Hundred Seventy-Five Feet (375') to the
point of beginning.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-84   Special Assessments
The real property located within the boundaries of South Locust BID shall be
subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 1, Article 40, Revised
Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement
District Act and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13 Article I Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-85   Assessment Method
The costs and expenses for the activities proposed to be performed within this
business improvement district will be funded through special assessments
against the property in the district based upon the special benefits to the
property as fairly and equitably equalized by the City Council sitting as a
board of equalization. The special assessments on each property will be levied
annually as a percentage of the property’s frontage feet to the total frontage
feet in the district.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-86   Enforcement and Penalties
Enforcement and Penalties shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-2(C) and
13-2(D).
(Added by Ordinance No. 9187, effective 09-24-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-87   Governance
The District shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
Article 13-XII
Business Improvement District No 8 Railside Business Improvement District
13-91   Creation of District
13-92   Purpose
13-93   District Boundaries
13-94   Special Assessments
13-95   Assessment Method
13-96   Enforcement and Penalties
13-96.1   Governance
13-91   Creation of District
There is hereby created and established a business improvement district
pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as
amended, to be known as Railside Business Improvement District of the City of
Grand Island, Nebraska. Notice of hearing was given pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat.
§19-4029.01 and a public hearing was held on August 14, 2018.
Creation of the District was established by the Grand Island City Council by
passage Ordinance 9700 on August 14, 2018, with the effective date October 1,
2018.
Superseded by Ordinance No. 9700
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-92   Purpose
The proposed public facilities and improvements to be made or maintained within
the District include district beautification facilities, to include but not
limited to planters, tree grates, foliage and flowers, pedestrian areas,
streetscape, signage and attractions. District activities will include district
beautification and maintenance, business retention and recruitment, such as
main street promotions and investment enhancements, implementation and
maintenance, including support staff, additional labor force, and volunteers,
and strategic planning.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9391, effective 08/14/2012)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-93   District Boundaries
The outer boundaries of Railside Business Improvement District are described as
follows:
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the South line of Third Street
and the West line of Kimball Avenue; thence South on the West line of Kimball
Avenue to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two feet (132') South of the South line of
First Street; thence West on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two feet (132') South of
and parallel to the South line of First Street to the West line of Sycamore
Street; thence Southerly on the Westerly line of Sycamore Street to the North
line of Court Street; thence Westerly on the North line of Court Street to the
West line of Pine Street; thence Southerly on the West line of Pine Street to
the North line of Charles Street; thence Westerly on the North line of Charles
Street and an extension thereof to the East line of Walnut Street; thence
Northerly on the East line of Walnut Street to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two
Feet (132') North of the North line of Division Street; thence West on a line
One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') North of and parallel to the North line of
Division Street and an extension thereof to the East line of Cedar Street;
thence Northerly on the East line of Cedar Street to the South line of First
Street; thence West on the South line of First Street to the West line of Elm
Street; thence Southerly on the West line of Elm Street for a distance of One
Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132'); thence Westerly on a line One Hundred Thirty-
Two Feet (132') South of and parallel to the South line of First Street to the
East line of Eddy Street; thence Northerly on the East line of Eddy Street to
the South line of South Front Street; thence Easterly on the South line of
South Front Street to the West line of Oak Street; thence Southerly on the West
line of Oak Street to the South line of Third Street; thence Westerly on the
South line of Third Street and an extension thereof to the point of beginning.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-94   Special Assessments
The real property located within the boundaries of Railside BID shall be
subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 1, Article 40, Revised
Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement
District Act and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13 Article I Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-95   Assessment Method
The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as
follows:
The costs and expenses for the activities proposed to be performed within this
business improvement district will be funded through special assessments, as
authorized by the Business Improvement District Act, against the property in
the district based upon the special benefits to the property, and shall be
fairly and equitably equalized by the City Council sitting as a board of
equalization. The special assessments on each property will be levied annually
based upon the assessed value of individual property divided by total assessed
value of all taxable property in the district times total special assessment
equals individual special assessment. Based upon the recommendation of the
Business Improvement District Board, owner-occupied residential properties
within the district will be assessed at 70% of assessed valuation based on
their primary benefit from the downtown beautification and maintenance
programs. Owners of property exempt from ad valorem taxes are encouraged to
support District activities, promotions, and improvements but property exempt
from ad valorem taxes will not be subject to special assessment for this
Business Improvement District. Property owned by the Federal Government, the
State of Nebraska and political subdivisions thereof shall not be subject to
special assessment for this Business Improvement District. For mixed-use
properties that combine owner-occupied residential and other uses, the property
owner may submit evidence supporting a pro-rated split of the assessed value
(between owner-occupied residential and other uses) for the City Council to
consider when sitting as a board of equalization. The assessed values to be
used in the above formula shall be the values, as shown in the office of the
Hall County Assessor, in effect on the first day of January of the current
year. The city council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the
special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the
method of assessment provided above. If the city council finds that the
proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of
apportioning costs, then it may assess the cost under such method as the city
council finds to be fair and equitable. Said assessments shall be payable in
one installment to become delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such
levy. Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in the Neb.
Rev. Stat. §45-104.01, as amended. All special assessments together with
interest and penalties shall be liens upon the property assessed until paid.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-96   Enforcement and Penalties
Enforcement and Penalties shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-2(C) and
13-2(D).
(Added by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-10-2008)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Superseded by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
13-96.1   Governance
The District shall be governed in accordance with Section
13-3.
HISTORY
Added by Ord. 10,012 on 3/26/2025
Article 13-XIII
Vehicle Off-Street Parking Districts
13-97   Creation Of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No 3
13-98   District Boundaries
13-99   Purpose
13-100   Special Assessments
13-101   Credits
13-102   Disestablishment Of Downtown Improvement And Parking District
13-97   Creation Of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No 3
There is hereby created within the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, Vehicle
Offstreet Parking District No. 3 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
13-98   District Boundaries
Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3 shall include all property within the
following boundaries, all of which is hereby deemed to be specially benefited
by the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of offstreet parking facilities
within the District, to wit: Beginning at the intersection of Sycamore Street
and First Street; thence westerly on First Street to Pine Street; thence
southerly on Pine Street to the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition;
thence westerly along the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition to Locust
Street; thence westerly on Division Street to Walnut Street; thence northerly
on Walnut Street to the alley between Division Street and First Street; thence
westerly on said alley to Cedar Street; thence northerly on Cedar Street to the
alley between Second Street and Third Street; thence westerly on said alley to
Elm Street; thence northerly on Elm Street to a point 40 feet north of the
southerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence easterly
parallel to and 40 feet from said right-of-way line to Walnut Street; thence
northerly on Walnut Street to a point 100 feet north of the northerly right-of-
way line of South Front Street; thence easterly parallel to and 100 feet from
said right-of-way line to Kimball Avenue extended; thence southerly on Kimball
Avenue extended and Kimball Avenue to the alley between Third Street and Second
Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to the point of beginning.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
13-99   Purpose
The acquisition of new parking lots is not contemplated by the creation of
Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3. No money is to be expended in the
acquisition of property and construction of such offstreet parking facilities.
The purpose of the District is to provide for the maintenance, repair,
reconstruction and operation of the City-owned off-street public parking
facilities located within the District excepting and excluding parking
facilities located upon Block Seventy-eight (78), Original Town of Grand
Island, and Lots One (1), Two (2), and Three (3), Parking Ramp Subdivision, a
replat of Lots 5, 6, and 7, Block 79, Original Town of Grand Island, all
located in Hall County, Nebraska.
Editor's note: Renumbered to correct numbering error on Ord. 9718. (Added by
Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
13-100   Special Assessments
All or a portion of the cost of maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any
offstreet parking facilities designated herein may be paid for by annual
special assessments against the real estate located in such district in
proportion to the special benefit of each parcel of real estate. The amounts of
such special assessments shall be determined by the mayor and city council
sitting as a board of equalization.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
13-101   Credits
The Grand Island City Council sitting as a Board of Equalization may by
resolution establish privately owned parking space credits or offsets to be
applied toward any special assessments levied for Vehicle Offstreet Parking
District No. 3, and provide necessary rules and procedures applicable to such
credits or offsets.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
13-102   Disestablishment Of Downtown Improvement And Parking District
Concurrent with the establishment of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3
as provided herein, the Downtown Improvement and Parking District of the City
of Grand Island, Nebraska, created and established by Ordinance No. 5854, is
hereby disestablished and dissolved, and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13,
Article I, Sections
13-1 through
13-10, inclusive, are repealed. Any remaining occupation taxes assessed and
collected or to be collected for purposes of the Downtown Improvement and
Parking District shall be set aside and utilized for the purposes for which
said District was established. The disestablishment and dissolution of the
Downtown Improvement and Parking District shall not operate as a nullification
of any occupation tax previously assessed for purposes of said District.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019)
CHAPTER 14
ELECTIONS
14-1   Elections; Date; Procedure
14-2   Officers Of The City
14-3   Wards; Boundaries
14-1   Elections; Date; Procedure
The City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall hold its municipal election on the
date of the statewide primary election for the State of Nebraska. Such
elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the
Statutes of Nebraska.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9030, effective 03-01-2006)
14-2   Officers Of The City
There shall be elected a mayor at large and two council members from each of
the five wards as established by §
14-3 of the Grand Island City Code, thereby forming a council of ten members
and one mayor.
14-3   Wards; Boundaries
The City of Grand Island, Nebraska, is hereby divided into five wards, numbered
1 through 5, the boundaries of such wards defined as shown on the drawing
entitled, "Election Ward Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska." The
Election Ward Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall be kept current
and on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9030, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9345, effective 11-23-2011)
CHAPTER 15
ELECTRICITY
Article 15-I   Licenses; Installations; Inspections 
Article 15-II   Municipal Service
Article 15-I
Licenses; Installations; Inspections
Division 15-I-1   Generally 
Division 15-I-2   Permits
Division 15-I-3   Electrical Inspections; Electrical Board 
Division 15-I-4   Electrical Contractors; Licenses, Registration 
Division 15-I-5   Master, Journeyman, Apprentice; Electricians
Division 15-I-6   Registration Certificate Revocation
Division 15-I-1
Generally
15-1   Applicability Of Article
15-2   National Electrical Code Adopted
15-3   Amendments To National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition
15-4   Electrical Plans
15-5   Installation Of Service Conductors
15-6   Service Entrances
15-7   Wiring In Commercial Buildings
15-8   Wiring In Single And Multiple-Family Units
15-9   Repairs In Building Damaged By Fire
15-10   Existing Electrical Installations
15-11   Requirements For Electrical Installations
15-1   Applicability Of Article
This article shall apply to all structures, constructed, assembled or placed
within the City zoning jurisdiction, and provides standards for electrical
wiring as identified in the Nebraska State Electrical Act.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-2   National Electrical Code Adopted
   A.   There is hereby adopted by the City of Grand Island for the purpose of
safeguarding persons and buildings from hazards arising from the use of
electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling, and other purposes, that
certain code known as the National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, recommended
by the National Fire Protection Association, except as modified by this
section.
   B.   The National Electrical Code is amended by §
15-3 of the Grand Island City Code.
   C.   One copy of the National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, shall be on
file in the City Clerk's office for public use and inspection as provided by
law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-3   Amendments To National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition
The following sections are adopted as amendments to the same numbered sections
of the National Electrical Code 2023 Edition:
   A.   Delete Article 210.8(F) Exception No. 2.
   B.   Amend Article 210.11(C)(3) - Shall be limited to two bathrooms.
   C.   Amend Article 320 - Armored cable (type AC) Anti-short bushings shall
be used.
   D.   Amend Article 330 - Metal-Clad Cable (Type MC) Anti-short bushings
shall be used.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-4   Electrical Plans
Wherever the Building Code of the City requires that plans be filed with the
Building Services Division for the construction and alteration of dwellings and
all other buildings and structures in the City, there shall also be filed a
detailed plan of the electrical work to be done on such structures which plan
shall show the outlets, connections, and all fixtures and appliances to be
installed. If deviations are made from an approved set of plans, then the
changes shall be submitted for approval. When the electrical work to be done is
for additional wiring only, the Electrical Inspector may approve the same
without plans therefor.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-5   Installation Of Service Conductors
All electrical service conductors shall be installed according to the National
Electrical Code with the following additional requirements. The point of
entrance in all cases shall be determined by the Grand Island Utilities
Department:
Overhead Service. The service mast must be Rigid or Intermediate metal conduit.
Where the service mast is used for the sole support of the service drop, the
minimum size shall be two-inch. The service mast shall be continuous with no
interruptions. The point of attachment shall be a minimum height of twelve (12)
feet.
Underground Service. The service conductors shall be installed in a continuous
approved conduit system from the service head, transformer or secondary tap box
to the main meter socket or service disconnect. The first ten feet of conduit
out of the ground attaching to a utility pole shall be schedule 40 G.R.C.
conduit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9804, effective 01-01-2021)
15-6   Service Entrances
Each service entrance with 2,000 amperes capacity or less shall be provided
with a readily accessible main disconnecting device with appropriate
overcurrent protection; provided, each service entrance larger than 2,000
amperes capacity shall comply with the provisions of the National Electric
Code. The device shall disconnect all ungrounded conductors from the source of
supply in one motion or operation of the hand. For overhead services, said
overcurrent protection shall be installed within twenty-five (25) feet from the
weatherhead, and within ten (10) feet from where the conductors enter the
building. For underground services, said overcurrent protection shall be
installed within ten (10) feet from where the conductors enter the building,
and within 25' feet of where the conduit emerges from grade.
   A.   Provisions for Metering. Meter sockets shall be mounted on the outside
of a principal building. With prior approval given by the Utilities Department
and Building Services Division, meter sockets may be located on UL listed
pedestals, accessory buildings greater than 625 square feet constructed on
perimeter foundations extended below frost depth, or alternate locations
approved by the Departments. Additional provisions for metering can be found in
the standards and specifications set out by the Grand Island Utilities
Department.
   B.   Single family switches shall be grouped to disconnect them with one
motion of the hand.
   C.   Multiple Family Units. New multiple family units constructed in
compliance with
Chapter 8  of the Grand Island Code may be allowed up to 6 switches, one switch
per unit. All switches shall be grouped together in one listed and approved
assembly.
   D.   Number of Services. One (1) electrical service shall be provided for
each tract or parcel of land, except upon written request and approval by the
Utilities Director and Chief Building Official, and/or their respective
designee, and in conformance with this Code.
   E.   Electric Meter Location. The electric meter shall be located on the
property that it is supplying power to, unless prior approval by the Utilities
Department and Building Services Division.
   F.   Meter Tampering. Pursuant to Nebraska Revised Statute 25-21,275,
tampering or bypassing a meter is strictly prohibited and will result in
immediate disconnection.
   G.   Grade Changes. The property owner shall be responsible for any repairs
or modifications to City owned equipment damaged or deemed unsafe due to grade
changes, settlement or erosion.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9712, effective 11-13-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9840, effective 09-08-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-7   Wiring In Commercial Buildings
   A.   Nonmetallic cable shall not be used for the installation of wiring for
lights, heat, air conditioning power, or power in all commercial buildings.
These include, but are not limited to, asylums, hospitals, hotels, motels,
theaters, schools, factories, churches, warehouses, mills, grain elevators,
food stores, office buildings, retail sales, stables, garages, meeting halls,
buildings of fireproof or mill construction.
EXCEPTION: Tray cable systems installed in accordance with Article 392 NEC and
permission of the Electrical Inspector.
   B.   All dwelling units located within any commercial type building shall be
wired to the same commercial standard.
   C.   Wiring above suspended ceilings – all permanent raceways, boxes,
cabinets, and fittings shall be securely fastened to the building structure.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9194, effective 11-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-
2016)
15-8   Wiring In Single And Multiple-Family Units
   A.   Multiple family units may have branch circuits in individual units
wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable if construction complies with
Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code.
   B.   Existing residential buildings containing more than six family units
not having a two-hour fire wall rating separation as provided in
Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be wired with nonmetallic
cable.
   C.   No wiring in basements below the floor joist on exterior walls shall be
wired with unprotected nonmetallic cable.
   D.   Smoke alarms shall be installed to comply with Section R314 of the 2021
International Residential Code.
   E.   Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed to comply with Section R315
of the 2021 International Residential Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-9   Repairs In Building Damaged By Fire
Whenever the wiring of any building in the City has been damaged by fire, the
Electrical Inspector shall be notified before permanent repairs to this wiring
are started. In replacing such wiring, all the rules of this article shall be
observed.
15-10   Existing Electrical Installations
   A.   Extensions to Existing Installations. Extensions to existing
installations shall not be made, attached or connected to any existing wiring
where the existing wiring does not conform to the minimum requirements as set
forth by this article.
   B.   Removal of Unused Electrical Wiring. All unused and abandoned
electrical equipment, wiring, conduits, and devices shall be removed from all
buildings and structures.
   C.   Existing Electrical Wiring. All existing electrical wiring, conduits,
equipment, and devices in existing buildings shall be compliant with the code
at the time of installation. Remodeled areas of buildings shall comply with the
current code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-11   Requirements For Electrical Installations
   A.   Aluminum Conductors. Aluminum conductors may be used for service
entrance and feeders only.
   B.   Equipment Grounding Conductors. An equipment grounding conductor will
be required in all conduit systems except for rigid metal conduit systems with
threaded hubs, couplings or fittings.
   C.   Non-grounding receptacles shall not be installed, either in new work or
for replacement, after December 31, 2014.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9508, effective 12-31-2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-
2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
Division 15-I-2
Permits
15-14   Permit For Work; Required
15-15   Permit; Application
15-16   Permit Fees
15-17   Electrical Work; Permit Required; Fee
15-18   Investigation Fees; Work Without A Permit
15-19   Reinspection; Fees
15-14   Permit For Work; Required
No electrical wiring work, unless excepted in this section, shall be undertaken
prior to the issuance of a permit therefor by the Building Services Division.
Such permit shall be issued only to a registered contracting electrician.
No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as replacing a switch.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9804, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-15   Permit; Application
   A.   No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any
work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and
unrevoked registration as required by this chapter, except when and as
otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.
   B.   A permit may be issued to a properly registered person not acting in
violation of any current contractor licensing law.
   C.   Any permit by this Code may be issued to any person to do any work
regulated by this Code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living
purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection
with such buildings in the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of
any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same is
currently occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally
purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection
therein. No permit shall be issued to said owner for the installation of a new
electrical service and panel.
   D.   If work is done by other than said owner the permit will be voided and
said owner will be subject to possible legal action.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-16   Permit Fees
Upon the granting of a permit for electrical work requiring an inspection, the
applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
15-17   Electrical Work; Permit Required; Fee
The person to whom such registration is issued under this division shall be
required to first secure permits to do any electrical work on the premises of
such registration as required by ordinances of the City. Fees for the issuance
of such permit shall be the same as now in force and required by ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-18   Investigation Fees; Work Without A Permit
   A.   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been
commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be
made before a permit may be issued for such work.
   B.   An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected
whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee
shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. The payment
of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all
other provisions of this Code, nor from penalty prescribed by law.
   C.   This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be
proven to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official that such work was
urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the
commencement of the work. In such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as
it is practical to do so.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-19   Reinspection; Fees
A reinspection fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule may
be assessed for each inspection when such portion of work for which inspection
is called is not complete or when required corrections have not been made.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-1-2008)
Division 15-I-3
Electrical Inspections; Electrical Board
15-22   Inspections; Required
15-23   Inspection Of Electrical Work
15-24   Violations
15-25   Designation Of Electrical Inspector
15-26   Records
15-27   Review Of Decisions; Electrical Board
15-28   Right Of Entry; Inspections; Disconnection
15-29   Disconnection Or Removal During Fire
15-30   Electrical Board; Appointment
15-31   Electrical Board; Duties
15-22   Inspections; Required
All electric apparatus, wires or conduits that are to be hidden from view shall
be inspected before concealment, and any person installing such wires shall
notify the Electrical Inspector, giving him twenty-four hours in which to make
the required inspection before such wires are concealed. For residential
installations not exceeding four units per structure, power shall be permitted
to be connected under the terms of a Temporary Electrical Hookup Agreement.
This permit shall be obtained from the Building Department before a request is
made to connect power.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-23   Inspection Of Electrical Work
Any electrical work performed under the provisions of this division shall be
inspected by the Electrical Inspector if the ordinances of the City provide for
inspections.
15-24   Violations
Any electrician, agent, or owner who shall construct, or cause to be
constructed, wiring in any building, or part of such building or structure or
device, in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and any
architect, or other person, designing, drawing plans for, or having charge of
such building, or part of such building or structure or device, who shall
permit it to be so constructed, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
15-25   Designation Of Electrical Inspector
Electrical inspections shall be under the supervision of the Building
Department Director. The inspector in charge of these inspections shall be
referred to in this article as the Electrical Inspector.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-26   Records
The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued and
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this
article.
15-27   Review Of Decisions; Electrical Board
When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical
installation, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice
from the electrical inspector, file a petition for review of such action of the
Electrical Inspector with the City Electrical Board, on receipt of which the
Board shall at once proceed to determine whether such electrical installation
complies with this article, and within three days shall make a decision in
accordance with its findings.
15-28   Right Of Entry; Inspections; Disconnection
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building in the discharge of official duties, or for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, electric
device, or electric material contained therein, and the electrical inspector
shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents
and to cut or disconnect, in case of emergency, any wire where such electrical
currents are dangerous to life or property.
If electrical wiring is found to be hazardous, it shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to have the needed repair work started as soon as
possible or within forty-eight (48) hours. Extended time may be given by the
Electrical Inspector.
If the service is disconnected for six (6) months or longer, an inspection
shall be performed prior to reconnection. The City of Grand Island shall not be
responsible for any damage to customer’s property as a result of disconnection
or reconnection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-29   Disconnection Or Removal During Fire
The Chief of the Fire Department or the Electrical Inspector, or a competent
person delegated by them, or either of them, shall have the power to at once
cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electrical currents
where such wires or current interfere with the work of the Fire Department
during the progress of a fire. Any reconnection of a disconnected service shall
be inspected by the Electrical Inspector prior to reconnection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-30   Electrical Board; Appointment
The Electrical Board shall be appointed by the Mayor annually, with the
approval of the City Council, and shall consist of a master electrician, a
journeyman electrician, a representative of the Grand Island Utilities
Department, a representative of the public at large, and the Building
Department Director or delegated Electrical Inspector, who shall act as ex
officio chairman of such Board. Three members of the Electrical Board shall
constitute a quorum.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-31   Electrical Board; Duties
The Electrical Board shall establish standards and procedures for the
qualification and registration of master electricians and journeyman
electricians and shall issue an appropriate registration to each person who
meets the qualifications therefor. The Board shall keep an official record of
all its transactions and registrations.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
Division 15-I-4
Electrical Contractors; Licenses, Registration
15-34   Intent Of Division
15-35   Registration Required
15-36   Registration And Insurance Required
15-37   (Reserved)
15-38   Use Of Name; Change Of Address
15-34   Intent Of Division
It is the intent of this division that no person shall engage in the business
of installing, repairing or altering electrical wiring unless the work
performed in the course of such business is under the direct supervision of a
contracting or master electrician licensed by the State of Nebraska and
registered with the City of Grand Island.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-35   Registration Required
No person shall engage in the business of installing, altering, or repairing
any electrical wiring, fixtures, or apparatus for any purpose whatsoever in the
City of Grand Island without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration as
an electrical contractor.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010)
15-36   Registration And Insurance Required
   A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      1.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      2.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      3.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building
Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance
coverage.
      4.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9144, effective 01-01-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9265, effective 08-17-2010)
15-37   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-38   Use Of Name; Change Of Address
No person or concern who has obtained a contracting electrician's registration
shall allow his name to be used by another person or concern, either for the
purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such
registration. Every person registered pursuant to this article shall notify the
Electrical Board of any change to their street address.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
Division 15-I-5
Master, Journeyman, Apprentice; Electricians
15-41   Registration; Required
15-42   (Reserved)
15-43   Apprentice Electrician
15-41   Registration; Required
No person shall be engaged in the installation of any electrical wiring,
fixtures, equipment, or devices for any purpose whatsoever in the City without
having registered in the office of the Building Department.
   A.   Required. Any applicant for a registration certificate shall be the
holder of a valid State of Nebraska Electricians License.
   B.   Renewal. All journeyman electrician's and master electrician's
certificates of registration issued by the Electrical Board shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which such certificates are issued, but such
certificates may be renewed within thirty days thereafter upon application and
payment of fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Any master electrician or journeyman electrician who does not renew his or her
certificate of registration pursuant to this article within the thirty day
grace period provided by this section shall automatically forfeit such
certificate.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-42   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-43   Apprentice Electrician
Apprentice electricians shall be required to have a valid State of Nebraska
registration and work under the direct supervision of a contracting, master, or
journeyman electrician.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
Division 15-I-6
Registration Certificate Revocation
15-46   Registration Certificate; Revocation
15-46   Registration Certificate; Revocation
   A.   Registration Certificate; Revocation. The City Council, by a majority
vote, shall have the power to revoke the certificate of any contracting,
master, or journeyman electrician issued pursuant to this article, upon the
recommendation of the Electrical Board, if such registration was obtained
through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly
incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of
this article. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties
prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.
   B.   Registration; Revocation. If any person's qualifications for a
registration certificate under this article shall fail at any time during the
term thereof, such certificate shall be revoked and canceled immediately by the
Building Department Director, who shall serve notice of such action by
registered mail to the holder of the certificate.
   C.   Registration Certificate; Notice and Hearing. Before a registration
issued pursuant to this article may be revoked, the registrant shall have
notice in writing, enumerating the reasons for revocation, and shall be
entitled to a hearing before the City Council not sooner than five days from
the date of receipt of the notice. The registrant shall be given an opportunity
to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-
examination. All such testimony before the City Council shall be given under
oath. The City Council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue
subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses in such cases.
   D.   Decision of Council Final; Reapplication. The decision of the City
Council relative to the revocation of a registration issued pursuant to this
article shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, and such
decision shall be final. A person whose registration has been revoked shall not
be permitted to reapply for another such registration within one year from the
date of such revocation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
Article 15-II
Municipal Service
Division 15-II-1   Generally
Division 15-II-2   Residential Service 
Division 15-II-3   Commercial Service 
Division 15-II-4   Power Service
Division 15-II-5   Area Flood Lighting 
Division 15-II-6   Power Cost Adjustment 
Division 15-II-7   Interdepartmental Rates
Division 15-II-1
Generally
15-49   Interconnection Devices
15-50   Deposit Requirements
15-51   Payment Conditions
15-52   Rate Assignment
15-53   Power Factor
15-54   Arc Welders And X-Ray Units
15-49   Interconnection Devices
Any Distributed Energy Resource (DER) device generating or storing electricity
to be used for domestic purposes that is interconnected with the electrical
supply of the household, business, or industry shall be finished by the Grand
Island Utilities Department in accordance with plans, specifications, rules and
regulations approved by the Utilities Director or his designated representative
and subject to the inspection of the Grand Island Utilities Department prior to
the connected device being energized and put into operation. The standards for
connecting any DER to any property that will be also connected to Grand Island
Electric Utility shall be found in the Grand Island Utilities Department
Metering and Interconnection standards online.
A customer that has a generation facility (or facilities) interconnected behind
their service meter with an aggregate nameplate of 25 kW or less may be
considered as a Qualified Facility (QF) and eligible for participation in a net
metering program. Examples of this include Solar, Diesel Generator, Battery
Bank, Wind Turbine, etc., or any device that may produce electricity. The
program will be available for QF customers until the aggregate nameplate
capacity of the participating QF customers meets one percent (1%) of the peak
annual demand of the Utilities Department. The installation of equipment by the
QF customer must meet all applicable safety, interconnection, and reliability
standards established by the National Electrical Code filed with the Secretary
of State and adopted by the State Electrical Board under subdivision (5) of
section 81-2104, the National Electrical Safety Code, the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and the Underwriters Laboratories; and
must be equipped to automatically isolate the QF from the electrical system in
the event of an electrical power outage or other conditions where the line is
de-energized. An outside-mounted visible device shall be installed on the
customer's side of the point of delivery/receipt that must be capable of
preventing energizing the Utilities Department's service line and provide for a
means for the Department to operate and lock in place. The Utilities Department
will provide a bi-directional meter for measurement of the flow of electricity
in both directions. A separate meter socket shall be provided and installed by
the customer between the QF and the point of interconnection with the
customer's electrical panel. The Utilities Department will provide a private
use meter that will be used for measuring gross generation of the QF. Net
excess energy produced by the QF during the billing period will be applied as a
credit to the customer's account at the current month cost of energy per
kilowatt-hour as defined in Division 6. At the end of the calendar year, or
within sixty days after the customer terminates retail service, any excess
credits will be paid to the customer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9767, effective 04-08-2020)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9840, effective 09-08-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9981, effective 08-01-2024)
15-50   Deposit Requirements
   A.   Except as provided below, all electric service accounts established
under the commercial rate structure shall be required to maintain a deposit in
an amount to be determined by the Utilities Department as set forth in this
section.
   B.   Deposits for any account created on or after September 1, 1983, and
deposits for all accounts for which service has been reinstated after being
disconnected for nonpayment shall be maintained in an amount of not less than
Two Hundred Dollars ($200), nor more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000), as
determined by the Utilities Department. The amount of the deposit required
shall be equal to two times the highest billed period of the last 12 billing
periods, not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000). For new construction or
properties that have been unoccupied for the last 12 billing periods, a similar
property from an identically zoned business shall be used in establishing the
required deposit amount.
   C.   The deposit required herein shall be refunded to the customer as
follows:
      (1)   When the electric service has been disconnected, whether at the
request of the customer or for nonpayment of the customer's electric bill, or a
new account has been created for said service with a different customer, and a
final reading has been taken, any deposit on hand and minus the amount of any
unpaid billing statement and other charges, shall be refunded to the customer;
or
      (2)   After at least one year of continuous service to the customer, if
the monthly payments for the account have been made promptly, with no more than
one delinquent payment during the twelve (12) month period immediately
preceding, the Utilities Department shall credit any deposit on hand. For the
purposes of this subsection, a payment shall be deemed delinquent if made more
than fifteen (15) days after the date set forth on the monthly billing
statement.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9275, effective 09-29-2010)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9930, effective 06/28/2023)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9930 on 6/28/2023
15-51   Payment Conditions
   A.   All bills are due when received.
   B.   If full payment is not received by the due date stated on the bill, a
late payment charge shall be assessed in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
   C.   A service charge shall be collected before reconnection, in each
instance of disconnection for nonpayment of billing. If reconnection is
demanded after business hours, an additional fee shall apply. The charges for
reconnection shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   D.   A service charge in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule will be assessed for each check returned for insufficient funds. This
charge is in addition to any other charges.
   E.   A service charge in accordance to the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
shall be collected, before all new connections are made by the Utilities
Department.
   F.   A service charge in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule shall be collected, to transfer service from one occupant to another
occupant at the same location.
   G.   Service periods are normally for periods of one year or longer. If it
appears that services are being disconnected and reconnected within a twelve-
month period, in order to avoid minimum billing charges; an amount equivalent
to the minimum billings for the disconnected period (not to exceed eleven
months) must be paid before the service is reconnected. This is in addition to
the normal connection charges.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9523, effective 3-17-2015)
15-52   Rate Assignment
The Grand Island Utilities Department will attempt to assign customers to the
lowest applicable rate. It is the customer's responsibility to inform the
Utilities Department of any changes that may affect the assignment or billing
conditions within a given rate.
The customer is in a better position than the Utilities Department to analyze
electric usage. When more than one rate assignment is applicable, the customer
may select the rate considered the most beneficial. Customer-requested rate re-
assignments will not be made more frequently than once every twelve months. In
no event will the Utilities Department be responsible for losses incurred due
to improper rate assignment.
At customer request, demand metering will be installed by the Utilities
Department. The Utilities Department may, at its option, assess a one-time
charge of $200.00 to pay the additional metering facilities.
15-53   Power Factor
All Demand customers shall install power-factor correction equipment, if
necessary, to ensure a power factor of no less than 90%, lagging or leading.
Failure to maintain a power factor of 90% or greater (leading or lagging) will
result in a penalty as stated herein. The Grand Island Utilities Department
will notify any customers who have a power factor of less than 90% for two
consecutive months. Power factor correction penalties will not be applied for
the first 6 months after notification of failure to comply with this provision.
After the initial 6-month period following notification, customer will be
subject to penalties without further notice. For a customer whose power factor
at the time of their Peak Monthly Demand is less than 90%, the Billing Demand
will be multiplied by 90% and divided by the customer's power factor (expressed
in percent) determined at the time of the customer's Monthly Demand.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-54   Arc Welders And X-Ray Units
Electric transformer type arc welders or x-ray units shall not be used on
Residential or Single Phase Commercial Services. When used on Three Phase
Services, the welder or x-ray unit KVA may be converted to horsepower for
determination of connected horsepower at the rate of 746 watts per horsepower,
minimum connection five horsepower.
Division 15-II-2
Residential Service
15-55   010 Residential Service
15-56   Service Specifications
15-55   010 Residential Service
Applicable in urban and rural distribution areas. Available at single phase,
through a single meter, to residential consumers for domestic use in a single-
family dwelling unit; but is not available for commercial or non-domestic use.
Individual single-phase motors, not to exceed 10 HP each, may be connected;
however, the City Utilities Department must be notified in writing if a motor
over 5 HP is installed.
This schedule has two sets of rates: one for the summer period of five months,
beginning with the June billing; and the second for the winter season of seven
months, beginning with the November billing.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:             October 1, 2024
                            Summer (June-October) Winter (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month  $11.00                $11.00
Energy Charge
First 300 kWh, per kWh      $0.100                $0.100
All additional kWh, per kWh $0.079                $0.062
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:             October 1, 2025
                            Summer (June-October) Winter (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month  $14.00                $14.00
Energy Charge
First 300 kWh, per kWh      $0.099                $0.099
All additional kWh, per kWh $0.079                $0.061
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
Minimum Bill: The minimum monthly bill shall be the monthly customer charge and
Electric City Dividend.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 01-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 01-5-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-56   Service Specifications
Residential Service shall be supplied at a nominal voltage of 120/240 Volts or
120/208 Volts single phase.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
Division 15-II-3
Commercial Service
15-57   030 Single-Phase Commercial Service
15-58   Service Specifications
15-59   Discounts For Primary Service
15-60   050 Three-Phase Commercial Service
15-61   Service Specifications
15-62   Discounts For Primary Service
15-57   030 Single-Phase Commercial Service
Applicable in urban and rural distribution areas. Available for commercial
customers, for lighting and small appliances. Available for single meter
apartment units, and combined residential-commercial use, where the Residential
Service Rate is not applicable. Service shall be through a single meter.
Individual single-phase motors, not to exceed 10 HP each, may be connected;
however, the Grand Island Utilities Department must be notified in writing if a
motor over 5 HP is installed.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:                October 1, 2024
Customer Charge, per month     $15.00
Energy Charge
   First 1,000 kWh, per kWh $0.102
   All additional kWh, per k$0.081
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:                October 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month     $19.00
Energy Charge
   First 1,000 kWh, per kWh $0.102
   All additional kWh, per k$0.081
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
Minimum Bill: The minimum monthly bill shall be the monthly customer charge and
Electric City Dividend.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 01-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-58   Service Specifications
Single-Phase Commercial service shall be supplied at a nominal voltage of 120/
240 Volts or 120/208 Volts single phase.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-59   Discounts For Primary Service
If the Single-Phase Commercial user owns and maintains all necessary
transformation equipment and structures, a 3% reduction will be made in the
energy billed. If energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of
the service, a 2% reduction will be made in the energy billed. These discounts,
however, do not apply to the minimum stated.
15-60   050 Three-Phase Commercial Service
Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island; and is
available through a single meter at three-phase for any electric service uses
where three-phase service is available.
This schedule has two sets of rates: one for the summer period of five months,
beginning with the June billing; and the second for the winter season of seven
months, beginning with the November billing.
Rate:
                   October 1, 2024
Effective Date: Summer         Winter
                (June-October) (November-May)
Rate:
                                  October 1, 2024
Effective Date:                Summer         Winter
                               (June-October) (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month     $26.00         $26.00
Energy Charge
   First 1,000 kWh, per kWh $0.102
   Next 4,000 kWh, per kWh  $0.090
   All additional kWh, per k$0.086
   First 500 kWh, per kWh                  $0.102
   Next 1,000 kWh, per kWh                 $0.090
   All additional kWh, per kWh             $0.083
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
Rate:
                   October 1, 2025
Effective Date: Summer         Winter
                (June-October) (November-May)
Rate:
                                  October 1, 2025
Effective Date:                Summer         Winter
                               (June-October) (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month     $33.00         $33.00
Energy Charge
   First 1,000 kWh, per kWh $0.105
   Next 4,000 kWh, per kWh  $0.090
   All additional kWh, per k$0.087
   First 500 kWh, per kWh                  $0.105
   Next 1,000 kWh, per kWh                 $0.090
   All additional kWh, per kWh             $0.083
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge and Electric City Dividend.
Minimum Bill: The minimum monthly bill shall be the larger of the following:
   A.   Customer Charge plus Electric City Dividend, or
   B.   Total connected HP x $0.75 plus Electric City Dividend
If questions arise as to the actual billing HP, the City Utilities Department
may, at its option, install demand meters. The kilowatt reading shall determine
the HP on the basis of 0.75 kilowatt = 1.0 HP.
It is the responsibility of the customer to inform the Grand Island Utilities
Department of changes that may affect minimum billings.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 01-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 01-5-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-61   Service Specifications
New Three-Phase Commercial Services are supplied at three phase, four wire wye,
at 120/208 Volts or 277/480 Volts. Delta services must operate ungrounded,
unless prior written approval is obtained by the customer from the City
Utilities Department.
Current unbalance between phases should not exceed 15%. (Amended by Ordinance
No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
15-62   Discounts For Primary Service
If the Three-Phase Commercial user owns and maintains all necessary
transformation equipment and structures, a 3% reduction will be made in the
energy billed. If energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of
the service, a 2% reduction will be made in the energy billed. These discounts,
however, do not apply to the minimum stated.
Division 15-II-4
Power Service
15-63   100 Three-Phase Power Service
15-64   Billing Demand
15-65   Service Specifications
15-66   Discounts For Primary Service 15-67 Waiver Of Demand Charge
15-63   100 Three-Phase Power Service
Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island, available
through a single meter at three- phase. Available for any commercial or
industrial use of energy.
Rate:
                October 1, 2024
Effective Date: Summer         Winter
                (June-October) (November-May)
Rate:
                                  October 1, 2024
Effective Date:                   Summer         Winter
                                  (June-October) (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month        $380.00        $380.00
Demand Charge, per kW
   First 5,000 kW              $14.95         $10.70
   All additional demand       $11.90         $7.60
Energy Charge, per kWh
   First 450 kWh per kW of dema$0.049         $0.047
   All additional energy       $0.040         $0.037
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
Rate:
                October 1, 2025
Effective Date: Summer         Winter
                (June-October) (November-May)
Rate:
                                  October 1, 2025
Effective Date:                   Summer         Winter
                                  (June-October) (November-May)
Customer Charge, per month        $400.00        $400.00
Demand Charge, per kW
   First 5,000 kW              $15.40         $11.00
   All additional demand       $12.25         $7.80
Energy Charge, per kWh
   First 450 kWh per kW of dema$0.051         $0.048
   All additional energy       $0.041         $0.038
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
Minimum Bill: The minimum monthly bill shall be no less than $800 plus the
Electric City Dividend.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 01-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 01-5-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-64   Billing Demand
The Monthly Demand shall be the highest integrated demand (in kW) during a 30-
minute time interval in the billing period. For purposes of this section,
Summer Months shall be June through October. Winter Months shall be November
through May. The Billing Demand shall be the greater of:
   1.   The Monthly Demand
   2.   65% of the Monthly Demand in the five (5) most recent Summer Months
(Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9767, effective 04-08-2020)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-65   Service Specifications
Any standard, nationally recognized, three-phase voltage will be supplied if
transformation is available.
15-66   Discounts For Primary Service
If Three-Phase Power energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of
the service, a 3% reduction will be made in the energy billed. In addition, if
the user owns and maintains all necessary transformation equipment and
structures, a 5% reduction will be made in the demand billed. These discounts,
however, do not apply to the minimum stated.
15-67   Waiver Of Demand Charge
For customers developing a new site or significantly expanding an existing
facility, the Utilities Department may waive the charge on the incremental
demand for the first twelve months of service. Customers developing a new site
must have an anticipated load of at least 500 KW; these customers will have the
entire demand charge waived for the twelve month period.
An expansion must result in at least 300 KW additional load, based on largest
historical Summer Demand at the facility. During the months from June through
October, the demand charge in excess of this historical Summer Demand will be
waived. During the months from November through May, the Billing Demand for the
corresponding month of the previous year will be used as the Billing Demand.
Customers applying for this waiver must remain on Rate 100 for at least twelve
months after resumption of full demand billing. For the twelve months after
resumption of full demand billing, the Summer Demand will reflect the waived
demand. The Summer Demand for new customers will be not less than 500 KW. The
Summer Demand for plant expansions will be not less than 300 KW above the
historical Summer Demand.
Written application for waiver of demand charge must be made prior to
connection of such new load to the City electric system, and shall be subject
to the approval of the Utilities Director.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-201)
Division 15-II-5
Area Flood Lighting
15-68   114 Area Floodlighting
15-69   Contract Period And Conditions
15-68   114 Area Floodlighting
Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island; and is
available for any outdoor area floodlighting of consumer's property from dusk
to dawn, where such service can be rendered directly from existing secondary
distribution lines of the City.
Luminaire will be selected by the Grand Island Utilities Department and
provided from the Utilities Department stock. Installation will be on an
existing wood pole and connected to existing secondary conductors on such pole.
If installed lamp is not listed on the rate schedule, the rate for the nearest
sized lamp of the same type shall be charged.
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date: October 1, 2024
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date:       October 1, 2024
Mercury Vapor:
   175 watt lamp   $8.46
   400 watt lamp   $14.42
   1,000 watt lamp $28.39
High Pressure Sodium:
   100 watt lamp   $7.55
   250 watt lamp   $10.10
   400 watt lamp   $11.18
Metal Halide:
   100 watt lamp   $9.40
   400 watt lamp   $17.10
   1,000 watt lamp $31.48
LED:
   25 watt lamp    $4.64
   50 watt lamp    $5.74
   100 watt lamp   $7.42
Halogen:
   500 watt lamp   $19.40
 
Plus the Electric City Dividend.
Power Cost Adjustment is not applicable to the Area Floodlighting rate.
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date: October 1, 2025
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date:       October 1, 2025
Mercury Vapor:
   175 watt lamp   $8.72
   400 watt lamp   $14.85
   1,000 watt lamp $29.24
High Pressure Sodium:
   100 watt lamp   $7.78
   250 watt lamp   $10.40
   400 watt lamp   $11.51
Metal Halide:
   100 watt lamp   $9.68
   400 watt lamp   $17.61
   1,000 watt lamp $32.42
LED:
   25 watt lamp    $4.77
   50 watt lamp    $5.91
   100 watt lamp   $7.65
Halogen:
   500 watt lamp   $19.98
 
Plus the Electric City Dividend.
Power Cost Adjustment is not applicable to the Area Floodlighting rate.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9064, effective 09-6-2006)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-69   Contract Period And Conditions
Service under Rate 114 is available for a minimum period of 24 months and
thereafter until terminated by thirty (30) days notice in writing.
The City of Grand Island will install, own, and operate and maintain all area
lighting equipment under this schedule. If underground service is desired,
approval of the City must be obtained and the additional cost therefor shall be
paid in advance to the City by the consumer on a nonrefundable basis.
The burning of the lamps shall be controlled by automatic control equipment
installed by the City and burning time shall be approximately thirty minutes
after sunset to approximately thirty minutes before sunrise.
The City shall be notified by the consumer of any operational failure of lamps.
Lamp replacement or repairs will be performed only during regular working
hours.
Non-Standard Installations. If underground service is desired or extension of
overhead secondary facilities is required or special materials are requested,
approval of the City must be obtained. All additional cost for materials and
labor shall be paid in advance to the City, by the consumer, on a nonrefundable
basis.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
Division 15-II-6
Power Cost Adjustment
15-70   Power Cost Adjustment
15-70   Power Cost Adjustment
The rates set out are predicated upon a base power cost of 35.00 mills per
kilowatt-hour. When the City's cost of energy per kilowatt-hour shall
temporarily be greater than 35.00 mills per kilowatt-hour, there shall be added
to the consumer's monthly charge for electricity used an amount equal to the
number of kilowatt-hours used during the month to which the consumer's charge
applies, multiplied by the amount by which the cost of energy for kilowatt-hour
shall be greater than 35.00 mills per kilowatt-hour.
Cost of energy per kilowatt-hour as determined for any month shall be
applicable to all charges rendered to consumers after the last day of the
following month, without any City Council action.
The cost of energy per kilowatt-hour applied to the consumer's monthly charge
shall be an average of the previous 12-months cost of energy per kilowatt-hour,
provided that between October 2024 and March 2025 the calculation will
transition from 6-months average to 12-months average as follows:
October 2024:      Average of February 2024- August 2024 (7 months)
November 2024:      Average of February 2024- September 2024 (8 months)
December 2024:      Average of February 2024- October 2024 (9 months)
January 2025:      Average of February 2024- November 2024 (10 months)
February 2025:      Average of February 2024 - December 2024 (11 months)
Thereafter:         Previous 12 months
For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   Cost of Energy shall mean the power cost for the generating plants owned by
the City, consisting of the monthly natural gas cost and the cost of any fuel
oil consumed; the cost of coal and air quality reagents consumed, including
freight and handling charges; plus costs of payments by the City for power,
energy, and transmission purchased from other power suppliers, less receipts
from energy sold to other electric utilities.
   Cost of Energy per Kilowatt-Hour shall mean "Cost of Energy" as above
defined, divided by 95% of the total kilowatt-hours; consisting of the
kilowatt-hour output of the City's electric generating plants, plus the
kilowatt-hours purchased from other power suppliers, less the kilowatt hours of
energy sold to other electric utilities.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 01-5-2005)
(Amended by Ord No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
Division 15-II-7
Interdepartmental Rates
15-71   Interdepartmental Rates
15-72   (Reserved)
15-73   (Reserved)
15-74   116; Interdepartmental; Streetlights
15-75   (Reserved)
15-76   Co-Generation Standby
15-77   Economic Development Rate
15-78   Interruptible Service Rate
15-79   City Dividend for Utility Ownership
15-80   Contribution in Aid of Construction
15-71   Interdepartmental Rates
Municipal accounts shall be assigned to standard retail Rate 30 or Rate 50 as
appropriate. An Interdepartmental discount shall be assigned to non-enterprise
accounts. The discount for calendar year 2005 is $0.01 per kWh for Rate 50
Interdepartmental accounts and $0.03 per kWh for Rate 30 Interdepartmental
accounts. The discount beginning calendar year 2006 is $0.003 per kWh for both
Rate 50 and Rate 30 Interdepartmental accounts.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005) (Amended by Ord. No. 8946,
effective 1-5-2005)
15-72   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
15-73   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
15-74   116; Interdepartmental; Streetlights
Applicable for various size lights used for public street lighting and public
parks lighting, whether City or privately-owned. If installed lamp is not
listed on the rate schedule, the rate for the nearest sized lamp of the same
type shall be charged.
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date: October 1, 2024
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date:       October 1, 2024
Mercury Vapor:
   175 watt lamp   $5.04
   400 watt lamp   $9.45
   1,000 watt lamp $18.68
High Pressure Sodium:
   100 watt lamp   $3.78
   250 watt lamp   $6.23
   400 watt lamp   $7.39
Metal Halide:
   100 watt lamp   $4.53
   400 watt lamp   $12.13
   1,000 watt lamp $21.78
LED:
   50 watt lamp    $3.52
   100 watt lamp   $4.82
 
Plus the Electric City Dividend.
Power Cost Adjustment is not applicable to the Interdepartmental Streetlights
rate.
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date: October 1, 2025
Monthly Rate per Lamp:
Effective Date:       October 1, 2025
Mercury Vapor:
   175 watt lamp   $5.19
   400 watt lamp   $9.74
   1,000 watt lamp $19.24
High Pressure Sodium:
   100 watt lamp   $3.89
   250 watt lamp   $6.42
   400 watt lamp   $7.61
Metal Halide:
   100 watt lamp   $4.66
   400 watt lamp   $12.50
   1,000 watt lamp $22.44
LED:
   50 watt lamp    $3.63
   100 watt lamp   $4.96
 
Plus the Electric City Dividend.
Power Cost Adjustment is not applicable to the Interdepartmental Streetlights
rate.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 01-1-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 01-5-2005)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978, effective 10-1-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-75   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005)
15-76   Co-Generation Standby
Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island at locations
acceptable to the City who meet all of the following conditions:
   A.   Take three-phase service from the City's system at a nominal standard
voltage of 13,800 volts or greater.
   B.   Operates any PURPA-eligible electric generating equipment in parallel
with the City's electric system with availability to produce energy at an
average of 65% of nameplate capacity during the hours of 12:00 PM and 7:00 PM,
June 15 through September 15.
   C.   Requires 1,000 kW or more of standby capacity from the City.
   D.   Desire use of the City's electric service for temporary backup or
maintenance power and energy.
   E.   The City determines that it has sufficient capacity available in
production and transmission facilities at the location where service is
requested.
Not applicable to resale service. Service under this rate is only provided via
an agreement for standby service.
Rate:
Effective Date: October 1, 2024
Rate:
Effective Date:                                   October 1, 2024
Customer Charge, per month                        $1,000.00
Distribution Standby Rate                         $5.79/kW-month of Standby
                                                  Capacity
Monthly Standby Usage Demand                       
   Summer                                      $9.16/kW-month
   Winter                                      $4.91/kW-month
Excess Usage Demand                                
   Summer                                      $14.95/kW-month
   Winter                                      $10.70/kW-month
Firm Energy Usage (per kWh)                        
   Summer                                       
      First 450 kWh per kW of Monthly Usage $0.049
Demand
      Excess                                $0.040
   Winter                                       
      First 450 kWh per kW of Monthly Usage $0.047
Demand
      Excess                                $0.037
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge
Rate:
Effective Date: October 1, 2025
Rate:
Effective Date:                                   October 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month                        $1,000.00
Distribution Standby Rate                         $5.79/kW-month of Standby
                                                  Capacity
Monthly Standby Usage Demand                       
   Summer                                      $9.61/kW-month
   Winter                                      $5.21/kW-month
Excess Usage Demand                                
   Summer                                      $15.40/kW-month
   Winter                                      $11.00/kW-month
Firm Energy Usage (per kWh)                        
   Summer                                       
      First 450 kWh per kW of Monthly Usage $0.051
Demand
      Excess                                $0.041
   Winter                                       
      First 450 kWh per kW of Monthly Usage $0.048
Demand
      Excess                                $0.038
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge, Power Factor Correction
Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
Definition of Standby Capacity: Standby Capacity is defined as the lower of:
   A.   Customer's accredited summer capability, as determined under the
procedures established by Attachment AA of the Southwest Power Pool Open Access
Transmission Tariff, or
   B.   The customer's gross demand, defined as the highest 30-minute
integrated demand of customer facility as determined by a meter that measures
total load, including amounts that may be served by customer-owned generation,
or
   C.   The Contract Standby Capacity, as stated in the service contract
between the Customer and City.
Standby Capacity will be set for a 12-month period beginning on January 1 of
each calendar year based on the above criteria applied to the prior October 1
through September 30.
Determination of Monthly Standby Usage Demand: Monthly Usage Demand equals the
Customer's measured net demand (gross usage less output of customer-owned
generation used to serve customer energy requirements) in a given month, less
the capacity associated with any generation that is out of service for a
maintenance outage that has been approved by the City (see "Maintenance
Outages" section of this rate schedule), up to the Contract Standby Capacity.
Determination of Excess Usage Demand: Excess Usage Demand equals the Customer's
measured gross demand (metered usage including output of customer-owned
generation used to serve customer energy requirements) in a given month, less
the Standby Capacity.
Determination of Hourly Usage Energy: Hourly Usage Energy equals the energy
usage by customer in excess of the output of customer-owned generation,
provided that the energy usage in any hour cannot be less than zero. In the
event that customer-owned generation produces excess energy in a given hour,
the Monthly Usage Energy for that interval shall be zero and any excess energy
shall be reimbursed under the "Excess Energy Rate" section of this rate
schedule.
Determination of Distribution Standby Demand: The Distribution Standby Demand
rate is paid on the Standby Capacity as defined herein.
Determination of Firm Energy: Firm Energy is determined hourly and is equal to
Hourly Usage Energy minus Standby Contract Capacity, provided that the Firm
Energy in any hour cannot be less than zero.
Determination of Standby Energy: Standby Energy is determined hourly and is
equal to the Hourly Usage Energy up to the Standby Capacity.
Deposit: Two (2) times the highest estimated monthly bill. Deposits held until
Customer no longer takes service from the District.
Excess Energy Rate: In the event the customer's generators produce excess
energy over the energy used by the customer's facility and the customer has not
made arrangements with a third party to purchase said energy, the energy shall
be purchased by the City at the real-time locational marginal price for the
Grand Island load settlement location in the Southwest Power Pool Integrated
Marketplace.
Billing for Actual Demand: If customer takes service associated with the
standby capacity from City without approval of a maintenance outage, the
customer will be billed for its Actual Demand based on Schedule 100, provided
that charges for Distribution Standby Service will be credited against the
demand charges applicable to said customer.
Billing for Firm Energy: Firm Energy is billed at the established rate in this
rate schedule, including applicable monthly Power Cost Adjustment.
Billing for Standby Energy: Standby Energy will be assessed based on the number
of kilowatt-hours consumed in any given hour multiplied by the cost of
purchased energy from the Southwest Power Pool. The cost of purchased energy
will be the higher of the day-ahead or real-time locational marginal price for
the Grand Island load settlement location plus 0.0015 per kWh ($1.50 per MWh).
In no instance shall any one (1) hour interval be assessed at less than $0.0015
per kWh ($1.50 per MWh), which will be the minimum assessed hourly rate
calculated.
Maintenance Outages: Customer may take up to 14 days per year of maintenance
outages without being billed for Actual Demand under the following conditions:
   1.   Outages must be scheduled at least 120 days in advance during the
period of September 15 and December 1 and March 15 through May 31, with written
notification provided to the City and approval or rejection provided in writing
to the customer within 7 days, or
   2.   During other periods as agreed-upon by the City based on weather
conditions, loads, and local and regional generation availability, provided the
customer must notify the City at least 14 days prior to any planned outage,
with the City providing an approval or rejection within 7 days of the request.
Minimum Bill: The minimum bill shall be the sum of the following:
   1.   Customer Charge plus
   2.   Distribution Standby Rate multiplied by the contracted standby
capacity, plus
   3.   Generation Standby Rate multiplied by the contracted standby capacity,
plus
   4.   Electric City Dividend.
Specific Terms and Conditions Applicable to Standby Rate: The following terms
and conditions are specific to service provided under this rate schedule:
   A.   Contract Year: All contracts under this schedule shall be for a minimum
period of one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31, and one-year
periods thereafter until terminated, where service is no longer required on 30
days' notice. Greater minimum periods may be required by contract in situations
involving large or unusual loads.
   B.   Meter Installation: The City shall, at the expense of the customer,
install, own, operate, and maintain the metering to measure the electric power
and energy supplied to customer to allow for proper billing. Said meter will
provide data based on the billing intervals used by the Southwest Power Pool
Integrated Marketplace. In addition, the City will install, at the expense of
the customer, a meter that measures the flow of power and energy from the
customer's own generating facility (generation metering).
      As a result of the electrical or physical configuration of the customer's
generation facility, the City may determine that it is more practical or
economical to use generation metering installed and owned by the customer
rather than installing its own metering equipment. If the City, at its sole
discretion, makes such a determination, then the customer-owned generation
metering may be used for billing purposes, so long as such metering equipment
meets the City's standards for quality and accuracy.
(Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,010, effective 03-12-2025)
15-77   Economic Development Rate
Applicable at the City's discretion in the territory served by the City of
Grand Island at locations acceptable to the City who meets all the following
conditions:
   A.   Has monthly peak demand of 1,000 kW or greater of new or expansive
load.
   B.   New load or expansion of existing load has monthly load factor of 60%
or greater.
   C.   Enter into an agreement with the State of Nebraska or other political
subdivision to provide an economic development project under state or local
laws and is in compliance with all obligations under said agreement.
   D.   Enter into a service agreement with the City.
   E.   The City determines that it has sufficient capacity available in
production and transmission facilities at the location where service is
requested.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:            October 1, 2024
Customer Charge, per month $1,000.00
Demand Charge, per kW      $11.50/kW-month of Contract Demand
Energy Charge, per kWh     $0.035/kWh
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:            October 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month $1,000.00
Demand Charge, per kW      $12.00/kW-month of Contract Demand
Energy Charge, per kWh     $0.035/kWh
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
Facility Charge: Customer will be responsible for any capital costs as
determined by an engineering and economic analysis prepared by the City and
agreed to between the customer and the City.
Minimum Bill: The minimum monthly bill shall be sum of the Customer Charge plus
Demand Charge multiplied by Contract Demand plus Electric City Dividend plus
Facility Charge.
Term: Service under this rate schedule is available for a period of up to 60
months, commencing when the customer first meets the minimum 1,000 kW size and
monthly load factor requirements. Any service prior to this period is under the
applicable commercial rate class.
Failure to Comply with Requirement of Economic Development Agreements: If the
customer fails to comply with the terms and conditions of any economic
development agreement entered into with the State of Nebraska or other
political subdivision as well as the service agreement with the City, including
minimum load and monthly load factor provisions, service under this rate
schedule will be suspended and customer will revert to the otherwise applicable
rate schedule. The customer will remain on the otherwise applicable rate
schedule until such time customer is in compliance with all terms and
conditions of said agreements. If service is terminated under this provision,
the customer must comply with all terms and conditions of the economic
development agreements for an uninterrupted period of 12 months to restart
service under this rate schedule.
(Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-78   Interruptible Service Rate
Applicable at the City's discretion in the territory served by the City of
Grand Island at locations acceptable to the City, who meets all the following
conditions for customers willing to take interruptible service under the
provisions of this section.
   A.   Take three-phase service from the City's system at a nominal standard
voltage of 13,800 volts or greater.
   B.   Requires 3,000 kW or more of fully interruptible demand. Any firm load
must be separately metered and served under the otherwise-applicable rate
schedule.
   C.   Enter into a service agreement with a term of 5 years, agreeing to pay
a minimum contract demand rate, such service commencing no more than 18 months
after Interruptible Service Rate Agreement (Contract) execution.
   D.   Customer's load characteristics will not have a detrimental effect on
City. Detrimental effects will be determined at the City's sole discretion and
may include, but are not limited to harmonics, sudden unexpected load or
voltage fluctuations, an expected power factor of less than 90%, adverse
impacts on other City infrastructure, a proposed load that is not consistent
with City's planning and zoning regulations, and excessive financial risk to
City.
   E.   The City determines that it has sufficient capacity available in
production, distribution, and transmission facilities, at the location where
service is requested, as it pertains to the current and future development
plans of the City.
   F.   Has a monthly load factor of 60% or greater. This does not include the
time when directed to curtail by the City.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:                                       October 1, 2024
                                                      Summer     Winter
Customer Charge, per month                            $10,000.00 $10,000.00
Interruptible Demand Charge, per kW-month of Contract $5.79      $5.79
Interruptible Demand
   Failure to Interrupt Charge, per kW-month       $9.16      $4.91
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
 
Rate:
Effective Date:                                       October 1, 2025
                                                      Summer     Winter
Customer Charge, per month                            $10,000.00 $10,000.00
Interruptible Demand Charge, per kW-month of Contract $6.50      $6.50
Interruptible Demand
   Failure to Interrupt Charge, per kW-month       $9.61      $5.21
 
Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption
only), Power Factor Correction Charge, and Electric City Dividend.
Energy Charge: An Energy Charge will be assessed based on the number of
kilowatt-hours consumed in any given hour multiplied by the cost of purchased
energy from the Southwest Power Pool. The cost of purchased energy will be the
higher of the day-ahead or real-time locational marginal price for the Grand
Island load settlement location plus 0.0015 per kWh ($1.50 per MWh), unless
City and customer agree to a price-sensitive day-ahead energy bid in which
case, the energy charge for the price sensitive load will be based on the Day-
Ahead locational marginal energy price at the Grand Island settlement location
plus 0.0015 per kWh ($1.50 per MWh). In the event that energy is awarded via a
price-sensitive load bid, but not utilized by the customer during the allotted
usage window, the customer will be charged the difference between the Day-Ahead
and Real-Time locational marginal energy prices, plus 0.0015 per kWh ($1.50 per
MWh), for all unused energy.
In no instance shall any one (1) hour interval be assessed at less than $0.0015
per kWh ($1.50 per MWh), which will be the minimum assessed hourly rate
calculated.
Deposit: Two (2) times the highest estimated monthly bill. Deposits held until
Customer no longer takes service from the District.
Facility Charge: City may require a contribution in aid of construction based
on actual cost of improvements necessary to provide interconnection to City's
13.8 kV or 115 kV system.
Minimum Charge: Customer Charge plus Interruptible Demand Charge multiplied by
Contract Interruptible Demand plus Electric City Dividend.
Contract Interruptible Demand: To be eligible for the Interruptible Demand
rate, the customer must demonstrate the ability to interrupt 100% of its Total
Contract Demand with 30 minutes notice and execute a contract specifying the
Contract Interruptible Demand. The City may interrupt service under any of the
following conditions:
   A.   It is anticipated the City's demand in a given hour will be greater
than the forecasted seasonal peak unless customer's service is interrupted.
Winter and Summer Seasons peaks will be analyzed independently of each other.
   B.   The Southwest Power Pool declares an Energy Emergency Alert of any
level.
   C.   The City experiences a facility outage or local system emergency
affecting a facility that is directly necessary to serve the customer.
   D.   Up to an additional 60 hours per Contract Year, the City may interrupt
service at its discretion for economic or operational reasons.
   E.   At the request of the customer, City and customer will coordinate to
provide for a price- sensitive load bid to be submitted in the Day-Ahead
market. A price-sensitive bid is one where the customer provides an upper limit
on the hourly energy rate it is willing to pay. If the price threshold is
exceeded, the customer agrees to interrupt service.
Customer must execute a service agreement specifying the amount of
Interruptible Demand the customer will commit. The service agreement will
include the amount of Interruptible Demand, methodology for measuring
interruptible demand, testing protocols, notification provisions, and other
information necessary to administer the interruption provisions of this rate
schedule. Any non-interruptible load will be connected to a separate meter and
billed based on the otherwise-applicable rate schedule.
To qualify for Interruptible Demand rate, the customer must demonstrate its
ability to interrupt service through an annual test using protocols established
in the service agreement. The test will be performed at a randomly selected on-
peak time and will last up to four hours.
If customer fails to interrupt at any time requested by the City, the customer
will be obligated to pay the Failure to Interrupt Charge for the current month
and the number of prior billing months customer was served by City or eleven
months, whichever is lower. Further, customer will be ineligible for the
Interruptible Demand rate for a period of 5 years and will have their service
converted to the otherwise applicable rate schedule.
(Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-79   City Dividend for Utility Ownership
All electric services provided by the Grand Island Utilities Department will be
subject to a City Dividend for Utility Ownership. The City Dividend for Utility
Ownership will be set by resolution in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
and calculated as a percentage of the total bill. The City Dividend for Utility
Ownership will be identified as a separate line item on an electric bill and
will be calculated as follows:
   Electric City Dividend = Electric Bill Before Sales Tax * Electric City
Dividend Rate
   The City Dividend for Utility Ownership will be subject to applicable sales
tax.
(Ordinance No. 9978, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9978 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
15-80   Contribution in Aid of Construction
The Grand Island Utilities Department, pursuant to this section, will make all
improvements and extensions to its distribution system, which shall include
street lighting units and circuits. The purpose of this Section is to establish
general conditions under which the Grand Island Utilities Department will make
extensions or additions to electric facilities, or upgrades to existing
electric facilities, and the general guidelines to be followed in determining a
customer's Contribution in Aid of Construction (CIAOC).
The Grand Island Utilities Department will make permanent extensions of
electrical lines and facilities and require a customer's CIAOC based on the
customer's estimated new or increased electrical usage associated with the
extension. The Grand Island Utilities Department reserves the right to
determine the advisability and legality of making any extension. Extensions
made by the Grand Island Utilities Department shall remain the property of the
Grand Island Utilities Department.
The Total Extension Investment shall mean the total estimated project cost to
serve a proposed load. This Total Extension Investment shall include, but not
limited to, costs related to materials, labor, vehicles, subsistence, and
applicable overheads, but exclude customer-provided facilities and costs and
any costs incurred but not required solely for the customer's service
requirement.
The Grand Island Utilities Department's required Allowable Investment Limit
(AIL) and the CIAOC calculations within this Section are based on the
customer's projected revenue. To mitigate the Grand Island Utilities
Department's risk for new loads not meeting projected thresholds in a given
time period, the Grand Island Utilities Department reserves the right, in its
sole discretion, to require the customer to enter into an agreement to
guarantee the recovery of line extension costs prior to construction.
Contribution in Aid of Construction Calculation
   1.   The contribution in aid of construction calculations in this section
apply to:
      a.   All three-phase commercial customers, regardless of location, on or
after the effective date of this ordinance.
   2.   All Class 50 and Class 100 three-phase commercial customers will be
provided an AIL equal to 2.5 times the projected annual gross revenue for the
customer, excluding City dividend and sales taxes. In the case of an apartment
or other multi-family unit where individual units are not separated by a
firewall, the dwelling will be considered commercial and revenues will be
calculated based on the projected combined revenue from all services in the
complex. The customer will be required to pay to the City an amount equal to
the actual Total Extension Investment less 2.5 times the projected annual
revenues for the customer. The City will provide an estimate of the amount the
customer is required to pay and the customer will be required to pay that
amount in advance of construction commencement. The City will charge the
customer for any overage in costs and refund any overpayment within 60 days of
the completion of construction. The revenue estimate shall be based on a)
customer's usage at similar facilitates in other jurisdictions, b) similar
existing customers usage, or c) if no other comparison is available, the City
shall assume a load factor and usage based on the transformer size and
historical references.
(Ordinance No. 10,010, effective 03-12-2025)
CHAPTER 16
FIRE PROTECTION
Article 16-I   General 
Article 16-II   Fireworks 
Article 16-III   (Reserved)
Article 16-IV   Fire Protection Contracts 
Article 16-V   Ambulance Service
Article 16-VI   Self-Service Fuel Stations 
Article 16-VII   Home Day Care
Article 16-VIII   Recovery Of Cost
Article 16-I
General
16-1   International Fire Code (IFC) Adopted
16-2   Bureau Of Fire Prevention
16-2.1   Building Plans; Fees
16-3   IRC - Appendix M - Homes Day Care (IRC) Adopted
16-3.1   (Repealed)
16-3.2   IFC -- Amendment Of Chapter 2 Definitions
16-3.3   (Repealed)
16-3.4   IFC -- Reserved
16-3.5   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 113.4
16-3.6   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 105.1.2
16-3.7   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 105.2
16-3.8   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 108.2
16-3.9   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 111 Means Of Appeals
16-3.10   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 112.4 Violations Penalties
16-4   Transportation Of Dangerous Material
16-5   Definitions
16-6   (Repealed)
16-7   (Repealed)
16-8   False Alarms
16-9   Combustible Materials; Storing
16-10   Combustible Materials
16-11   Open Fires; When Allowed; Permit; Fire Locations; Hours Of Burning
16-1   International Fire Code (IFC) Adopted
The International Fire Code, 2021 Edition, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted, except for such portions as heretofore or hereafter
have been deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this
Code. The following sections of the Appendix shall also be adopted:
Appendix B – Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings Appendix C – Fire Hydrant
Locations and Distribution Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads Appendix E
– Hazard Categories
Appendix F – Hazard Rankings
Appendix H – Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMM) and Inventory Statement
(HMIS)
Appendix I – Fire Protection Systems-Noncompliant Conditions
Appendix K – Construction Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care Facilities
Appendix M – High-Rise-Retroactive Automatic Sprinkler Requirements Appendix N
– Indoor Trade Shows and Exhibitions
(Amended by Ordinance 8957, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9488, effective 06-17-2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-
2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9808, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-2   Bureau Of Fire Prevention
The Fire Prevention Division for the City of Grand Island is hereby established
and shall consist of the non-sworn inspectors of the City of Grand Island Fire
Department and shall include and be operated under the supervision of the Fire
Prevention Division Chief. The provisions of Chapter 16 of the Grand Island
City Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Division. All permits
required by this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be issued only upon
application to the Fire Prevention Division in such form and detail as it shall
prescribe. All permits issued by the Fire Prevention Division shall be issued
with the name of the applicant and the prevention stated thereon.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-2018)
16-2.1   Building Plans; Fees
In addition to the building permit fee in
Chapter 8, there shall be a fire department plan review fee in accordance with
the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for the review of said plans as required
by state statutes. Such fee shall be paid to the Fire Department.
16-3   IRC - Appendix M - Homes Day Care (IRC) Adopted
Appendix M of the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 03-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9488, effective 06-17-2014) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-
2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.1   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-3.2   IFC -- Amendment Of Chapter 2 Definitions
Definition of Residential Group R-3, subsection Care Facilities Within a
Dwelling, of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a
single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-3.3   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-3.4   IFC -- Reserved
Reserved
(Added by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 3-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9488, effective 06-17-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.5   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 113.4
Section 113.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
113.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 3-31-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9808, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.6   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 105.1.2
Section 105.1.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
105.1.2 Types of permits. There shall be three types of permits as follows:
   1.   Fire Safety Occupancy Use Permit. An Occupancy Use Permit is a renewal
permit thereby allowing occupants to continue use of a structure previously
permitted for occupancy by the building department by section 111.1 of the City
adopted International Building Code.
   2.   Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to
conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section
105.6 for either:
2.1.   A prescribed period.
2.2.   Until renewed or revoked.
   3.   Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to
install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
Section 105.7.
16-3.7   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 105.2
Section 105.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
105.2 Application. Application for a permit required by this code shall be made
to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire
code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as
prescribed by the fire code official. Although an Occupancy Use Permit is
required for all occupancies, an application for an Occupancy Use Permit is not
required to be submitted to the fire code official if no change has transpired.
Application and new permits are required for any change of ownership of
building or business, change of business, and any change of occupancy use.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.8   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 108.2
Section 108.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
108.2 Inspections. The fire code official is authorized to conduct such
inspections as are deemed necessary to determine the extent of compliance with
the provisions of this code and to approve reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be prepared and
submitted in writing for review and approval. Inspection reports shall be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The fire code official is authorized to engage such
expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual, detailed or complex
technical issues subject to the approval of the governing body.
If violations of this Chapter 16, Article I and this code are identified during
a routine Occupancy Use Inspection the Fire Prevention Chief may revoke the
Fire Safety Occupancy Permit until such time as corrections are made. Such
actions shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for the revocation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9808, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.9   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 111 Means Of Appeals
Section 111 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 111 Board of appeals established.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9808, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-3.10   IFC -- Amendment Of Section 112.4 Violations Penalties
Section 112.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
112.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law and fines in accordance with the city waiver
fine schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9808, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
16-4   Transportation Of Dangerous Material
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle transporting,
carrying or hauling any flammable or explosive liquid or material, except its
own fuel supply, over or upon any of the streets, highways, alleys, avenues, or
boulevards within the City of Grand Island except over the following:
Capital Avenue, provided, that such regulation shall not prevent the delivery
of any such flammable or explosive liquid or material to the place of business
of any person engaged in the manufacturing, processing, selling, or
distributing of such flammable or explosive liquid or material within the City,
nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any vehicle departing from
the City of Grand Island, such vehicle having been loaded with flammable or
explosive liquid material within the City.
The City Engineer shall cause to be erected all necessary signs and signals
routing such vehicles carrying flammable or explosive liquid or material
according to the provisions of this section.
16-5   Definitions
As used in §
16-4, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Flammable or explosive liquid or material shall mean gasoline, butane, propane,
dynamite, nitroglycerin, or any other liquid or material of like character
generally known to be inflammable or explosive.
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which flammable or explosive
liquids and materials are or may be transported, carried or hauled, including
by way of description and not of limitation, trucks, tractor trucks, trailers,
semi-trailers, tankers, and transports.
Person shall include all individuals, male and female, firms, associations,
partnerships, and corporations.
16-6   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-7   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-8   False Alarms
Any person who shall activate any fire alarm system knowing such alarm to be
false without the permission of the mayor or chief of the fire department shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-9   Combustible Materials; Storing
It shall be unlawful to keep, store, or maintain, in any building or on any
premises any waste, refuse, debris, rubbish, garbage, or other loose
combustible materials, except recognized fuels, in such manner as will enhance
the danger of fire on such premises, when such premises are located within the
City.
In connection with automobile service stations, fuels offered for sale shall be
stored in either: (1) underground tanks, or (2) above-ground tanks properly
vaulted in an enclosure which is substantially liquid- and vapor-tight without
backfill. The sides, top, and bottom of the enclosure shall be of reinforced
concrete at least six (6) inches (15 cm) thick, with openings for inspection
through the top only. Tank connections shall be so piped or closed that neither
vapors nor liquid can escape into the enclosed space. Means shall be provided
to use portable equipment to discharge to the outside any liquid or vapors
which might accumulate should leakage occur.
16-10   Combustible Materials
Any materials described in §
16-9 which accumulate within the City which are not to be disposed of in an
acceptable incinerator as defined in this chapter or in any other manner
permitted by this Code shall otherwise be disposed of by regular haulage by
carriers to an authorized central disposal area as provided by this Code or
other ordinances of the City relating to such disposal.
16-11   Open Fires; When Allowed; Permit; Fire Locations; Hours Of Burning
   A.   For purposes of this section, Open Fire shall mean burning under such
conditions that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the
ambient air.
   B.   No person shall cause or permit any open fire within the limits of the
City.
   C.   EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   Fires set solely for the outdoor cooking of food for human
consumption where no hazard is created;
      2.   Fires set with the written permission of the Fire Chief of the City
of Grand Island or his or her designated representative and upon receipt of any
permit required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality:
         a.   for the purpose of training public or industrial fire fighting
personnel.
         b.   for essential agricultural operation in the growing of crops
where no nuisance or hazard is created.
         c.   for the purpose of destroying dangerous materials or diseased
trees.
         d.   for the purpose of clearing land for roads or other construction
activity.
         e.   for ceremonial, educational, or recreational purposes by a
legally established and recognized non-profit organization or governmental
entity.
         f.   for the purpose of burning leaves and brush where no hazard is
created.
      3.   Fires set in operation of smokeless flare stacks for the combustion
of waste gases, provided they meet the requirements of the Nebraska Department
of Environmental Quality.
      4.   For permitted open burning:
         a.   A fourteen (14) day period beginning the third Sunday in April,
and
         b.   A fourteen (14) day period beginning the second Sunday in October
or as the Fire Chief may designate due to inclement weather during the
foregoing specified periods.
      5.   For the private, residential use of outdoor fireplaces as defined
below and with the following restrictions:
         a.   portable fire pits which are designed and commercially sold to
confine outdoor wood fires;
         b.   chimeneas, constructed of clay or some other fire safe material
which are designed and commercially sold to confine outdoor wood fires;
         c.   fire rings which are designed to enclose an outdoor fire with a
metal tube, poured concrete, stones, or some other fire safe material partially
buried in the ground;
         d.   all outdoor fireplaces must be at a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
distance from any structure, including fences and sheds and placed on a stable,
non-combustible surface such as a concrete pad;
         e.   the fuel area for all outdoor fireplaces shall be no more than
three (1) feet in diameter and completely enclosed by a non-combustible
screening material;
         f.   the opening in the fuel area must be covered with a screening
material constructed of fire safe wire mesh to prevent the passage of sparks
and embers:
         g.   fuel for outdoor fireplaces shall be limited to untreated and/or
seasoned wood.
         h.   fuel that consists of yard waste or wood that is milled,
processed, treated, and/or painted is prohibited;
         i.   while in operation, all outdoor fireplaces shall be continuously
monitored by at least one (1) person eighteen (18) years of age or older and an
operable garden hose connected to a water supply shall be available for
extinguishing flames; and
         j.   outdoor fireplaces shall not be operated when local average wind
speed is fifteen miles per hour (15 mph) or greater.
   D.   Open fires ((C)(4) above) shall be continuously monitored by at least
one (1) person eighteen (18) years of age or older until the fire is
extinguished. The person so attending shall have an operable garden hose
connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily
available for use, and no such fire shall be abandoned until it has been
completely extinguished.
   E.   Permits to burn leaves ((C)(4) above) and brush shall only be issued to
the owner or occupant of private residential property fire locations.
Applications for permits may be made only during each open burning period and
the week prior thereto. A separate permit shall be required for each open
burning period for the activities listed in paragraph (C)(2)(f) above and shall
be maintained in the possession of a person tending the fire at all times.
   F.   A separate permit shall be required for any of the activities listed in
paragraphs (C)(2)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e).
   G.   Fire locations for leaf and brush piles greater than three (3) feet in
diameter or two (2) feet in height must be at least fifty (50) feet away from
any structure or other combustible material. Fire locations for leaf and brush
piles less than three (3) feet in diameter and two (2) feet in height must be
at least twenty-five (25) feet from any structure or other combustible material
unless the fire is contained within an approved burning appliance or barrel
with one-half inch (1/2”) wire mesh screen covering the entire opening and such
container or barrel is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any
structure or other combustible material.
   H.   Leaf and brush fires may only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. during the open burning periods as defined in paragraph (C)(4) above.
   I.   The Fire Chief of the Grand Island Fire Department may prohibit any and
all open burning when he or she determines atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous.
   J.   A permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
for each open burning period for the activities listed in paragraph (C)(2)(f)
above must be paid by any person or organization seeking a permit prior to its
issuance.
   K.   A permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
for each daily occurrence for any of the activities listed in paragraphs (C)(2)
(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) above must be paid by any person or organization
seeking a permit prior to its issuance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9376, effective 03-26-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9890, effective 08-10-2022)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9959 on 12/20/2023
Article 16-II
Fireworks
16-12   Generally
16-13   Permit To Sell Fireworks
16-14   (Repealed)
16-15   Dates And Times Of Lawful Sale
16-16   Temporary Fireworks Stands
16-17   Age Limitation For Selling Fireworks
16-18   Discharging Fireworks Where Sold
16-19   Explosives; Throwing Prohibited
16-20   Definitions
16-21   (Repealed)
16-22   Discharge Of Fireworks
16-12   Generally
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, bring
into this City, or discharge any pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks
other than consumer fireworks; provided, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to:
   A.   Any fireworks for purposes of public exhibitions or displays purchased
from a licensed distributor or the holder of a display license to be issued by
the State Fire Marshal, which license shall be good only for the calendar year
in which issued and which shall not authorize the holder to sell or hold for
sale any consumer fireworks as defined in §
16-20 or any firecrackers of any description, whether soft shell or hard shell;
   B.   Any public exhibition or display under the auspices of the City of
Grand Island;
   C.   Any fireworks brought into this state for storage by a licensed
distributor and held for sale outside of this State;
   D.   Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to written
authorization from the State Fire Marshal to any holder of a distributor's
license; or
   E.   Toy cap pistols or toy caps each of which does not contain more than
twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive material.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
16-13   Permit To Sell Fireworks
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale consumer
fireworks in the City without first making application to the Fire
Administration Office (City Hall) for a permit and receiving a permit to do so
from the Life Safety Division. Permits shall require that applicants disclose
any location within the geographic boundaries of the City where they are
storing fireworks for sale. Permits shall require applicants to offer proof of
a valid liability insurance policy of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) naming the City as an additional insured party. This policy
must be in full force and effect for the entire period of lawful fireworks
sales as set forth in §
16-15. Such permits shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule and shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued, and shall at
all times be displayed at the place of business of the holder thereof. Such
permits shall not be transferable.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ord. No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014) (Amended
by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
16-14   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 8895)
16-15   Dates And Times Of Lawful Sale
Consumer fireworks may be sold or offered for sale in the City of Grand Island
on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year. Consumer fireworks may
only be sold during the following times:
June 28 through July 2 – 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
July 3 – 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
July 4 – 8:00 a.m. to midnight
(Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ord. No. 9488,
effective 06-17-2014) (Amended by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
16-16   Temporary Fireworks Stands
16-16.1   Signage Required
Any person having obtained a permit to sell consumer fireworks may sell or
offer for sale such fireworks only from a temporary stand or enclosure erected
or placed on real estate for that purpose. No fireworks shall be sold from
permanent buildings or structures in the City. If fireworks are to be sold from
a temporary stand or enclosure, such stand or enclosure shall be of wood or
steel frame construction covered with metal or wood. Any temporary enclosure or
stand shall be permitted only in those areas of the City zoned for business or
manufacturing, and only after a permit is obtained from the Life Safety
Division for the erection or placement of such temporary enclosures or stands.
Such temporary enclosures or stands shall be permitted to remain on real estate
where consumer fireworks are sold for only the period beginning on June 22
through and including July 9 of each year. Any such temporary stand or
enclosure shall not be located closer than twenty-five feet from any building,
and at least one hundred feet from any station where gasoline and oil for motor
vehicles is sold. Such temporary stand or enclosure shall not exceed five
hundred square feet in size. Such temporary enclosures shall only be permitted
as an accessory to a permitted principal use on improved property, no vacant
lots shall be utilized for sale of fireworks. Temporary stands with customer
openings adjacent to a public street or sidewalk shall maintain a ten (10) foot
setback to protect customers from traffic on the adjacent street or sidewalk.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ord. No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014) (Amended
by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
16-16.1   Signage Required
Smoking shall not be permitted inside or within 50 feet of the temporary
fireworks stand or sales area. At least one sign that reads as follows, in
letters at least 2 inches in height on a contrasting background, shall be
conspicuously posted on the exterior of each side of the fireworks stand:
NO SMOKING WITHIN FIFTY FEET OR DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS WITHIN THREE HUNDRED
FEET OF THE PREMISES
In addition to the "no smoking" sign, at least one sign, 2 foot by 3 foot in
size, on a contrasting background, shall be posted on the exterior of the
fireworks stand that reads as follows:
THE GRAND ISLAND CITY CODE ALLOWS FIREWORKS TO BE DISCHARGED ONLY ON THE
FOLLOWING DATES AND TIMES:
June 28 through July 2 – 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
July 3 – 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
July 4 – 8:00 a.m. to midnight
(Added by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ord. No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
16-17   Age Limitation For Selling Fireworks
Retail sales establishments shall, at all times, be supervised by a person of
at least sixteen (16) years of age. Failure to comply with this regulation may
result in immediate revocation of the retail license.
16-18   Discharging Fireworks Where Sold
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks in or upon the
premises where fireworks are sold or within three hundred (300) feet of the
premises.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012)
16-19   Explosives; Throwing Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any object
which explodes upon contact with another object: (1) from, at, or into a motor
vehicle; (2) onto any street, highway, or sidewalk; (3) at or near any person;
(4) into any building; or (5) into or at any group of persons.
16-20   Definitions
Consumer fireworks shall mean fireworks approved under Neb. Rev. Stat. §§28-
1241 and 28-1247. See also Rules and Regulations concerning fireworks in the
State of Nebraska Administrative Code, Title 157.
Consumer fireworks not permitted include wire sparklers and any other fireworks
that have been tested by the Nebraska State Fire Marshal as a response to
complaints and deemed to be unsafe.
Person as used in this Article shall include any person, firm, partnership,
association of persons, or corporation.
Sale shall include barter, exchange, or gift or offer therefor, and each such
transaction made by any person whether as principal, proprietor, agent,
servant, or employee.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
16-21   (Repealed)
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 8895)
16-22   Discharge Of Fireworks
Consumer fireworks may be discharged, exploded, or used in the City of Grand
Island on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year; provided that on
such days the discharge and explosion of fireworks shall be permitted during
the following times:
June 28 through July 2   8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
July 3   8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
July 4   8:00 a.m. to midnight
The discharge of fireworks within the City of Grand Island on any dates or
times other than as set out in this section shall require a permit from the
Life Safety Division. Public exhibition applications shall be accompanied by
documentation of a display license issued by the State Fire Marshal. Private
party display applications will not require a State Fire Marshal license, but
displays will be limited to consumer fireworks as described in §
16-20 of this Article. Applicant shall also show that there will not be any
substantial danger to people or property. Factors that will be considered when
reviewing an application will include, but not be limited to, where the
fireworks will be discharged, the procedures used to discharge the fireworks
and the qualifications of the individuals discharging the fireworks.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9386,
effective 6-12-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
(Amended by Ord. No. 9829, effective 6-23-2021)
Article 16-III
(Reserved)
Article 16-IV
Fire Protection Contracts
16-24   Fire Protection Contracts
16-25   Fire Protection Contract; Compensation
16-26   Review Of Contract Rates
16-24   Fire Protection Contracts
Owners of buildings located outside the corporate limits of the City may enter
into contracts which provide for fire protection services from the City Fire
Department. Each such contract shall be evaluated by the city council on its
merits and may be approved if the council deems it desirable. The mayor is
authorized to cause such fire protection contracts to be drafted and to
recommend their execution or denial.
16-25   Fire Protection Contract; Compensation
In the preparation of fire protection contracts for buildings outside the
corporate limits of the City, provisions shall be made for compensation to the
City based on a mutually agreeable compensation amount, to be negotiated, based
on the nature of hazards associated with the building occupancy as determined
by the International Fire Code.
Amended by Ordinance No. 9890, effective 08-10-2022
16-26   Review Of Contract Rates
The Fire Department shall annually review the occupancy of buildings covered by
fire protection contracts and shall report to the mayor any changes in
occupancy which would affect the rate of changes made under such contracts. All
contracts entered into for fire protection after the effective date of this
ordinance shall include a rate structure as set forth in §
16-25 of this Code.
Article 16-V
Ambulance Service
16-27   Ambulance Service; Basic Rates
16-28   Paramedic Services; Rates
16-29   Ambulance Interlocal Agreements
16-27   Ambulance Service; Basic Rates
The rates for basic ambulance service provided by the City of Grand Island,
Nebraska, shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
16-28   Paramedic Services; Rates
The rates for paramedic services provided by the City of Grand Island,
Nebraska, shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
16-29   Ambulance Interlocal Agreements
The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute
agreements with Hall County, Hamilton County, Howard County, and Chapman Rural
Fire District of Chapman, Nebraska, and any other communities wishing emergency
ambulance and paramedic services, based on the rates set herein.
Article 16-VI
Self-Service Fuel Stations
16-30   Unattended Self-Service Fuel Stations
16-30   Unattended Self-Service Fuel Stations
Card operated dispensing systems activated by a card, code, or other means of
access to a customer's account, or any combination thereof, that may be used by
the customer for the purpose of initiating electronic fund transfers and cash
or coin operated dispensing systems shall be permitted at self-service stations
whether or not an attendant is on duty at the time such dispensing systems are
in operation and open to the public; provided,
   A.   Listed dispensing devices including automatic-closing-type hose nozzle
valves with or without a latch-open device shall be used for dispensing Class
I, II, and III-A liquids. The dispensing devices shall include listed equipment
with a feature that causes or requires the closing of the hose nozzle before
the product flow can be resumed or before the hose nozzle valve can be replaced
in its normal position in the dispenser.
   B.   Clearly labeled emergency controls shall be installed at a location
more than twenty feet but less than one hundred feet from dispensers.
Additional emergency controls shall be installed on each group of dispensers
for the outdoor equipment used to control the dispensers. Emergency controls
shall shut off power to all dispensing devices at the station and shall require
manual resetting.
   C.   Operating instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the dispensing
area and shall include location of the emergency controls and a requirement
that the customer must stay outside of his/her vehicle, in view of the fueling
nozzle during dispensing.
   D.   Emergency instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the dispensing
area which incorporate the following or equivalent wording:
      Emergency Instructions In Case of Fire or Spill.
      1.   Use emergency stop button.
      2.   Report accident and location by calling 911 on the telephone.
   E.   A clearly identified telephone or alarm device directly connected to
the 911 Center to notify the Fire Department shall be provided in a conspicuous
location on the site subject to approval by the Fire Department.
Article 16-VII
Home Day Care
16-31   Definition And Scope
16-32   Life Safety Inspection And Occupancy Permit
16-31   Definition And Scope
For purposes of this action, Home Day Care shall be defined by NFPA 101 (life
Safety Code).
16-32   Life Safety Inspection And Occupancy Permit
For a new Home Day Care service, an application for occupancy shall be
requested by owner of record. Only after a fire code official has conducted
associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of the life and
fire safety codes have been met shall new home day care services be permitted
and or conducted.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014)
Article 16-VIII
Recovery Of Cost
16-33   Recovery Of Costs
16-34   Rates
16-35   Collection
16-36   Non-Payment
16-37   No Refusal
16-38   Severability
16-39   Effective Date
16-33   Recovery Of Costs
The City of Grand Island Fire Department is hereby authorized to recover an
hourly fee for responding to vehicular accidents.
16-34   Rates
A rate schedule for responding to vehicular accidents shall be set annually by
the City’s Fee Schedule Ordinance and may be updated from time to time upon
recommendation of the Grand Island Fire Chief. The hourly rate shall be billed
in 15-minute increments.
16-35   Collection
The fee set by the City’s Fee Schedule Ordinance may be recovered from any
identified insurance carrier or person or persons, directly by the City or by
an attorney, or through a third-party billing service acting as a contracted
authorized agent for the collection of such costs. In addition to the
reasonable costs as set forth in the above-mentioned rate schedule, the City,
attorney, or the third-party billing service shall hereby be authorized to
collect, in addition to the reasonable costs, reasonable interest, legal, and
any other collection fees associated with collecting the said costs and fees as
permitted by statute. Insured motorists will not be billed for fees in excess
of the amount paid by the insured motorist’s insurance carrier.
16-36   Non-Payment
In the event that any insurance carrier or person or persons should fail to pay
any bill or invoice within 30 days of the mailing or delivery of such notice of
charges, the City, attorney or the third-party billing agency who mailed or
delivered the bill or invoice may enforce the provisions of this chapter by
turning over to a third-party collection agency or, if deemed appropriate, may
be enforced by filing a civil action at law in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due to the City, together with
statutory interest, court costs, collection fees and associated reasonable
attorneys' fees if permitted by law.
The City shall not be obligated to pursue collection efforts against any
insurance company or person in the event that the City reasonably determines
that collection efforts will not be successful or that the costs of collections
will exceed the amount due hereunder.
16-37   No Refusal
Emergency services not to be refused for lack of insurance or ability to pay.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize any City department or City staff
member or department personnel to refuse or delay any rescue service to any
person, firm, organization or corporation, due to the lack of insurance
coverage or ability to pay for said rescue services.
16-38   Severability
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is
declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the validity of the
remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. It is the intention of the
Council of the City of Grand Island that this chapter would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid part not been included.
16-39   Effective Date
Sections
16-33 through
16-39 shall be effective from and after January 1, 2018.
CHAPTER 17
GARBAGE, REFUSE, WASTE, AND WEEDS
Article 17-I   Garbage, Refuse And Waste
Article 17-II   Collection, Transportation And Disposal
Article 17-III   Weeds
Article 17-IV   Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
Article 17-V   Graffiti
Article 17-I
Garbage, Refuse And Waste
Division 17-I-1   Duty Of Disposal 
Division 17-I-2   Disposal Receptacles
Division 17-I-1
Duty Of Disposal
17-1   Definitions
17-2   Duty Of Enforcement
17-3   Removal; Duty Of Owner
17-4   Litter And Offensive Substances Prohibited; Removal
17-5   Penalty For Violation
17-6   Notice To Remove; Noncompliance With Notice
17-7   Procedure For Removal For Noncompliance
17-8   Assessment; Levy; Collection
17-9   Disposal Of Large Dead Animals
17-10   Disposal Of Construction And Demolition Waste
17-1   Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
City Solid Waste Disposal System. The City solid waste disposal system shall
mean and include the City-operated sanitary landfill, the City-operated
transfer station, and the City-operated compost site.
Compost. Compost shall mean the end product of an aerobic degradation process
of yard and garden waste. Approved backyard composting site shall mean one
which uses only composting materials as defined herein.
Construction and demolition waste. This shall mean waste which results from
land clearing, the demolition of buildings, roads or other structures,
including but not limited to, beneficial fill materials, wood (including
painted and treated wood), land clearing debris other than yard waste, wall
coverings (including wall paper, paneling and tile), drywall, plaster, non-
asbestos insulation, roofing shingles and other roof coverings, plumbing
fixtures, glass, plastic, carpeting, electrical wiring, pipe and metals. Such
waste shall also include the above listed types of waste that result from
construction projects. Construction and demolition waste shall not include
friable asbestos waste, special waste, liquid waste, hazardous waste and waste
that contains polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), putrescible waste, household
waste, industrial solid waste, corrugated cardboard, appliances, tires, drums
and fuel tanks.
Detachable container. A detachable container is a container of the size
approved by the Central District Health Department that can be lifted and
dumped by a collection truck mechanism.
Garbage. This word shall be held to include every accumulation of animal, fruit
or vegetable food waste generated by or resulting from the decay,
deterioration, storage, preparation or handling of any animal and vegetable
matter in any place or at any point where food is prepared for human
consumption, including all kitchen and dining room refuse produced by
households, hotels, restaurants, lunch rooms, clubs, hospitals, schools,
stores, warehouses, cold storage plants, creameries, bakeries, or any other
source whatsoever existing in the City.
Hazardous Waste. This word shall mean a solid waste, or combination of solid
wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may (a) cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible, illness or (b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human or animal health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Junk. Junk shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, batteries, rubber,
dismantled or wrecked automobiles, trucks, tractors, and farm machinery or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous
material, which are not held for remelting purposes by an establishment having
facilities for remelting material.
Litter. Litter shall include, but not be limited to: (i) Trash, rubbish,
refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes; (ii) wood, plaster, cement, brick, or
stone building rubble; (iii) grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation; (iv)
offal and dead animals; and (v) any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles,
or parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character,
utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the
ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions,
or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk.
Minimum Service Collection. A minimum service collection in a residential
district shall mean not more than one full 32 gallon garbage can or any number
of full baskets, boxes, sacks, or bundles equal in volume to but not exceeding
one 32-gallon garbage can. The weight of such collection shall not exceed 50
pounds. Such minimum service collection shall be on a once-a-week basis.
Refuse. This word shall be held to include the waste material from normal
households or living conditions and business operations other than garbage, but
the term shall not include waste materials from building construction or
repair, factory wastes, or refuse from industrial plants of any character. In
general, the kinds of materials classified as refuse are paper, rags, bottles,
tin cans, bottle caps, cardboard, wornout clothing or furniture, household
appliances, excelsior, garden or tree trimmings, and similar materials.
Regular Collection. A collection in a residential district shall mean not more
than three full thirty-two gallon garbage cans, or two full thirty-two gallon
cans and any number of full baskets, boxes, sacks, or bundles equal in volume
to not exceeding one thirty-two gallon garbage can. A regular collection shall
be on a twice-a-week basis.
Salvage Yard. Any building, lot, yard or premise used for the collection,
processing, salvage, storage, bailing, or shipping of junked vehicles, vehicle
parts, paper, cardboard, glass, plastic, metals, rags, scrap materials, junk,
or any material similar to those listed herein.
Special Waste. A solid waste, except waste which is regulated as a hazardous
waste, which possesses physical, chemical, or biological characteristics that
make it different from general household, or construction and demolition waste,
and which requires special handling, treatment, or disposal methodologies in
order to protect public health, safety, and the environment.
Waste material. This word shall be held to include all items, objects, or
material not included within the definition of garbage, litter, yard waste, or
refuse as well as petroleum oils, greases, solvents, and fuels, insecticides,
herbicides, chemical waste, hazardous materials, or any materials similar to
those listed herein.
Yard Waste. Yard waste shall mean grass and leaves and shall not include other
yard debris such as tree limbs and brush.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-2   Duty Of Enforcement
The Central District Health Department or the Grand Island Police Department
are hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to the collecting, transporting, and disposing, by approved methods,
of all garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, and waste materials within the
City. Approved methods of disposal for garbage, litter, refuse and waste
materials are as follows:
   A.   By delivery to a licensed garbage or refuse collector;
   B.   By hauling to the City-operated sanitary or landfill transfer station
and dispensing there as directed by the person in charge; provided, that the
transportation conforms to the requirements of §
17-35;
   C.   By disposal of garbage in a home garbage disposal unit.
Approved methods of disposal for yard waste are as follows:
   A.   By utilizing such yard waste in an approved backyard composting site;
   B.   By delivery to a licensed garbage collector in a separate yard waste
collection service;
   C.   By hauling to the City-operated composting site, which is adjacent to
the City's transfer station, and dispensing there as directed by the person in
charge.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8960, effective 3-9-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-3   Removal; Duty Of Owner
It shall be the duty of every owner, and person in possession, charge, or in
control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital,
school, hotel, club, restaurant, boarding house, or eating place, or in
possession, in charge, or in control of any shop, place of business, or
manufacturing establishment, where garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, or
other waste material is created, or accumulated, to remove or cause to be
removed from the premises where accumulated such garbage, litter, refuse, yard
waste or waste material.
It shall be unlawful to place garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, or waste
material in any alley, easement, or vacant property.
17-4   Litter And Offensive Substances Prohibited; Removal
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any lot or
parcel of ground within the city or within two (2) miles of the corporate
limits thereof to keep said premises owned, leased, or occupied by such person
free from garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, brush, trash, junk, old building
material, offal, manure, and any other offensive or unwholesome matter, and it
shall be unlawful for such owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of such lot or
parcel of ground to permit, keep, or maintain thereon any such condition liable
to become putrid or injurious to the public health, or any such condition
liable to produce disease, or which is conducive to the breeding and existence
of rats, mice, flies, mosquitoes, bacteria, or any other rodent or insects. The
maintenance or permitting of any of the foregoing conditions on any such lot or
parcel of ground is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable as hereinafter provided in this code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003)
17-5   Penalty For Violation
Any person violating §
17-4 shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a code violation. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as provided in this Code.
(Amended by Ordinance. No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004)
17-6   Notice To Remove; Noncompliance With Notice
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the Health Director, his or her
designee or employees of the City of Grand Island, that there exists upon such
lot or parcel of ground such nuisance, the Health Director, his or her designee
or employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause a notice to abate and
remove said nuisance within five (5) days to be served upon the owner or the
owner's authorized agent, and upon the tenant or occupant of said premises.
Said notice shall be served either in person or by mailing such notice by
first-class mail, postage prepaid and posting notice of the violation on the
property. Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant
of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the City to appeal the
decision to abate or remove a nuisance by filing a written appeal with the
office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen
days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by the Health
Director or his/her designee or the Police Chief or his/her designee. The
hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days
after the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the City may have
such work done. Within five days after receipt of such notice, if the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the City
or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the City
may have such work done. The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid
by the owner. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the City may
either (a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or
piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for
improvements are levied and assessed or (b) recover in a civil action the costs
and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining
streets or alleys. If such owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant shall have failed
or refused to abate and remove such nuisance at the expiration of the date
fixed upon such notice, the Director of Health, his or her designee or
employees of the City of Grand Island may cause such nuisance to be removed
from such parcel or lot, and from any roads, streets, or alleys abutting
thereon as set forth in §
17-7 of this Chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8903, effective 6-9-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9494, effective 09-16-2014)
17-7   Procedure For Removal For Noncompliance
If the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand
Island determines that there exists upon any lot or parcel of ground the
conditions described above in such a manner as to constitute an immediate
nuisance and hazard to the public health and safety, the director, his or her
designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall request the Mayor or
his/her designee to declare that such an immediate public nuisance exists, and
after any such declaration, the Health Director, his or her designee or
employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause to be issued a written notice
to abate and remove such public nuisance from such lot or parcel of land within
twenty-four (24) hours. Said notice shall be served by personal service upon
the owner or the owner's authorized agent, and to any tenant, lessee, or
occupant of the premises. If such owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant shall have
failed or refused to abate and remove such nuisance at the expiration of the
twenty-four (24) hours from delivery of the notice, the Health Director, his or
her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause such nuisance
to be removed from such parcel or lot and from any roads, streets, or alleys
abutting thereon.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8903, effective 6-9-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-8   Assessment; Levy; Collection
If the costs and expenses of removing litter is not paid within the time
provided, the city council shall, and it is hereby empowered to, levy and
assess the costs and expenses of such work upon the property so benefitted. The
same shall be levied on all lots, tracts or parcels of land to the extent of
the special benefits to such real estate, by reason of such improvement, such
benefits to be determined by the city council sitting as a board of
equalization after publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
City and personal notice at least ten days prior thereto. The assessments so
levied shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of levy
and shall be due and payable to the city treasurer thirty days after such levy
and shall become delinquent fifty days after such levy and shall bear interest
at the rate of seven percent per annum from the date they become delinquent;
and, at the time of the next certification for general revenue purposes to the
county clerk, if not previously paid, the special taxes shall be certified to
the county clerk and by him be placed upon the tax list and be collected as
other real estate taxes are collected, and be paid over to the city treasurer.
17-9   Disposal Of Large Dead Animals
All dead animals such as horses, cows, mules and goats, shall be the property
of the owner thereof and shall be promptly hauled away and disposed of by such
owner at no cost to the City.
17-10   Disposal Of Construction And Demolition Waste
All accumulation of waste occasioned by the construction, alteration,
remodeling, rebuilding, repairing, and/or demolition of buildings or structures
shall be removed and disposed of by the owner or contractor at no expense to
the City and such waste shall not be considered as garbage or refuse within the
meaning of this article.
Division 17-I-2
Disposal Receptacles
17-14   Garbage Receptacles; Residential
17-15   Garbage Receptacles; Non-Residential
17-16   Duty To Keep Clean
17-17   Garbage Receptacles; Storage
17-18   Receptacles; Repair Or Replacement
17-19   Tree Limbs And Branches
17-14   Garbage Receptacles; Residential
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any residential premises
where meals are served or where garbage or refuse is created or accumulated to
provide and keep on the premises suitable and sufficient watertight, rodent-
proof and insect-proof metal or plastic receptacles, equipped with a tight-
fitting lid and handles or a bail for easy handling. Such receptacles shall not
be larger than thirty-two gallons; provided, in multi-family residential areas,
detachable containers may be used upon approval of the Central District Health
Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-15   Garbage Receptacles; Non-Residential
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any non-residential premises
where meals are served or where garbage or refuse is created or accumulated to
provide on such premises suitable and sufficient watertight, rodent-proof and
insect-proof metal or plastic receptacles, equipped with a tight-fitting lid
and handles or a bail for easy handling, provided, other receptacles may be
used in accordance with the following:
   A.   Fiber or pressed board receptacles may be used as garbage containers
for restaurants, cafes and other similar businesses if such receptacles are
protected from the elements and covered so that the contents will not blow
away;
   B.   Detachable containers may be used upon approval of the Central District
Health Department.
Except as provided above, garbage receptacles in non-residential areas shall
not exceed twenty gallons. Fifty-five gallon barrels or drums shall not be
permitted as garbage receptacles.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-16   Duty To Keep Clean
It shall be the duty of every person to keep his or her garbage receptacles or
waste cans reasonably clean and free from offensive odors.
17-17   Garbage Receptacles; Storage
All receptacles and cans used for the collection of garbage and refuse shall be
kept on the rear of the lot or at a convenient place upon the private premises
to facilitate the collection thereof; provided, that where residential premises
do not abut alleys, all baskets, boxes, plastic sacks, bundles, or other
containers of leaves or grass, shall be placed by the owner or occupant of any
such residential premises at the curb adjacent to the premises prior to the
time of collection to facilitate the collection thereof. In no event shall
receptacles, cans, or storage racks be located or permitted in City alleys,
easements, or other City right-of-way.
17-18   Receptacles; Repair Or Replacement
If garbage cans or receptacles are in a state of disrepair, or do not meet the
requirements of this article, it shall be the duty of the Central District
Health Department to leave notice with the owner thereof directing such repair
or replacement as may be necessary.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-19   Tree Limbs And Branches
All tree limbs and branches to be picked up as garbage or refuse shall be cut
so that none shall be more than five feet in length and the same shall be tied
in bundles not to exceed fifty pounds in weight.
Article 17-II
Collection, Transportation And Disposal
Division 17-II-1   Licensed Collectors 
Division 17-II-2   City Landfill
Division 17-II-1
Licensed Collectors
17-23   License Required; Fee
17-24   Residency Requirements
17-25   Application For License; Renewal
17-26   Vehicle Specifications
17-27   Office And Telephone Required
17-28   Complaints
17-29   Insurance
17-30   Performance Bond
17-31   License Revocation
17-32   Use Of Licensee Name By Another
17-33   Collection Time
17-34   Levels Of Service Offered
17-35   Disposal By Unlicensed Persons
17-23   License Required; Fee
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect
and transport garbage or refuse for hire without first obtaining a license
therefor from the City.
   B.   The following two types of licenses are authorized:
      1.   Garbage Hauler License entitles the licensee to collect and
transport both garbage and refuse.
      2.   Refuse Hauler License entitles the licensee to collect and transport
only refuse.
   C.   The license year shall run from October 1 of the calendar year to
September 30 of the following calendar year.
   D.   The fee for a garbage hauler license shall be in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, no part of which shall be refundable.
   E.   The fee for a refuse hauler license shall be in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, no part of which shall be refundable.
   F.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawn care or tree
trimmer businesses.
   G.   No license issued hereunder shall be transferable.
17-24   Residency Requirements
All garbage hauler licensees must be and remain residents of Hall County,
Nebraska, at all times during the license year. This requirement must be met in
one or more of the following ways:
   A.   By the individual licensee; or
   B.   If the licensee is a partnership, by at least one partner; or
   C.   If the licensee is a corporation, by the corporation's registered agent
or one or more corporate officers; or
   D.   If a licensee cannot satisfy the residency requirements set forth in
subsections (A) through (C) above, the licensee must appoint a person as an
agent who is authorized to receive service of process for the licensee and who
meets the residency requirements of this section. Said authorization shall be
in writing, acknowledged before a notary, and shall contain a provision that
said authorization may not be revoked without the prior written consent of the
City.
17-25   Application For License; Renewal
   A.   Any individual, partnership, or corporation applying for a garbage
hauler's license or a refuse hauler's license shall file the following with the
city clerk:
      1.   A completed application form;
      2.   A list of all vehicles and auxiliary equipment therefor to be used
by the applicant in collecting and transporting garbage or refuse. All motor
vehicles shall be identified in the manner required by §
17-26;
      3.   A certificate of insurance as required by §
17-29;
      4.   A performance bond as required by §
17-30 (garbage hauler licensees only);
      5.   The fee for the license for which application is made as established
by §
17-23;
      6.   A copy of the document appointing an agent pursuant to subsection
17-24(D), if the residency requirement of said section is being met under that
subsection;
      7.   A certificate from the Central District Health Department showing
that the licensee's equipment and method of operation are in compliance with
the department's guidelines therefor approved by the city council under §
17-26(B).
   B.   The city clerk shall issue the appropriate license to the applicant
after city council approval.
   C.   The procedure for license renewal shall be the same as for a new
license, with the additional requirement that the licensee must file his, her,
or its application for renewal at least ten days but not more than thirty days
prior to the expiration date of the license.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-26   Vehicle Specifications
   A.   Any vehicle used by a refuse hauler licensee to collect and transport
refuse shall be equipped with a cover of such a material sufficient to prevent
any refuse and waste materials from being blown away or jarred off such
vehicle.
   B.   Any vehicle used by a garbage hauler licensee to collect and transport
garbage, shall have a body designed specifically for the transportation of
garbage which meets the Central District Health Department guidelines therefor.
The Central District Health Department shall submit said guidelines to the city
council for approval prior to implementation.
   C.   All garbage and refuse vehicles used by licensees shall display a
commercially prepared sign showing the name of the licensee in letters not
smaller than four inches high.
   D.   All applicants and licensees shall provide the city clerk with a list
of all vehicles to be used in collecting and transporting garbage and/or
refuse. For each vehicle, the list shall state: (1) the vehicle's make and
model; (2) the VIN number; (3) the year produced; (4) the license plate number;
and (5) the gross vehicle weight (GVW). Said list shall be updated whenever any
vehicle is added or deleted from usage.
   E.   All vehicles and equipment used by a licensee shall be maintained in as
clean and sanitary a condition as possible while in use.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-27   Office And Telephone Required
All garbage hauler licensees shall maintain one or more offices within the
zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island at all times during the license
year, which are available for contact by the public from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
from Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon on Saturday. A
licensee may use an automatic telephone answering machine or similar device for
this requirement.
17-28   Complaints
All garbage hauler licensees shall:
   A.   Maintain a local telephone number for the receipt and processing of
complaints, which will enable customers to make contact with the licensee
during the business hours established by §
17-27.
   B.   Make an investigation as to the validity of all complaints received,
and take corrective action on all valid complaints within twenty-four (24)
hours of receiving said complaint.
   C.   Maintain a record of complaints received, which sets forth the
following information:
      1.   The name and address of the complainant;
      2.   The date and time the complaint was received;
      3.   The action taken in response to the complaint; and
      4.   The date and time action was taken.
   D.   Make the records required by subparagraph (C) above available for
inspection by the City during the business hours established by §
17-27 or produce said records for inspection by the city council upon request.
   E.   Publish a notice in the local weekly newspaper at least once every six
(6) months, which informs the licensee's customers of the phone number or
numbers which may be called if they have any complaints or questions regarding
their garbage service. Said notice may be contained within and be a part of the
licensee's normal advertisements.
   F.   The requirements of this section may be met by either the licensee or a
designated agent.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-29   Insurance
   A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      A.   Worker's Compensation insurance in compliance with the laws of
Nebraska, and Employer's Liability insurance with limits of not less than
$100,000; except that a sole proprietor applying for a refuse hauler license
who has no employees shall be exempt from providing proof of Worker's
Compensation insurance.
      B.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant with limits of not less than $500,000 for bodily injury and
property damage.
      C.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island City Clerk a
certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08/17/2010)
17-30   Performance Bond
   A.   Each garbage hauler licensee shall maintain in full force and effect a
performance bond with a corporate surety licensed to do business in Nebraska
and in favor of the City and all customers of the licensee, guaranteeing:
      1.   That all services purchased by the licensee's customers shall be
furnished in a manner in full compliance with the provisions of §
17-23 through §17-38 inclusive, or the money paid therefor be refunded in total
to said customer or customers;
      2.   That all the licensee's duties under all contracts with residential
customers shall be performed; and
      3.   That all fees owed the City, including landfill fees and spillage
cleanup fees, shall be paid in full by the 20th day of the month as indicated
in §
17-42.
   B.   The bond required hereby shall be in the amount of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00).
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-31   License Revocation
   A.   The city council may, after notice and hearing, suspend or permanently
revoke a garbage hauler's or refuse hauler's license, for one or more of the
following reasons:
      1.   Failing to maintain residency requirements of §
17-24.
      2.   Failing to maintain all insurance required by §
17-29.
      3.   Failing to pay the City landfill fees or spillage cleanup fees when
due.
      4.   Misusing a license.
      5.   Violating one or more provisions of this chapter relating to the
collection and transportation of garbage, and/or trash; or failing to fulfill
one or more of the terms of a contract with any customer, on five or more
occasions in any twelve-month period.
   B.   If the city council determines that, based upon the evidence presented,
a suspension is warranted, it shall order the hauler's license be suspended for
a period of not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred eighty (180)
days. Said suspension shall begin on the first day of the month following the
date the order of suspension is entered. The licensee shall, before his, her,
or its license may be renewed, refund to all customers all fees collected in
advance for service to be rendered during the period of suspension; provided,
that said licensee may, at his, her, or its option, pay a fine in lieu of
suspension in the amount of ten (10) dollars for each day of suspension. Said
option must be made and the fines therefor must be paid prior to the first day
of suspension under the council's order.
   C.   If the city council determines that, based upon the evidence presented,
revocation is warranted, it shall order the hauler's license to be revoked
immediately. The order of revocation shall require the licensee to refund to
his, her, or its customers, all fees collected in advance for services that
were to be rendered after the date of revocation; and require the payment of
all fees due the City.
   D.   Any licensee whose license has been revoked may not reapply for a
license for a period of five years.
      1.   This prohibition shall apply to individuals, partners, corporate
officers and agents, and all managerial personnel involved in the violations
for which revocation was ordered.
      2.   Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensee from employing a person who
is subject to the order of revocation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-32   Use Of Licensee Name By Another
No licensee shall permit another by lease, rental, or other agreement to engage
in such business under the name of the licensee or to use the licensee's
equipment in such business; provided, that this shall not prohibit a licensee
from lending equipment to another licensee on a temporary basis, so long as
such equipment has been approved for use by the City.
17-33   Collection Time
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee thereof to begin collecting
garbage or trash from any property within the city limits before 5:00 a.m.
17-34   Levels Of Service Offered
Every licensed garbage hauler shall offer regular collection service to all
customers.
Upon customer request, every licensed garbage hauler shall provide minimum
service collection.
The rate for minimum service collection shall be the minimum rate necessary to
offset the cost of the minimal service and will not be used to offset the cost
of services provided to other customers.
Haulers will provide a way for customers to occasionally dispose of additional
refuse at additional cost. The hauler will charge an additional amount for this
service, based on his additional cost to pick up, transport, process, and
dispose of the additional refuse. Units of additional refuse shall be in
volumes of 32 gallons, not to exceed 50 pounds each.
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit haulers from offering additional
levels of service.
17-35   Disposal By Unlicensed Persons
   A.   The provisions of §
17-23 through §
17-34 shall not be interpreted as preventing persons from collecting and
transporting their own garbage, refuse, construction and demolition waste, and
waste materials approved for disposal from their own property to the City
disposal facilities, so long as such garbage, refuse, construction and
demolition waste, and trash is secured as set forth in subsection (B) below.
   B.   The garbage, trash, refuse, construction and demolition waste, and
waste materials collected and hauled pursuant to this section must be
completely covered or securely fastened so as to prevent the load or any part
of the load from spilling, seeping, falling or blowing from the vehicle while
in transit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9616, effective 12-28-2016)
Division 17-II-2
City Landfill
17-39   Landfill Site
17-40   Hours Of Operation
17-41   Fees
17-42   Fees; Monthly Statement
17-43   Fees; Failure To Pay
17-44   Lead-Acid Batteries; Waste Oil; Hazardous Waste; Prohibited
17-45   Automobile Parts; Bulky Refuse
17-46   Burn Barrels; Fireplace Ashes; Acceptance Of
17-39   Landfill Site
The City of Grand Island shall provide suitable landfill or transfer station
areas for the disposal of garbage, refuse, and construction and demolition
waste. All garbage and refuse collectors licensed by the City of Grand Island
shall deposit all garbage, refuse, and construction and demolition waste
collected in such areas. It shall be unlawful, except as set forth herein, to
unload or deposit any garbage, refuse, construction and demolition waste and
the contents of privy vaults and cesspools hauled from any premises within the
corporate limits of the City of Grand Island, and destined for disposal within
the State of Nebraska, at any place other than the approved disposal site
designated as the landfill or transfer station areas provided by the City of
Grand Island. The prohibition herein shall not apply to garbage or refuse
processed at a Materials Recovery Facility operated pursuant to a permit issued
by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. All garbage, refuse, and
construction and demolition waste lawfully deposited in City landfill areas
shall become the property of the City of Grand Island.
17-40   Hours Of Operation
The Public Works Director shall have the authority to designate the days and
hours that the City landfill or transfer station areas will be open to the
public. Notice thereof shall be posted at the entrance to the area.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-41   Fees
All persons who dispose of Municipal Solid Waste at the City transfer station,
or the Grand Island Regional landfill when permitted, shall pay to the City for
such dumping privileges, for each load, an amount in accordance with the City
of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
An additional charge shall apply when the delivering vehicle is not properly
equipped or the load is not completely covered, or otherwise contained or
securely fastened as required by this chapter or other applicable laws. Penalty
provision applies to all loads.
All yard waste, clean trees and branches shall be free of trash and debris. All
plastic bags must be removed by the hauler.
Special wastes as defined in §
17-1 and so designated by the Solid Waste Superintendent or his/her designee as
requiring additional handling due to disposal method and/or operational
considerations shall be charged a disposal rate in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule. Due to the additional handling necessary to process
the disposal of special waste, no special waste will be accepted within one
hour of the end of the working day.
Fuel contaminated soils require Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
and landfill pre-approval.
Asbestos (ACM) requires Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and
landfill pre-approval. Disposal only during scheduled hours. Haulers shall use
same equipment and procedures at disposal area as required for removal
procedures. ACM shall be in approved condition and/or containers.
If full payment is not received by the 20th of each month in the month it is
due, a late payment charge shall be assessed. This charge shall be one percent
(1%) per month of the unpaid balance.
The fees required by this chapter may be waived by order of the mayor when, in
the discretion of the mayor, the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community would be enhanced by the waiving of such fees because of city-wide or
district cleanup or improvement campaigns, or because of fire, flood, tornado,
or other event, or series of events, causing extensive damage to the homes and
property of the residents of the City of Grand Island.
This section shall not be construed to permit the mayor to waive fees for
garbage and refuse licensees under this chapter, disposing of garbage, refuse
and waste materials for hire at the City transfer station or sanitary landfill
in the normal course of their business.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-42   Fees; Monthly Statement
All charges or approved licensee accounts made for such use of the City
landfill shall be billed on the first day of the month and payable by the 20th
day of such month; provided, the Department of Public Works shall accumulate
all information necessary for such billings by the city treasurer, and all such
billings shall be payable at the office of the city treasurer.
17-43   Fees; Failure To Pay
The city council may in its discretion revoke the license of any person
licensed under the provisions of this article who shall for fifteen days fail
to pay any amount due the City for the use of the City landfill as provided by
this article.
17-44   Lead-Acid Batteries; Waste Oil; Hazardous Waste; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful to deposit for disposal, attempt to deposit for disposal,
or leave for collection by a licensed garbage or refuse collector, any lead-
acid batteries, waste oil, or other hazardous waste materials in the City solid
waste disposal system.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006)
17-45   Automobile Parts; Bulky Refuse
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul to and deposit in the City landfill
any automobile chassis, automobile tops, automobile frames, automobile fenders,
any farm implements, or any bulky refuse made of iron, steel, tin, or metal of
any kind without first having such automobile chassis, automobile tops,
automobile frames, automobile fenders, any farm implements, or any bulky refuse
made of iron, steel, tin, or metal of any kind cut or broken into pieces not
over two feet in height.
17-46   Burn Barrels; Fireplace Ashes; Acceptance Of
The senior operator on duty at the Grand Island Solid Waste facilities
(landfill and transfer station) shall, at his/her sole and absolute discretion,
have the right to refuse burn barrels or fireplace ashes if in his/her
judgment, based upon the time of day as relating to the time of closing of said
facilities, such disposal will create the potential of fires.
Article 17-III
Weeds
17-50   Weeds; Prohibited
17-51   Duty To Cut
17-52   Notice To Abate; Remove Nuisance
17-50   Weeds; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance for any owner,
agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge or control of any lot or piece
of ground in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, to allow or maintain any
growth of twelve inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation and upon conviction such owner, agent, occupant, or person shall be
penalized in accordance with the provisions of the Grand Island City Code. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as having been committed on
each calendar day that such weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation is
permitted to remain on said premises.
As used and applied in this section, weeds shall include, but not be limited
to, bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), puncture vince (tribulus terrestris),
leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial
peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (cenaurea picris), Johnson grass
(sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle (Carduus nutans), Scotch thistle
(onopordum acanthium), morning glory (Impmoea spp.), bur ragwood (Franseria
discolor/Franseria tomentosa), glodepodded hoary cress (Hymenophysa pubescens),
quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus arvensis), horse
nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn
(rahmnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), ragweed (ambrosiaceae), or
any other economically useless plant or plant of unsightly appearance.
17-51   Duty To Cut
It shall be the duty of each owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession,
charge or control of any lot or piece of ground in the City of Grand Island,
Nebraska, to cut and remove from such lot or piece of ground together with the
adjoining streets or alleys, all weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation twelve
inches or more in height, and the cuttings shall be removed from such real
estate.
17-52   Notice To Abate; Remove Nuisance
Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each owner or
owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service
or by mailing such notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid and posting
notice of the violation on the property. Within five days after receipt of such
notice or publication or posting, whichever is applicable, if the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the city
or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city
may have such work done. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the
city may either (a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the
lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes
for improvements are levied and assessed or (b) recover in a civil action the
costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the
adjoining streets and alleys.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9494, effective 09-16-2014)
Article 17-IV
Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
17-56   Definitions
17-57   Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles; Public Nuisances
17-58   Placement Of Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
17-59   Removal Of Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
17-60   Storage Of Damaged Vehicles
17-56   Definitions
The following definitions are applicable to all Code sections pertaining to
unlicensed or inoperable vehicles:
   A.   Unlicensed Vehicle means any vehicle as defined in
Chapter 22 of the City Code which does not display valid license plates or
valid in transit stickers.
   B.   Building means a structure with four walls and a roof erected in
compliance with the city building codes.
   C.   Wrecked means a vehicle that has been damaged to such an extent that
such vehicle, if operated on the streets or highways, would be in violation of
one or more state statutes or city code sections pertaining to the condition of
vehicles being operated on the alleys, streets or highways.
   D.   Dismantled means lacking any vehicle part, the absence of which, if
such a vehicle were operated on the streets or highways, would cause such
vehicle to be in violation of one or more state statutes or city code sections
pertaining to the condition of vehicles being operated on the alleys, streets
or highways.
   E.   Inoperable means having one or more parts necessary for the operation
of a vehicle either not attached to such vehicle or in non-working condition,
including but not limited to a fully charged battery and all tires fully
inflated. Inoperable shall include totally or partially wrecked or dismantled
vehicles.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004)
17-57   Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles; Public Nuisances
   A.   No person shall place any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or any
vehicle parts on any tract of land within the City of Grand Island. Each
vehicle or vehicle part shall be a separate offense.
   B.   Owner or occupant of any tract of land shall provide proof of valid
registration upon request.
   C.   Upon conviction of one or more violations of this section, the
placement of any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or any vehicle parts on any
tract of land within the City of Grand Island shall be deemed a public nuisance
and may be abated pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code upon written request by the Grand Island
Police Department pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
owner's duly authorized agent or person in possession, charge or control, or
the occupant of such a tract to cause, maintain, or permit such public nuisance
to exist on said property, except in a manner as set forth below.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8941, effective 11-24-2004)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
17-58   Placement Of Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts, whether junked, salvaged,
or new, may be placed:
   A.   On any tract being used as a salvage yard, which is in full compliance
with all city code sections pertaining to such businesses, including zoning.
   B.   On any tract being lawfully used for a business activity related to
unlicensed or inoperable vehicles, such as an automotive body shop, so long as
the unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and parts are stored in an area that is
screened from adjoining property and the public right-of-way by a sight-
obscuring fence at least six feet in height, or such unlicensed or inoperable
vehicles and vehicle parts are removed from the premises; provided, that
unlicensed or inoperable vehicles being displayed for sale as whole units by a
licensed automobile dealer are not subject to this screening requirement.
   C.   On any other tract, so long as such unlicensed or inoperable vehicles
and such vehicle parts are placed within a building.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004)
17-59   Removal Of Unlicensed Or Inoperable Vehicles
   A.   The chief of police or any police supervisor may cause the removal of
any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or vehicle parts:
      1.   from any public property; or
      2.   from any private property with the permission of the owner or
occupant thereof or by authority of a Court order.
   B.   The towing, impoundment, and disposal provisions set forth in
Chapter 22 shall be applied to all unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and
vehicle parts removed under authority of this section.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004)
17-60   Storage Of Damaged Vehicles
No automobile repair shop, body shop, or dealer may store any customer,
inventory, or owned vehicles on the public right-of-way or streets, but shall
be required to store such vehicles on the business premises.
Article 17-V
Graffiti
17-64   Intent
17-65   Definitions
17-66   Graffiti - Prohibited
17-67   Violation; Penalty
17-68   Same - Notice Of Removal
17-69   City's Costs Declared Lien
17-70   Removal By City
17-71   Private Property Consent Forms
17-64   Intent
Graffiti on public and private property is a blighting factor which not only
depreciates the value of the property which has been the target of such
malicious vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and
surrounding properties, and in so doing, negatively impacts upon the entire
community. The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is a nuisance
and unless it and other inscribed material is removed from public and private
properties, it tends to remain.
17-65   Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this division, they shall have the
meanings established by this section:
Graffiti means any letter, word, name, number, symbol, message, drawing,
picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible to the public that is
drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched, or etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge,
fence, gate, building, or other structure. Graffiti does not include
advertising or any other letter, word, name, number symbol, slogan, message,
drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on
property by an owner of the property, a tenant of the property, or an
authorized agent to such owner or tenant.
Graffiti abatement procedure means an abatement procedure which identifies
graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures in
absence of response.
Private contractor means any person with whom the city shall have duly
contracted to remove graffiti.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
17-66   Graffiti - Prohibited
   A.   Any person who knowingly and intentionally applies graffiti of any type
on any building, public or private, or any other tangible property owned by any
person, firm, or corporation or any public entity or instrumentality, without
the express permission of the owner or operator of the property, commits the
offense of unauthorized application of graffiti.
   B.   Upon conviction of an offense under this section, the court may, in
addition to any other punishment imposed, order the defendant to clean up,
repair, or replace the damaged property, keep the defaced property or another
specified property in the community free of graffiti or other inscribe
materials for up to one year, or order a combination of restitution and labor.
   C.   Upon conviction of an offense under this section, the court may, in
addition to any other punishment imposed order the defendant to undergo
counseling.
   D.   Upon conviction of an offense under this section, the court may, in
addition to any other punishment imposed, order the suspension of the
defendant’s motor vehicle operator’s license for up to one year. A copy of an
abstract of the court’s conviction, including an adjudication of a juvenile,
shall be transmitted to the director pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§60-497.01 to
60-497.04
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
17-67   Violation; Penalty
Any person who is convicted of violating §
17-68 shall be punished by a fine pursuant to §
1-7 of the Grand Island City Code.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
17-68   Same - Notice Of Removal
Whenever the City Administrator, or his/her designee determines that graffiti
exists on any public and private buildings, structures and places which are
visible to any person utilizing any public right-of-way in this city, be this
road, parkway, alley, or otherwise, and that seasonal temperatures permit the
painting of exterior surfaces, the City Administrator, or his/her designee
shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner
shall have ten (10) days after the date of the notice to remove or paint over
the graffiti, or the conditions will be subject to abatement by the city. If
the property owner elects to paint over the graffiti, the paint used to
obliterate the graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color
(s).
The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall consist of a
written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such
owner's name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of
the county. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be
sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may
be served in any one of the following manners:
   A.   By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or
control of the property.
   B.   By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's
last known address. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the
property address.
The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove
or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as:
                             , Grand Island, Nebraska, which is visible to
public view, within ten (10) days after the date of this notice; or, if you
fail to do so, City employees or private contractors employed by the City will
enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting
over the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its
private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will
constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby
notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Administrator of the
City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or his/her designee within forty-eight (48)
hours from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of this ten (10) day
period, the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on
your property at your expense without further notice.
City of Grand Island, Nebraska, Municipal Corporation,
By:
Title:
17-69   City's Costs Declared Lien
Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the graffiti
nuisance under the provisions of this division may constitute a lien against
the property upon which such nuisance existed.
17-70   Removal By City
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or
such continued date thereafter as the City Administrator, or his/her designee
approves, then the City Administrator, or his/her designee, with the consent of
the Mayor, is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by
city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is
expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All
reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the
city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as
practicable to background color(s). If the City Administrator provides for the
removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, he shall not authorize nor
undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than
that where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located.
17-71   Private Property Consent Forms
Property owners in the city may consent in advance to city entry onto private
property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms for such
consent available.
(Article V moved from Chapter 8 pursuant to Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-
2006)
CHAPTER 18
MECHANICAL
Article 18-I   Natural Gas
Article 18-II   Gas Appliances And Gas Piping
Article 18-III   Mechanical Fitters, Contractors, Installers
Article 18-I
Natural Gas
18-1   Rates
18-2   Basis Of Measurement
18-3   Violations Of Article
18-4   Filing Fee; Amount
18-5   Uniform Mechanical Code Adopted
18-6   UMC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
18-7   UMC - Public Copy
18-8   UMC - Amendment Of Section 101.0
18-9   UMC - Amendment Of Subsection 112.1
18-10   UMC - Amendment Of Subsection 115.2 18-11 (Reserved)
18-1   Rates
   A.   Schedule of Maximum Rates. The rates charged by NorthWestern Public
Service, a division of NorthWestern Corporation, a Delaware corporation, doing
business in the state of Nebraska as a Domesticated Corporation, for natural
gas supplied to customers in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, unless
otherwise approved by the Mayor and City Council, shall not exceed the
following, effective August 1, 2001:
Customer Charge Per Month
Residential Service Rate No. 91     $5.00 per Meter
General Service Rate No. 92         $6.00 per Meter
Commercial & Industrial Rate No. 94 $80.00 per Meter
Usage Charge – Rate No. 91        Non-GasGas
First 30 Therms per month           $0.26356$0.70271 per Therm
Over 30 Therms per month            $0.09513$0.70271 per Therm
Usage Charge – Rate No. 92
First 400 Therms per month          $0.12101$0.70271 per Therm
Next 1,600 Therms per month         $0.05343$0.70271 per Therm
Over 2,000 Therms per month         $0.03243$0.70271 per Therm
Usage Charge – Rate No. 94
All Therms per month                $0.04530$0.47232 per Therm
Demand Charge – Rate No. 94
Standard Service (all Therms)       $0.21910$1.20470 per Therm
Extended Service
First 500 Therms/day                $0.24590$0.33330 per Therm
Over 500 Therms/da                  $0.00000$0.33330 per Therm
 
Minimum Monthly Charge.
Shall equal the customer charge for Rate Nos. 91 and 92.
Shall equal the amount of therms of demand billed and the customer charge for
Rate No. 94.
Stand-by Capacity Charge.
For Rate Nos. 91 and 92 customers that use natural gas as a back-up to an
alternative fueled heating system, NorthWestern shall charge, in addition to
the charges stated above, the following stand-by fee during the months of
December through March:
Rate No. 91 - $12.00 per Meter Rate No. 92 - $37.00 per Meter
Bills will be rendered at monthly intervals.
   B.   Gas Cost Adjustment. The foregoing rates for gas supplied in the period
covered by any bill shall be increased or decreased from the foregoing schedule
of rates as follows:
      1.   If at any time or from time to time, the rate authorized to be
charged NorthWestern for any natural gas purchased by it on a firm supply basis
for resale in Nebraska shall be increased or decreased (whether or not charged
under bond) resulting in an average cost per therm to NorthWestern in excess of
or less than the average cost per therm prior to application of such increase
or decrease, the charge per therm, including the amount that is included in the
minimum bill, for gas supplied in each subsequent billing period (beginning not
earlier than the effective date of such increase or decrease) may be increased
or shall be decreased accordingly. In addition, gas cost variances resulting
from the purchase of non-traditional supplies will be added or deducted from
charges set forth in filed rates included herein.
      2.   For the purposes hereof, the amount of any refund, including
interest thereon, if any, received by NorthWestern from its supplier of charges
paid and applicable to natural gas purchased on a firm basis in Nebraska shall
be refunded to the customer as a reduction in billings over the succeeding
twelve month period or other period determined appropriate.
      3.   Variances in actual gas cost incurred and gas cost recovered through
unit sales rates will be measured monthly. Gas supply related costs collected
from NorthWestern's Agency Sales Service will be credited to actual gas cost
incurred. Resulting under or over cost recoveries will be spread to gas cost
component of rates over the succeeding twelve month period following the filing
of any gas cost adjustment. All accrued over or under variances shall be
assessed a carrying charge which shall be the overall rate of return allowed by
the Rate Area in NorthWestern's last general rate filing.
      4.   Any increase or decrease in rates because of gas cost adjustment
hereinbefore provided for shall become effective immediately upon the filing
with the City Clerk of the City of Grand Island of amended rates reflecting
such increase or decrease.
18-2   Basis Of Measurement
The rates prescribed by this chapter shall be understood to apply to and be
based upon natural gas of the British Thermal Unit heating value of not less
than nine hundred British Thermal Units per cubic foot of gas calculated
according to standard measurements and in the event that the average total
heating value of said gas in any billing period shall fall below said minimum,
then the gas to be billed during such billing period shall be decreased
proportionately to the deficiency in such heating value.
18-3   Violations Of Article
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a system of natural gas and
distributing through the streets and public places and selling natural gas in
the City, or for any agent or employee of any such person, to sell or attempt
to sell or to collect for or to charge for, any such gas supplied or furnished
to any customer, user, or purchaser thereof in the City at any rate or price in
excess of the rate or price fixed by this article, and any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 6/28/2006)
18-4   Filing Fee; Amount
The City shall charge and collect a filing fee from natural gas companies for a
rate filing. The fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
18-5   Uniform Mechanical Code Adopted
   A.   The Uniform Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby
adopted, together with Appendices as set forth hereafter, and any amendments
thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this
chapter of the Grand Island City Code. One copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code,
2021 Edition, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the
office of the city clerk as provided by law.
The following appendices shall be adopted along with the Uniform Mechanical
Code adopted by this section:
      A.   Appendix C- Installation and Testing of Oil (Liquid) Fuel-Fired
Equipment.
      B.   Appendix E- Sustainable Practices
      C.   Appendix F- Sizing of Venting Systems and Outdoor Combustion and
Ventilation Opening Design
      D.   Appendix G- Example Calculation of Outdoor Air Rate
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9668, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-
2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9913 on 1/10/2023
18-6   UMC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of
the Uniform Mechanical Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be
of no force and effect:
   A.   1 Table 104.5 Mechanical Permit Fees.
   B.   Sections 1203.2 Dual Purpose Water Heater, 1207.3 Dual-Purpose Water
Heaters, 1207.3.1 Temperature Limitations and Table 1203.2 Water Heaters.
   C.   Chapter 14- Process Piping.
   D.   Chapter 16- Stationary Power Plants.
   E.   Appendix A- Residential Plan Examiner Review Form for HVAC System
Design.
   F.   Appendix B- Procedures to be followed to Place Gas Equipment in
Operation.
   G.   Appendix D- Fuel Supply: Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and
Recreational Vehicle Parks.
   H.   Section 806.0 Certificate of Acceptance Forms of Appendix E-
Sustainable Practice.
   I.   Section 603.10.1 Duct Leakage Test.
   J.   Section 405.4 Kitchen Exhaust.
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9668, effective 01-01-2018)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9913 on 1/10/2023
Amended by Ord. 10,008 on 2/12/2025
18-7   UMC - Public Copy
Not less than one copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code adopted pursuant to
18-5 shall be kept on file by the city clerk for inspection by and use of the
public.
18-8   UMC - Amendment Of Section 101.0
Section 101.1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
101.1. Title.
This document shall be known as the "Uniform Mechanical Code" together with
Appendices and any amendments thereto, and shall be cited as such, and will be
referred to when used herein or in Chapter18 of the Grand Island City Code as
"this Code".
18-9   UMC - Amendment Of Subsection 112.1
Subsection 112.1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to include
the following:
104.1. Permits Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
installation, alteration or repair any mechanical system regulated by this Code
except as permitted in Subsections 112.2 of this section, or cause the same to
be done without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the Office of the
Chief Building Official.
   (A)   A permit is required for the installation or replacement of all fuel
burning heating equipment, and water heaters together with all chimneys, vents
and their connectors.
   (B)   A permit is required for the installation, repair, or alteration of
all fuel gas piping in or in connection with any building or structure or
within the property lines of any premises, other than service pipe.
   A permit is required for the installation or replacement of all warm-air
furnaces and heating systems including all chimneys, vents, and their
connectors.
   (C)   No Commercial Hoods and Kitchen Ventilation equipment shall be
installed without a permit.
   (D)   A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure.
   No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work
under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his or her employ.
   (E)   A permit is required for the repair, replacement, or installation of a
gas piping.
   (F)   No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any
work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and
unrevoked mechanical license as required by this chapter, except when and as
otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.
   (G)   Any permit by this code may be issued to do any work regulated by this
code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings in the event that such person is the bona fide owner of any such
dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same are currently
occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all
material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therein. This,
however, shall exclude all gas piping and venting of fuel combustion
appliances.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-10   UMC - Amendment Of Subsection 115.2
Subsection 115.2 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
104.5 Fees.
The fee for each permit identified in this chapter shall be set forth in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-2021)
18-11   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
Article 18-II
Gas Appliances And Gas Piping
Division 18-1   Generally
Division 18-1
Generally
18-12   Definitions
18-13   Interfering With Safety Equipment
18-14   Unlawful Connection Of Gas Line
18-15   Prohibiting Use For Electrical Connection
18-16   Pilot Burners; Safety Shutoff Devices
18-12   Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall be used and the
terms herein set forth shall be construed to have the meaning set forth in this
section:
Mechanical Appliance installation is the act of installing fixtures, equipment,
appliances or apparatus, using natural or artificial gas between the outlet of
the meter set assembly or outlet of the service regulator, when a meter is not
provided, and the inlet connection of fixtures, equipment, appliances or
apparatus. Appliance installation shall include the venting of such fixtures,
equipment, appliances or apparatus where required.
Gas company shall mean the franchised distributor of gas in the City, pursuant
to a franchise ordinance granted to such distributor or its successors or
assigns and approved by the mayor and city council.
HVAC is Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning.
Mechanical work is the act of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, gas
piping, miscellaneous heat producing, and energy-utilizing equipment, but also
to include regulating and controlling the design, construction installation,
quality of material, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating,
ventilating, cooling, incinerators, air condition systems and other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances within this jurisdiction.
Journeyman mechanical fitter is any person qualified under the ordinances of
the City of Grand Island to become a Journeyman mechanical Fitter upon
obtaining the required license.
Journeyman plumber is any person qualified under the ordinances of the City of
Grand Island to do plumbing work.
Master mechanical fitter is any entity qualified under the ordinances of the
City of Grand Island to become a master gas fitting contractor upon obtaining
the required license and bond.
Mechanical contractor is any entity engaged in the business of gas fitting and
appliance installation in connection with any building or structure or to serve
any building or structure with natural or artificial gas.
Master plumber is any person qualified under the ordinances of the City of
Grand Island to do plumbing contracting work upon obtaining the required
license and bond.
Workmanship shall mean executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work. Cutting,
notching and boring of floor joists and studs shall comply and adopted herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-13   Interfering With Safety Equipment
Any owner of a gas installation which has been provided with automatic safety
equipment, any employee or agent of such owner or any other person who shall
block open by manual means or by any other manner whatsoever interfere with or
defeat the purpose of such devices to function automatically in the interest of
safety shall be guilty of an infraction within the terms of this article, and
subject to its penalties, as in the base of a violation of any other of its
terms or provisions.
18-14   Unlawful Connection Of Gas Line
It shall be unlawful for any person except employees or agents of the gas
company to open or make any connection to or do work on any gas main or gas
service pipe of the gas company on the upstream side of the gas meter without
written authorization of the gas company.
18-15   Prohibiting Use For Electrical Connection
The gas piping shall not be used for an electrical ground or grounding
electrode, nor shall electric circuits utilize gas piping, casing on controls,
panels or other metal parts of the gas piping or appliance installations in
lieu of wiring.
This provision shall not apply to low voltage control and ignition circuits and
to electronic flame detection device circuits incorporated as a part of the gas
appliance or equipment.
18-16   Pilot Burners; Safety Shutoff Devices
   A.   All residential and commercial heating equipment with inputs less than
400,000 BTUH shall be equipped with a pilot burner and safety shutoff device.
In the event of ignition device failure or pilot outage, complete shutoff of
the gas to both the main burner and pilot burner shall take place. The combined
time required for the safety shutoff device and the automatic valve to shutoff
the gas supply shall not exceed 3 minutes. On heating equipment approved only
for outdoor installation, the safety shutoff device need not cause shutoff of
the pilot gas.
   B.   All heating equipment with rated inputs between 400,000 and 6,000,000
BTUH must have approved electronic type safety shutoff devices. The response
time of the primary safety control to de-energize or activate the gas shutoff
device shall not be more than four seconds. The pilot flame-establishing period
for expanding, intermittent and interrupted pilots shall not be more than 15
seconds. Gas to such pilots shall be automatically shut off if the pilot fails
to ignite. Inputs 2,000,000 BTUH or above shall be equipped with both a
solenoid valve and a motorized valve.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
Article 18-III
Mechanical Fitters, Contractors, Installers, and Mechanical Inspector
Division 18-III-1   Examining Board 
Division 18-III-2   Mechanical Inspector
Division 18-III-3   Registration Of Contractors
Division 18-III-4   Master And Journeyman Mechanical Fitters 
Division 18-III-5   General
Division 18-III-6   Permit To Perform Mechanical Work 
Division 18-III-7   Penalty
Division 18-III-1
Examining Board
18-17   Examining Board; Membership
18-18   Meetings; Chairman
18-19   Duties; Examinations; Licenses
18-20   Board Of Appeals
18-21   Quorum For Board
18-22   Records
18-23   Procedures
18-24   Filing Fee
18-25   General Rules
18-17   Examining Board; Membership
There is hereby created an examining board for mechanical fitters which shall
consist of seven members appointed annually by the Mayor and approved by a
majority of the city council. The seven members shall consist of the following:
   A.   The Chief Building Official, or his/her designee
   B.   One member from the local gas company
   C.   One contracting master mechanical fitter
   D.   One member from the community
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9034, effective 03-22-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9117, effective 05-29-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-
2012)
18-18   Meetings; Chairman
The Board shall hold its first meeting upon call by the chief building
official, and within thirty days following the appointment of its members. The
members shall select a chairman from their own number, but not the chief
building official. Such chairman shall hold office until the December 31
following, or until his or her successor has been selected. The Board shall
meet upon call by the chief building official at such intervals as may be
necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less
than twice a year.
18-19   Duties; Examinations; Licenses
The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification,
examination and licensing of master mechanical fitter and journeyman mechanical
fitter, and shall issue an appropriate license to each person who meets the
qualifications therefore and successfully passes the standardized exam
administered by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
(IAPMO).
The Board shall establish written standards and procedures for the approval of
all continuing education requirements as set forth in §18-48.1.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-20   Board Of Appeals
The duly appointed Board shall act as a Board of Appeals in making a correct
determination of any appeal arising from actions of the chief building official
or his authorized representative.
18-21   Quorum For Board
Four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum.
18-22   Records
The Board of Appeals shall keep an accurate record of all their official
transactions and shall submit a copy to the office of the city clerk.
18-23   Procedures
Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days from date of the chief
building official's decision. Decisions of the Board shall be made within
thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal. Decisions of the Board shall be in
writing. A copy of the Board's decision shall be delivered to the appellant
within 30 calendar days after receipt of original appeal.
18-24   Filing Fee
Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the chief building official or
his authorized representative relating to the suitability of alternate
materials or type of installation or interpretation of any provision of this
Code may obtain review of such decision upon filing a written request for
review by the Board in the office of the chief building official or his
authorized representative within thirty (30) days from the date of such
decision and payment of a filing fee as provided in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Enforcement of any decision, notice or order of the chief building official or
his authorized representative issued under this Code shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9890, effective 08-10-2022)
18-25   General Rules
   A.   All mechanical apprentices actively engaged under a master mechanical
fitter will be required to register with the City of Grand Island Office of the
Chief Building Official. Experience accrued towards taking the journeyman
mechanical test will only be accepted as a registered apprentice. Time accrued
previous to registration will be noted.
   B.   Time required for an apprentice to be actively engaged in the trade
under the supervision of a master, journeyman, or qualified shop will be a
minimum of three years. Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the chief
building official in writing for consideration and approval for the journeyman
examination. Any academical time to be considered in place of actual
apprenticeship time in the trade must be from a State accredited college or
Technical school and be submitted to the Board for consideration.
   C.   Applicants must hold a journeyman license for a minimum of four years
before taking the Master exam, and be actively engaged in the trade under the
supervision of a contracting master mechanical fitter for the full four years.
Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the chief building official in
writing for consideration and approval for the master examination.
   D.   The minimum age limit for a Journeyman examination will be Twenty (20)
years of age unless approved by the Board.
   E.   The allotted time for the Master and Journeyman examination will be as
administered by IAPMO.
   F.   Request for Master and Journeyman examination will be filed in the City
of Grand Island Office of the Chief Building Official prior to taking the
examination for the consideration of the chief building official or the Board.
Examination application fee will be paid with the application. No exam fee will
be refunded after taking the examination. Exam application review fees shall be
submitted directly to the Office of the Chief Building Official. Online exam
fees shall be submitted directly to IAPMO.
   G.   All applicants will submit, along with their request for examination,
letters of proof of the required apprenticeship time actively engaged in the
trade.
   H.   In the event that an applicant fails to pass the examination given, he
may make application for a subsequent exam after thirty (30) days have passed.
   I.   At the discretion of the Board, experience gained at an industrial
plant or outside the tri-city jurisdiction may be considered as apprenticeship
time to qualify for a Journeyman examination. Information considered by the
Board shall include written proof of previous experience record and oral
examination.
   J.   All examination papers are the property of the examining Board.
Applicants will not be permitted to remain during grading or to review
examination papers after they have been submitted for grading. Test results
will be sent by mail.
   K.   Applicant must obtain a passing score on each part of the exam (written
as well as drawing). A passing score for a Journeyman Mechanical Fitter is 70%
and for a Master Mechanical Fitter is 80%.
   L.   An applicant with a passing score will have a 30 day grace period to
pick up a new license dated from the test date.
   M.   An applicant must supply his own copy of this Code; the Grand Island
Office of the Chief Building Official will not supply copies to anyone during
the test. Photocopies, reference books, or any other reference materials will
not be allowed in the testing area during the test.
   N.   For purposes of
Chapter 18 an "employee" shall include employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors, and independent contractors so long as the "employee" is under
supervision of a registered contracting mechanical fitter and is covered by the
registered contracting mechanical fitter's insurance obligations as set forth
in
18-57.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9975, effective 05-05-2024)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
Division 18-III-2
Mechanical Inspector
18-26   Office Created; Authority; Assistants
18-27   Duties
18-28   Inspections
18-29   Inspection Prior To Covering Installation
18-30   (Reserved)
18-31   Procedure For Re-Inspection
18-32   Inspector May Require Testing
18-33   Authority To Condemn; Penalty 18-34 (Reserved)
18-26   Office Created; Authority; Assistants
There is hereby created and established the office of the mechanical inspector,
who shall be the chief building official, and who shall have supervision of all
gas piping, gas appliance installations and mechanical work in the city and the
two mile area adjacent thereto. The mechanical inspector shall have such
assistance as may be necessary. Assistants shall be hired only after being
examined and recommended by the chief building official. Any such assistant
shall have the same power as the mechanical inspector.
18-27   Duties
It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to issue permits and inspect
all mechanical work and gas distribution from the outlet side of the meter and
all gas installations, but to exclude gas mains, within the City and the two
mile area adjacent thereto and to investigate all reported cases of the use of
imperfect materials or workmanship on any job of mechanical work or the
violation of any of the provisions of this article by a plumber, mechanical
fitter or builder.
18-28   Inspections
It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to make inspections of any
mechanical work, gas piping, appliance installation or connections at the
request of the installer, chief building official, owner, agent, tenant, or
occupant of any building or the premises where such gas piping or mechanical
work is located in order to ascertain whether or not the mechanical work, gas
piping or appliances in such building or premises are in a safe condition. The
inspector shall have the authority to enter any building or upon any premises
at all reasonable hours to ascertain if the provisions of this article, or any
ordinances relating to mechanical work, gas piping or appliance installations
have been or are being violated or being complied with, and should the
inspector, upon making such an inspection as requested by the installer, owner,
agent, tenant, or chief building official, find an unsafe or unsatisfactory
installation, the inspector shall have the authority to request the gas company
to shut off the appliance or service at the meter (depending upon the
seriousness of the conditions as determined by the inspector), tag same, and
shall notify the installer immediately if the job is a new installation, or the
owner, agent, tenant, or one in charge of the property to cause the same to be
remedied within a specified time, not exceeding ten days if the same is not a
new installation. Should the installer, owner, agent, tenant, or one in charge
of the premises fail to make such corrections, changes or repairs, or fail to
notify the inspector to make a re-inspection within the specified time after
receiving such notification to comply therewith, said owner, agent, tenant,
installer or person in charge, shall be considered maintaining an unsafe
mechanical installation and violating the requirements hereof, and the
inspector shall make a re-inspection of the premises and report the findings to
the chief building official, who shall in turn cause action to be taken in the
proper court to secure compliance, and the penalties as set forth in this
chapter shall apply. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the
installer or one making such correction, changes or repairs to notify the
inspector within forty-eight hours after completion of such correction, changes
or repairs, and request for re-inspection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-29   Inspection Prior To Covering Installation
Before any part of any installation is covered from sight, a notification shall
be given the mechanical inspector who shall, within forty-eight hours, inspect
such part of the installation.
18-30   (Reserved)
18-31   Procedure For Re-Inspection
If, by reason of noncompliance with the provisions of this article or through
the use of defective material or inferior workmanship, the approval of the
mechanical inspector is not given and subsequent inspections become necessary,
the installer shall notify the mechanical inspector when such work shall be
ready for such subsequent inspection, which shall be made in the same manner as
is hereinbefore provided. The fees for re-inspection shall be provided in the
fee schedule.
18-32   Inspector May Require Testing
When permits have been issued for additional fixtures or piping or alterations
to any existing system, the mechanical inspector may, if in his or her
discretion it is deemed necessary, require the installer to make a complete
test of the whole system as is required for new systems.
18-33   Authority To Condemn; Penalty
Authority is hereby granted to the mechanical inspector to condemn any existing
gas or mechanical installations which, in his discretion, is hazardous or
dangerous to human life. It shall be the duty of the property owner to
immediately eliminate the hazardous conditions by removal or repair of these
conditions. Failure to do so will be a violation of the provisions of this
article.
18-34   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
Division 18-III-3
Registration Of Contractors
18-36   Registration Required
18-37   Registration; Individual
18-38   Registration; Firm, Corporation
18-39   Registration; Fee
18-40   Registration; Certificate
18-41   Certificate; Revocation
18-42   Mechanical Contractors
18-43   Insurance
18-44   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
18-36   Registration Required
No person shall engage in the mechanical fitting business in the City until
registered in the office of the chief building official as a mechanical
contractor.
18-37   Registration; Individual
No person shall be registered as a mechanical contractor unless he is licensed
as a master mechanical fitter under the provisions of this section and has in
force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by other sections
of the city code.
18-38   Registration; Firm, Corporation
No firm, association or corporation shall be registered as a mechanical
contractor unless the proper officers of the concern shall certify to the chief
building official that an identified master mechanical fitter, licensed under
the provisions of this section, is an officer, member or regular employee of
such concern, and that such master mechanical fitter will be in direct
supervision of all of the mechanical work contracted and done by such concern,
and unless such concern has in force and effect one or more insurance policies
as required by other sections of the city code.
18-39   Registration; Fee
The fees to be collected by the chief building official for the registration of
a mechanical contractor shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island
Fee Schedule.
18-40   Registration; Certificate
The chief building official shall issue a certificate of registration to any
mechanical contractor applying for such and qualifying under the provisions of
this section, for a period beginning on the date thereof and expiring on
December 31 of the same year. The holder of the certificate shall display same
at the regular place of business of the holder.
Renewal of a registration certificate may be obtained upon showing of
qualifications as provided for in this section and payment of the proper fee.
18-41   Certificate; Revocation
The city council by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke any
certificate of registration of any mechanical contractor, upon the
recommendation of the Mechanical Board for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Lack of competency or lack of knowledge in matters relevant to the
certificate of registration;
   B.   Certificate of registration being obtained by fraud;
   C.   The lending of any certificate of registration or the obtaining of
permits there under for any other person;
   D.   Failure to comply with this Code and any rules issued by the chief
building official or Board;
   E.   Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or
fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;
   F.   Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when the same are
required by this code.
   G.   Failure to complete the continuing education contact hours as required
by §
18-48.1.
The chief building official shall serve notice of such action by registered
mail to the holder of the certificate.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-42   Mechanical Contractors
Every mechanical contractor shall be required at all times to have a licensed
journeyman mechanical fitter in charge of all work as a condition for the
issuance and maintenance of such license.
18-43   Insurance
   A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      B.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      C.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Office of the
Chief Building Official with a certificate or certificates of insurance for the
above insurance coverage.
      D.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-44   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
No person or concern who has obtained a mechanical contractor registration
pursuant to this chapter shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing
business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed
pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street
address.
Division 18-III-4
Master And Journeyman Mechanical Fitters
18-45   Examinations; Fee; Exemptions
18-46   Licenses; Reciprocity
18-47   Re-Examination
18-48   Licenses; Term; Renewal; Fees
18-49   License; Revocation
18-50   Temporary Journeyman Mechanical Fitter License
18-51   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
18-52   Renewal Of License
18-45   Examinations; Fee; Exemptions
18-45.1   Master Mechanical Fitter
18-45.2   Journeyman Mechanical Fitter
18-45.3   Apprentice Mechanical Fitter
Any person desiring to be licensed as a master mechanical fitter or as a
journeyman mechanical fitter pursuant to this chapter shall make written
application for an examination to the chief building official. Examination
application fees shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule. Online examination fees shall be in accordance with the testing
facilities fee schedule.
Examination application fees shall accompany such application. Examination fees
are not returned but shall be forfeited in the event the applicant fails the
examination
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-45.1   Master Mechanical Fitter
A Master Mechanical Fitter shall mean a person who is registered with the Grand
Island Office of the Chief Building Official and has completed all experience
requirements as a journeyman mechanical fitter and has passed a master level
mechanical fitter's examination. A Master Mechanical Fitter has the necessary
qualifications, training, experience, and technical knowledge to properly plan,
layout, install, alter and repair mechanical systems or parts thereof
including, but not limited to, ventilation air; exhaust systems; duct systems;
combustion air; chimneys and vents; installation of specific appliances - as
defined in the UMC; boilers and pressure vessels; hydronics; refrigeration;
fuel gas piping; process piping; solar energy systems; stationary power plants
- as defined in the UMC, in accordance with the standards, rules, and
regulations established by the Grand Island Mechanical Board. A practicing
Master Mechanical Fitter must be an employee of a registered Contracting Master
Mechanical Fitter and work under a Contracting Master Mechanical Fitter's
supervision.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-45.2   Journeyman Mechanical Fitter
A Journeyman Mechanical Fitter shall mean a person who is registered with the
Grand Island Office of the Chief Building Official and who has completed their
apprenticeship under the supervision of a Contracting Mechanical Fitter. A
Journeyman Mechanical Fitter has passed a journeyman level mechanical fitter's
examination and has a working knowledge and application of the skills required
to be employed as a mechanical fitter in accordance with the standards, rules,
and regulations established by the Grand Island Mechanical Board. A practicing
Journeyman Mechanical Fitter must be an employee of a registered Contracting
Master Mechanical Fitter and work under a Contracting Master Mechanical
Fitter's supervision.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-45.3   Apprentice Mechanical Fitter
An Apprentice Mechanical Fitter is an entry-level mechanical fitter who is
registered with the Grand Island Office of the Chief Building Official and is
working under the direct supervision of a licensed Journeyman Mechanical Fitter
or Master Mechanical Fitter and is an employee of a registered Contracting
Master Mechanical Fitter.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-46   Licenses; Reciprocity
   A.   Any person validly licensed as a master or journeyman mechanical fitter
by a municipal jurisdiction, provided the testing mechanism of that
municipality has been verified by the chief building official or the Board to
meet or exceed the standards of an unamended standardized exam provided by a
nationally licensed testing agency, may apply for exemption from taking the
examination specified by Section
18-25 and, provided the applicant is otherwise qualified pursuant to this Code,
the chief building official may approve the applicant to receive a valid
license, and direct their designee to execute and deliver the license to the
applicant.
   B.   The chief building official shall have the right to require any
applicant to take an examination. In the event that an applicant is denied a
license, they may appeal to the mechanical board.
   C.   Any person validly licensed as a master or journeyman mechanical fitter
by a jurisdiction with a current reciprocal licensing agreement approved by
board shall be granted a licenses of the same level for the Grand Island
Jurisdiction.
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-47   Re-Examination
Any person desiring to become a master mechanical fitter or a journeyman
mechanical fitter who fails to pass an examination pursuant to this chapter as
prescribed by the Board may make written application for a subsequent
examination 30 days after taking the examination.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-48   Licenses; Term; Renewal; Fees
18-48.1   Continuing Education Requirements 
18-48.2   Instruction Hours Defined
18-48.3   Journeyman Mechanical Exam Credit 
18-48.4   Master Mechanical Exam Credit
   A.   All licenses issued by the Board pursuant to this article shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which issued, but may be renewed within thirty
days thereafter upon application and payment of fees in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any license holder who does not renew his
license within this thirty-day grace period shall automatically forfeit such
license. In the event of forfeiture of a license in this manner, the holder may
apply for and qualify to recover the lapsed license by passing an examination
as required under the provisions of this code.
   B.   The annual fee for master and journeyman mechanical fitters shall be in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   C.   After January 1, 2008 journeyman and master gasfitter licenses will not
be issued. Journeyman and master licenses will be issued as journeyman
mechanical fitter and master mechanical fitter.
   D.   Any person holding a valid master or journeyman plumbing license, will
be eligible to obtain an equivalent mechanical license from April 1, 2007 to
January 31,2008. Any person after January 31, 2008 applying for application to
test for journeyman or master mechanical license will be required to have
appropriate time, experience or qualifications for the level of license
applying for.
18-48.1   Continuing Education Requirements
All Journeyman Mechanical Fitters, Master Mechanical Fitters, and Contracting
Master Mechanical Fitters are required to complete a total of six (6) hours of
continuing education annually. The six (6) hours shall include four (4) hours
of principle instruction and two (2) hours of code instruction as defined below
in Section
18-48.2.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
18-48.2   Instruction Hours Defined
Principle instruction hours means subjects that directly relate to the
performance of HVAC services. Examples of such subjects include, but are not
limited to: the design, installation, servicing, troubleshooting, and skills
training for HVAC appurtenances, boilers and gas piping systems.
Code instruction hours means subjects that directly relate to regulations
governing HVAC and mechanical systems. Examples of such subjects include, but
are not be limited to: the Uniform Mechanical Code, written and published by
IAPMO, the Nebraska American Disabilities Act, and NFPA 54.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
18-48.3   Journeyman Mechanical Exam Credit
Apprentices who pass the Journeyman Mechanical Fitters License Examination will
be exempt from any continuing education requirements for the calendar year in
which the passing score is obtained.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
18-48.4   Master Mechanical Exam Credit
Journeyman Mechanical Fitters who pass the Master Mechanical Fitters
Examination will be exempt from any continuing education requirement for the
calendar year in which the passing score is obtained.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
18-49   License; Revocation
Mechanical Board by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke the license
of any journeyman mechanical fitter or master mechanical fitter if the license
was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be
grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the
provisions of this article or any other provisions of City of Grand Island Code
related to gas piping, Heating, Venting, Air Conditioning systems (HVAC) or
mechanical work. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the
penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.
Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice in writing,
enumerating the charges alleged, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Mechanical Board not sooner than five days from receipt of the notice. The
licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written,
and shall have the right of cross-examination. All testimony before the
Mechanical Board shall be given under oath. The Mechanical Board shall have
power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of
witnesses. The decision of the Mechanical Board shall be based upon the
evidence produced at the hearing, and such decision shall be final. A person
whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted to reapply for another
such license within one year from the date of such revocation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9805, effective 01-01-2021)
18-50   Temporary Journeyman Mechanical Fitter License
The chief building official may issue a temporary journeyman mechanical fitters
license pending examination; provided that the applicant therefore holds a
similar license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall be valid until the
next examination by the Board.
18-51   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
No person or concern who has obtained a mechanical fitter's license pursuant to
this article, shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or
concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or
work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this
section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.
18-52   Renewal Of License
Any person licensed under the provisions of this article as a master mechanical
fitter or a journeyman, who does not renew his license for a period of thirty
days after the expiration of same, shall pay the examination fee required by
this article, and shall submit himself to an examination by the Board for
mechanical fitters before such person can be again licensed hereunder.
Division 18-III-5
General
18-53   Application
18-54   Fees
18-55   Examination; Prerequisites; Exemptions
18-56   (Reserved)
18-57   Insurance
18-58   Expiration Of Insurance
18-59   (Reserved)
18-60   Mechanical Contractors
18-61   Corporations; Registration; Revocation
18-62   Violations Of This Article
18-63   Expiration Of Registration
18-64   Revocation; Re-Registration
18-65   Renewal
18-66   Persons Not Required To Register
18-67   Unlawful Use Of Registered Name
18-68   Unregistered Mechanical-Fitter
18-53   Application
Application for registration shall be made in writing to the chief building
official which shall show the name, residence and business location of the
applicant and such other information as may be required.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 06-28-2006)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-54   Fees
Fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be charged
for registration and examination as follows:
New mechanical contractor's license fee issued between January 1 and June 30
New mechanical contractor's license fee issued between July 1 and December 31
Renewal of mechanical contractor's license
Master mechanical fitter's license registration card Journeyman mechanical
fitter's registration card Master mechanical fitter's examination Journeyman
mechanical fitter's examination
18-55   Examination; Prerequisites; Exemptions
   A.   Before the applicant shall be registered as a master mechanical fitter,
contractor or journeyman, as the case may be, he or she shall submit to an
examination to determine fitness and competency to engage in the business,
trade, or calling of gas fitting, mechanical work or appliance installation
work, as the case may be, which examination shall be given by the online
standardized exam administered by International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) for mechanical fitters as hereinbefore set forth,
such applicant after having by such examination been shown to be fit, competent
and qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of a master or
journeyman mechanical fitter, as the case may be, shall be registered by the
chief building official, who shall deliver to such applicant a certificate of
registration, signed by the chief building official.
   B.   An applicant failing to pass an examination shall not be eligible for
re-examination until thirty days shall have elapsed after the previous
examination. Each applicant shall pay an examination fee for each re-
examination required.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-56   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012)
18-57   Insurance
   A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      B.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      C.   The registrant shall furnish the Office of the Chief Building
Official a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance
coverage.
      D.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-58   Expiration Of Insurance
Any registration certificate issued to a mechanical contractor under the
provisions of this chapter shall be revoked by the mayor and city council
should the holder of such registration certificate permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse. Any corporation, firm, or partnership which
may be registered hereunder as a mechanical contractor in the name of such
corporation, firm, or partnership, shall have a master mechanical fitter who
has submitted to the examination given by the examining board for mechanical
fitters and has thereby shown himself or herself fit, competent and qualified
to engage in the business, trade, or calling of mechanical work, HVAC
installation and gas piping as a bona fide officer of such corporation or as a
member of such firm or partnership and who shall at all times be in actual
charge of and be responsible for the installation, removal, or repair of any
mechanical work or HVAC installation or gas piping work done by such
corporation, firm or partnership. Before such corporation, firm, or partnership
shall be registered in its corporate, firm, or partnership name as a mechanical
contractor, there shall be filed with the chief building official a certificate
from the examining board of mechanical fitters showing the fitness and
competency of such officer of such corporation or such member of such firm or
partnership to engage in the business or calling of master mechanical fitter;
provided, if, after a certificate of registration is issued such corporation,
such member of such firm or partnership shall withdraw there from and cease to
be connected therewith, then and in that event, the mayor and city council
shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration of such corporation,
firm, or partnership upon the request of the chief building official.
18-59   (Reserved)
18-60   Mechanical Contractors
Every mechanical contractor shall be required at all times to have a licensed
journeyman mechanical fitter in charge of all work as a condition for the
issuance and maintenance of such license.
18-61   Corporations; Registration; Revocation
Any corporation, firm, or partnership which may be registered hereunder as a
mechanical contractor in the name of such corporation, firm or partnership
shall have a master mechanical fitter who has submitted to the examination
requirements determined by the examining board for mechanical fitters and
installers and has thereby shown himself or herself fit, competent and
qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of mechanical work, HVAC
installation and gas piping as a bona fide officer of such corporation or as a
member of such firm or partnership and who shall at all times be in actual
charge of and be responsible for the mechanical work, HVAC installation,
removal or repair of any gas fitting work done by such corporation, firm, or
partnership. Before such corporation, firm or partnership shall be registered
in its corporate, firm, or partnership name as a mechanical contractor, there
shall be filed with the chief building official a certificate from the
examining board of mechanical fitters showing the fitness and competency of
such officer of such corporation or such member of such firm or partnership to
engage in the business or calling of mechanical contractor; provided, if, after
a certificate of registration is issued such corporation, such member of such
firm or partnership shall withdraw there from and cease to be connected
therewith, then and in that event the city council shall forthwith revoke the
certificate of registration of such corporation, firm or partnership upon the
request of the chief building official.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-62   Violations Of This Article
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of contracting
mechanical work, HVAC installation and gas piping of any nature without first
being registered as a mechanical contractor qualified under the provisions of
this division; further, mechanical contracting shall be bonded and duly
authorized as provided for in this division.
Journeyman mechanical fitters shall work under the supervision of a master
mechanical fitter and are prohibited from engaging in the business of
mechanical contractor within the scope of this article.
18-63   Expiration Of Registration
Such registration shall expire on December 31 following the date thereof and
shall not be assignable. If registration and license fees are not paid within
thirty days, the license shall automatically be revoked.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-64   Revocation; Re-Registration
If a certificate of registration is revoked, the holder of the same shall not
apply for registration until one year from the date of such revocation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9805, effective 01-01-2021)
18-65   Renewal
Certificates of registration at the time of their expiration may be renewed
upon recommendation of the chief building official for mechanical fitters
without an examination upon payment of the required registration and license
fees.
Any person licensed under the provisions of this division as a master or
journeyman mechanical fitter who does not renew his or her license within a
period of one month after the expiration of the same shall pay the examination
fees required by this division, and submit to an examination by the examining
board before such person can be licensed hereunder.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-66   Persons Not Required To Register
Any person engaged in wholesale or retail sales of plumbing or gas connecting
materials or supplies but not engaged in the installation, alteration, repair
or removal of gas piping or appliances shall not be required to registered
hereunder.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-67   Unlawful Use Of Registered Name
No registered mechanical fitter shall allow his or her name to be used by
another person directly or indirectly either to obtain a permit for the
installation of any mechanical and HVAC, or to do any gas fitting work or any
appliance installing work, and if any registered mechanical fitter violates
this provision, the mayor and city council shall forthwith revoke the
certificate of registration issued to such mechanical fitter, and in addition
to having such certificate of registration revoked, such mechanical fitter may
be prosecuted under §
18-72 for such violation.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-68   Unregistered Mechanical-Fitter
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any job of mechanical or
HVAC, gas piping or making any gas connection incident to any property owned,
managed, or controlled by such person unless the fitter performing such work
has been registered as required by this division and has received a permit from
the chief building official for such particular work; and any such person
causing or permitting any such work to be done in violation of the provisions
hereof shall be guilty of a violation of this division and subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided for such violation.
Division 18-III-6
Permit To Perform Mechanical Work
18-69   Required; To Whom Issued; Term
18-70   Fees
18-71   Permit To Be Kept On Premises
18-69   Required; To Whom Issued; Term
Before any new gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC installation is started or
any repairs are made to existing gas fitting, mechanical, HVAC installation
inside any building or structure, except the stoppage of leaks or minor repairs
or adjustments, a permit shall be obtained from the chief building official and
the required fee paid to the city Office of the Chief Building Official. No
permits shall be issued to anyone except a licensed master mechanical
contractor or authorized journeyman mechanical fitter. All gas fitting
mechanical work or HVAC installation work shall be inspected by the mechanical
inspector. All gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC installation permits shall
expire and become invalid sixty days after the date of their issuance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,008, effective 02-12-2025)
18-70   Fees
Upon the granting of a permit for gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC
installation, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
18-71   Permit To Be Kept On Premises
It shall be the duty of the installer to keep all permits on the premises where
the work for which the permit was issued is being done until such time as the
work is completed, inspected, tested and accepted by the mechanical inspector.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007)
Division 18-III-7
Penalty
18-72   Penalty For Violation Of Article
18-72   Penalty For Violation Of Article
It shall be unlawful for any person upon whom a duty is placed by the
provisions of this article to fail or neglect to comply with the provisions
thereof, and every person failing or neglecting to comply with or violating any
of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred
dollars; each day's failure or neglect to comply with or the violation of any
of the provisions of this article shall be cumulative and deemed a separate and
distinct offense and punishable as such. The penalty provided for in this
section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty provided for
in this article.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 6/28/2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9117, effective 05-29-2007)
CHAPTER 19
LIBRARY
19-1   Established
19-2   To Be Free To Inhabitants Of City
19-3   Library Board; Compensation; Term
19-4   Library Board; Organization; Rules 19-5 Library Board; Powers Generally
19-6   (Reserved)
19-7   Donations
19-8   Private Books And Works Of Art
19-9   Library Fund
19-10   Library Penalties
19-11   Amendment Of Library Rules
19-1   Established
There shall be established in the City a public library and reading room.
19-2   To Be Free To Inhabitants Of City
The use of the library and reading room established under this chapter shall be
forever free to the inhabitants of the City, subject to the rules and
regulations of the library board.
19-3   Library Board; Compensation; Term
The library board shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by the city council. The members shall be residents of the city
of Grand Island. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall be
a member of the Library Board. Terms of office shall be a four (4) year period,
with board positions terminating on June 30 of the year their respective term
expires.
In case of vacancies by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the mayor and city
council shall make appointments to fill such vacancies for the unexpired term.
No director shall receive any pay or compensation for any services rendered as
a member of the board. No director shall be elected for more than two
successive terms.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8876, effective 12-24-2003)
19-4   Library Board; Organization; Rules
The library board directors shall, immediately after their appointment, meet
and organize by electing one of the members president, and one secretary, and
such other officers as they shall deem advisable. Four members of such board
shall be a quorum to transact business, and such board shall have power to make
and adopt such bylaws, rules, and regulations for its guidance and for the
government of the library and reading room that they may deem expedient,
subject to the supervision and control of the city council. Such board shall
have exclusive control of the expenditures of all money collected or donated to
the credit of the library fund and of the renting or construction of any
library building, the supervision, care, and custody of the grounds, rooms or
buildings, constructed, based, or set apart for that purpose.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8878, effective 12-24-2003)
19-5   Library Board; Powers Generally
The board of directors of the public library shall have power to purchase or
lease grounds, to exercise the power of eminent domain and to condemn real
estate for the purpose of securing a site for a library building; to erect,
lease or occupy any appropriate building for the use of such library; to
appoint a suitable librarian and assistants, to fix their compensation and to
remove their appointments in accordance with the Personnel Rules of the City;
to establish regulations for the government of such library as may be deemed
necessary for its preservation and to maintain its usefulness and efficiency;
to fix and impose by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses or
injury upon or to the library, grounds, rooms, books or other property, or the
failure to return any book, or for any violation of any bylaw or regulation;
and to exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and
intent of Neb. Rev. Stat. §51-201 through §51-219 and to carry out the
provisions of this chapter in establishing and maintaining the public library
and reading rooms.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8977, effective 06-08-2005)
19-6   (Reserved)
19-7   Donations
Any person may make any donation of money or lands for the benefit of the
public library and the title to property so donated may be made to and shall
rest in the library board and their successors in office and such board shall
thereby become the owners thereof in trust for the uses of the public library.
19-8   Private Books And Works Of Art
The library board shall have the power to authorize any circulating library
reading matter or works of art of any person to be deposited in the public
library rooms and to be drawn out or used outside of the rooms only on payment
of such fee as the person owning the same may require. Deposits of such reading
matter or works of art may be removed by the owner thereof at pleasure. The
books or other reading matter so deposited in the rooms of the public library
shall be separately and distinctly marked and kept upon the shelves apart from
the books of the public library and every such private library or other
property so deposited in the public library, while so placed or remaining
therein, shall be subject to the use and reading within the library room,
without charge, of anyone entitled to the free use of the public library.
19-9   Library Fund
Any tax levied or collected or funds donated for the benefit of the public
library shall be kept for the use of such library separate and apart from all
other funds of the city and shall be drawn upon by the proper officers upon the
authenticated vouchers of the library board, and shall not be used or disbursed
for any other purpose.
19-10   Library Penalties
Penalties unpaid or accruing by any bylaw or regulation of the library board
may be recovered in a civil action. Such action shall be instituted in the name
of the library board and moneys collected in such action shall be forthwith
placed in the city treasury to the credit of the library fund.
19-11   Amendment Of Library Rules
Any bylaw or regulation established by the library board may be amended or
annulled by the city council.
CHAPTER 20
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
20-1   Disturbing The Peace
20-2   Trespassing
20-3   Littering
20-4   Shoplifting
20-5   Tampering With Meter
20-6   Theft Of Services
20-7   Public Urination
20-8   Discharging Fire Arms, Air Rifles, Etc.
20-9   Curfew; Persons Under Age Of 16 Years
20-10   Horses On City Streets
20-11   Obstructing Public Right-Of-Way
20-12   Obstructing Public Easement
20-13   Nuisances Generally Defined
20-14   Maintenance Of Nuisance Unlawful
20-15   Procedure For Abatement Of Nuisances
20-16   Skateboards
20-17   Disorderly House
20-18   Failure To Disperse
20-19   Volume Control
20-20   Tobacco; Possession By Minors
20-21   Directed Health Measure Violation
20-1   Disturbing The Peace
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of any other
person by loud noise, music, or language, by fighting or threatening to fight,
or by any other offensive action. It shall be unlawful for any person in legal
possession or charge of a residence or other private property to permit, or by
inaction allow other persons on the premises to disturb the peace jointly or
severally by loud noise, music, or language.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8958, effective 3-9-2005)
20-2   Trespassing
   A.   A person commit criminal trespass if, knowing that he or she is not
licensed or privileged to do so, he or she enters or remains in any place as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
      1.   Actual communication to the actor; or
      2.   Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come
to the attention of intruders; or
      3.   Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders
except as otherwise provided by Nebraska law.
   B.   A person commits criminal trespass if, knowing that he or she is not
licensed or privileged to do so, he or she intentionally causes an electronic
device, such as an unmanned aircraft, to enter into, upon, or above the
property of another, including such property owned by such persona and leased
or rented to another, with the intent to observe another person without his or
her consent in a place of solitude or seclusion.
   C.   For purposes of this section, unmanned aircraft means an aircraft,
including an aircraft commonly known as a drone, which is operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
20-3   Littering
   A.   Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense
of littering unless:
      1.   Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use
such property; or
      2.   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for such purpose.
   B.   The word litter as used in this section shall mean all waste material
susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded, or otherwise disposed of by
any person upon any property in the City but does not include wastes of primary
processes of farming or manufacturing. Waste material as used in this
subsection shall man any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   C.   The operator of any motor vehicle or watercraft from which litter is
dropped, thrown, deposited, or dumped in violation of subsection (A) above
shall be deemed to have committed this violation.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
20-4   Shoplifting
   A.   It shall be unlawful to shoplift. A person commits the offense of theft
by shoplifting when he or she, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to
his or her own use without paying for the goods or merchandise or to deprive
the owner of possession of such goods or merchandise or its retail value, in
whole or in part, does any of the following:
      1.   Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any
store or retail establishment;
      2.   Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise
of any store or retail establishment;
      3.   Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail
establishment from one container to another;
      4.   Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of a good or of
merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of a good or of
merchandise;
      5.   Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the retail price of the goods or merchandise; or
      6.   Alters, bypasses, disables, shields, or removes any security or
alarm device attached to or housing any goods or merchandise of any store,
including the use or possession of a security device countermeasure as defined
in Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-511.03, prior to purchase of the goods or merchandise.
   B.   In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, photographs of the
shoplifted property may be accepted as prima facie evidence as to the identity
of the property. Such photograph shall be accompanied by a written statement
containing the following:
      1.   A description of the property;
      2.   The name of the owner or owners of the property;
      3.   The time, date, and location where the shoplifting occurred;
      4.   The time and date the photograph was taken;
      5.   The name of the photographer; and
      6.   Verification by the arresting officer.
   C.   The purpose of this subsection is to allow the owner or owners of
shoplifted property the use of such property during pending criminal
prosecutions.
   D.   Prior to allowing the use of the shoplifted property as provided in
this section, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a motion for
retention of the property, which motion shall be granted if there is any
reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and accompanying affidavit
may be misleading.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
20-5   Tampering With Meter
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, alter, or otherwise interfere in
any manner with any meter made or provided for the measuring or monitoring
usage of electricity, gas, water, or audiovisual transmission for which payment
is required, without first having the permission of the person or company
supplying such services.
20-6   Theft Of Services
   A.   A person commits theft if he or she obtains services, which he or she
knows are available only for compensation, by deception or thereat or by false
token or other means to avoid payment for the service. Services include labor,
professional service, telephone service, electric service, cable television
service, or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants, or
elsewhere, admission to exhibitions, and use of vehicles or other movable
property. When compensation for service is ordinarily paid immediately upon the
rendering of such service, as in the case of hotels and restaurants, refusal to
pay or absconding without payment or offer to pay gives rise to a presumption
that the service was obtained by deception as to intention to pay.
   B.   A person commits theft if, having control over the disposition of
services of others to which he or she is not entitled, he or she diverts such
services to his or her own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled
thereto.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
20-7   Public Urination
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or attempt to urinate on the
public streets, alleys, or other places open to the public within the City.
20-8   Discharging Fire Arms, Air Rifles, Etc.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer
in the course of his or her duties, to discharge or fire a gun, pistol, fire
arm, cannon, air rifle, sling shot, or other item designed for the discharge of
bullets, missiles, rocks, or other dangerous items by the operation thereof,
anywhere within the City.
   B.   The above prohibition shall not apply to a location designed and
utilized for the safe usage of such items, whether established or constructed
on a temporary or permanent basis.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess in the passenger
compartment of a motor vehicle off his or her own premises, an air rifle, bb or
pellet gun, airsoft gun, or paintball gun, unless the item is unloaded and
encased in a closed container that is secured by means of latches, zipper, or
similar method. Any item found in violation of this section shall be seized as
evidence and held by the Grand Island Police Department for a minimum period of
sixty (60) days. If at the end of the sixty-day period the item is no longer
required to be held as evidence for the prosecution of any violation of this
section, any other city ordinance, or violation of any federal or state
statute, the item will be returned to the rightful owner. If the rightful owner
is under eighteen (18) years of age at the time the item is eligible for
release, the item will be released to the rightful owner’s parent or legal
guardian.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9207, effective 03-25-09)
20-9   Curfew; Persons Under Age Of 16 Years
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to be
upon the public streets or other public places within the City between the
hours of 10:30 p.m., and 6:00 a.m., of the following day on all days preceding
a school day, nor between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 6:00 a.m., on the
following day on all other days, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or
an adult having the legal custody and care of such minor person, or unless such
minor person is upon an emergency errand or other business directed by his or
her parent or legal guardian.
20-10   Horses On City Streets
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, walk, ride, or otherwise
permit one or more horses, mules, oxen, or other draft animals on or along the
public right-of-way of the streets set forth in subsection (B) below, unless
said person has notified the chief of police of the route to be followed at
least twelve (12) hours prior to traveling thereon. Permission shall be denied
if, in the opinion of the chief of police such usage would interfere with, or
endanger, the normal traffic or use of the streets.
   B.   The following streets and areas shall require advance notice of usage:
      1.   Webb Road from Highway 281 to Highway 2;
      2.   Broadwell Avenue from Anna Street to northern city limits;
      3.   Eddy Street from Anna Street to State Street
      4.   Second Street;
      5.   First Street from Greenwich Avenue to Plum Street
      6.   Locust Street from Highway 34 to First Street
      7.   Central Business District: the area bounded on the north by Fourth
Street, on the east by Oak Street, on the south by Koenig Street, and on the
west by Eddy Street.
20-11   Obstructing Public Right-Of-Way
   A.   It shall be illegal for any person, corporation or entity to erect,
plant, place, or maintain, fences, hedges, shrubbery, or other natural or man-
made objects or structures on any public right-of-way which interfere with or
are hazardous to the City's or the general public's use of the right-of-way. No
such objects may be placed on any public right-of-way without the prior consent
of the City.
   B.   When the City discovers any objects on the city right-of-way as
described in Subsection (A) herein, the City will notify the adjacent property
owner or tenant that said objects shall be removed immediately upon giving
personal notice or posting the property.
   C.   Any objects not removed pursuant to Subsections (A) and (B) herein may
be removed by city personnel and taken to the Grand Island Police Department
impoundment facility or such other facility as the city deems appropriate for
storing said objects. If the objects are not claimed by the owners within
thirty days after being placed in storage, then the city may dispose of the
property as it deems appropriate. If said objects are auctioned, the City may
retain sufficient funds to pay all of the expenses of removal from the right-
of-way and storage. Any person who has items removed from the right-of-way by
the City shall pay a daily storage fee, the cost of disposal and an
administrative fee of $50.00.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004)
20-12   Obstructing Public Easement
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or person in charge of private
property to erect, plant, place, or maintain trees, fences, hedges, shrubbery,
or other natural or man-made objects or structures on any portion of said
property on which the City has an easement, where the said object will
interfere in any way with the City's rights under the easement in effect.
20-13   Nuisances Generally Defined
20-13.1   Nuisances; Specifically Defined
A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:
   A.   Violates any provision of this Code or any ordinances of the City of
Grand Island or statute of the State of Nebraska which is consistently repeated
or of a continuous and ongoing nature, if uncorrected.
   B.   Is an act or thing done, made, permitted, allowed, or conducted on any
property, public or private, by any person, firm, or corporation, their agents
or servants, detrimental to the health, or to the damage or injury of any of
the inhabitants of the City.
   C.   Is offensive to the senses.
   D.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street, or
highway in the City.
   E.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property.
   F.   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004)
20-13.1   Nuisances; Specifically Defined
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of any of
the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are
hereby declared to be nuisances:
   A.   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, feathers,
vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl.
   B.   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not
securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
   C.   Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards,
stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.
   D.   Stockpiling animal manure in a manner that causes an abundance of
flies, malodorous conditions or creates other health concerns, or which is kept
or handled in violation of any ordinance of the City.
   E.   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings and
offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity;
provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of
waste in receptacles in a manner approved by the health officer of the Central
District Health Department, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place
and manner approved by the health officer.
   F.   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken
glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be
kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.
   G.   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing
crates, mattresses, bedding, used furniture, used appliances, excelsior,
packing hay, straw or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap
iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or
any other waste materials when any of said articles or materials create a
condition in which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire
danger.
   H.   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or
other structures are either a fire hazard or a menace to the public health or
safety.
   I.   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or for
the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of
any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts
thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by
contractors or buildings or by other persons.
   J.   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
   K.   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in this
Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8960, effective 3-9-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 8-10-2005)
20-14   Maintenance Of Nuisance Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a nuisance whether on said
person's property, or on public property.
20-15   Procedure For Abatement Of Nuisances
If the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of any lot, building, or other
premises, or the person responsible for the maintenance of a nuisance fails to
abate said nuisance ten (10) days after a notice to abate has been mailed by
ordinary first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of such person or persons, the city attorney's office may,
with the consent of the mayor, bring legal action to obtain abatement of the
nuisance.
In the event legal action to abate a nuisance is commenced on behalf of the
City of Grand Island, the City Attorney shall request that the Court enter such
order as is appropriate to expeditiously and completely abate said nuisance and
that said order be of a continuing nature, permanently enjoining the defendant
from continuing, maintaining, renewing or restoring said nuisance on said
persons property or public property and entering a judgment against the
defendant(s) for the costs incurred by the City of Grand Island in abating said
nuisance conditions.
20-16   Skateboards
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard within the following
described boundaries of the City of Grand Island: Union Pacific right-of-way on
the north, Oak Street on the east, First Street on the south, and Elm Street on
the west.
   B.   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be
fined according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code.
20-17   Disorderly House
   A.   The term "disorderly house" as used in this code shall mean any room,
house, building, structure, or premises, where unlawful or illegal acts are
being committed.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in possession,
charge, or in control of any room, house, building, structure, or premises to
knowingly collect or permit to be collected therein persons who are engaging in
any unlawful act, or to knowingly make, cause, permit or suffer to be made
therein any loud or improper noise to the annoyance or disturbance of any
person or neighborhood.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be a resident or occupant of, or
visit or frequent any disorderly house with knowledge of, and participation in,
the illegal activities occurring therein.
20-18   Failure To Disperse
   A.   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person
or persons are creating a disturbance of the peace and quiet of any person or
neighborhood, such police officer may order said person or persons not residing
on the premises to disperse for the purpose of abating the said nuisance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with a lawful
order to disperse given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's
duties under this section.
20-19   Volume Control
No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated,
any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, compact disc (CD) player, or other
machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any public
property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park or
thoroughfare; or any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space
unless the volume of amplified sound shall be so controlled that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the source and
so that the volume is not unreasonably great and the noise, raucous, jarring,
disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8958, effective 3-9-2005)
20-20   Tobacco; Possession By Minors
20-20.1   Definitions
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to possess any tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine
products.
   B.   It shall not be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years to:
      1.   Possess tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine
products under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person
in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home.
      2.   Sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products, vapor
products or alternative nicotine products in the course of his or her
employment by a tobacco licensee; or
      3.   Possess or purchase tobacco products, vapor products or alternative
nicotine products for the purpose of testing or enforcing compliance with
statutes, laws or ordinances governing the sale of tobacco products, vapor
products or alternative nicotine products as long as law enforcement is
conducting the compliance check.
   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined
according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9547, effective 08-04-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9745, effective 09-11-2019)
20-20.1   Definitions
   A.   Tobacco products shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, or dipping tobacco.
   B.   Vapor products shall mean any noncombustible product, whether
containing nicotine or not, that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means,
regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor. Vapor product
shall include any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other
container of solution that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. Vapor product does not include an alternative nicotine
product, cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, or any product regulated
as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under
Chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   C.   Alternative nicotine product shall mean any noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine
product does not include any vapor product, cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco
product, or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food
and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9547, effective 08-04-2015)
20-21   Directed Health Measure Violation
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to violate the findings and
orders of a Directed Health Measure duly issued by the Central District Health
Department or by the Health Director for the Nebraska Department of Health and
Human Services. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than $100.00 per incident or per patron, if a business,
according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code and as found on the
Grand Island City Code Waiver Fine Schedule as approved by the Grand Island
City Council.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9769, effective 04-15-2020)
CHAPTER 21
MANUFACTURED HOMES And MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
21-1   Definitions
21-2   Jurisdiction
21-3   Permit Required
21-4   Applications; New Permits
21-5   Renewed Permit
21-6   Park Plan To Be Filed
21-7   Investigation; City Council
21-8   Permit Fee
21-9   (Reserved)
21-10   Permit; Revocation; Notice; Hearing
21-11   Permit; Transferability
21-12   Permit; Expiration
21-13   Parking On Private Property
21-14   Annual Inspections; Reports
21-15   Register Of Manufactured Homes In Park
21-16   Condition And Repair Of Park Grounds
21-17   Restriction On Location Of Parks
21-18   Location, Area, General Layout And Improvements
21-19   Water Supply
21-20   Sewage Disposal
21-21   Private Water And Sanitary Sewage Systems
21-22   Appurtenances; Accessory And Administrative Buildings
21-23   Refuse Storage And Collection
21-24   Exterior Electrical And Lighting Facilities
21-25   Manufactured Home Stands And Skirting
21-26   Dogs, Cats, Etc., Running At Large
21-27   Fuel Storage Tanks
21-28   Fire Prevention
21-29   Authority Of Officials To Inspect
21-30   Existing Manufactured Home Parks
21-31   Minimum Construction Code
21-1   Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Chief building official means the legally designated authority of the city or
his authorized representative.
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, and forty
body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty or
more square feet in size and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities.
Manufactured home lot means any individually owned plot of ground zoned and
platted so that it is permissible to place a single manufactured home upon it
after a permit is issued by the chief building official or his/her designee.
The manufactured home may be attached to a permanent foundation or basement
built in accordance with approved codes.
Manufactured home park means any lot of ground zoned and licensed as such by
the City within which two or more manufactured home spaces are located.
Manufactured home space means an area within a manufactured home park for the
placement of a single manufactured home and reserved for the exclusive use of
its occupants.
Manufactured home stand means that facility for the placing of a single
manufactured home and appurtenant structures thereto onto a foundation system
designed to resist horizontal wind pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square
foot minimum and nine (9) pounds per square foot minimum for uplift, or upon a
surface foundation system designed to resist the same forces.
Permit means a written permit issued by the chief building official or his/her
designee promulgated thereunder.
Recreational Vehicle as defined in
Chapter 22, Article IX of the Grand Island City Code.
Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men
and women with laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be required
by this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-2   Jurisdiction
It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced within the
city and in the two mile area beyond its corporate limits.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-3   Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, conduct, establish or maintain
site for the purpose of a manufactured home park unless a permit to do so shall
have first been issued by the city.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-4   Applications; New Permits
Applications for a manufactured home park permit shall be in writing and signed
by the applicant or authorized agent and shall contain the following:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant.
   B.   The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal description
of the manufactured home park.
   C.   A complete plan of the manufactured home park, showing compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   D.   Such further information as may be requested by the chief building
official or his/her designee to determine that the proposed manufactured home
park will comply with legal requirements.
21-5   Renewed Permit
Renewal of permits shall be made in writing to the City Building Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-6   Park Plan To Be Filed
The applicant for a permit required by this chapter or authorized agent shall
file with the chief building official or his/her designee a complete plan
showing:
   A.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land to be used for such
manufactured home park.
   B.   The number, location, and size of all manufactured home spaces.
   C.   The location and width of roadways and walkways.
   D.   The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.
   E.   The location and size of water and sewer lines.
   F.   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured home park.
   G.   Parks may have spaces for recreational vehicles provided that such
spaces shall be identified on the park plan filed, and shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the total number of spaces. Recreational vehicles shall be
limited in duration of stay. No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to remain
in a space for more than one hundred eighty (180) days within any consecutive
three hundred sixty five (365) day period. Any revisions or additions to such
plan must be reviewed and approved by the City Council as provided in Section
21-7 of this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-7   Investigation; City Council
Before any permit is issued to construct a manufactured home park, it shall be
the duty of the chief building official or his/her designee to examine the
plans and specifications of such park on file, as well as the proposed premises
ascertaining whether or not all ordinances pertaining to zoning, plumbing,
heating, electrical installations, storm water drainage and traffic flows have
been observed and if all regulations of the city concerning the construction
and operation of sewer and water mains and the handling and removal of garbage
comply with city ordinances and the laws of the state. The application for such
permit, together with the findings and recommendations of the chief building
official or his/her designee shall then be referred to the city council for its
approval or rejection.
21-8   Permit Fee
   A.   If the city council grants such permit required by this chapter to any
such applicant, it shall thereupon direct the chief building official or his/
her designee to issue such permit upon prepayment of a permit fee to the
building department, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   B.   Prior to expiration of the annual permit, a permit may be renewed upon
prepayment of the annual permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island
Fee Schedule.
   C.   Failure to obtain a permit renewal by January 31 of each subsequent
year, an investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be paid, in addition
to the permit fee, prior to obtaining a renewal of such permit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-9   (Reserved)
21-10   Permit; Revocation; Notice; Hearing
If any operator of a manufactured home park to whom a permit has been issued
shall continue to violate the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state
pertaining to sanitation, public health and welfare after due notice by the
officials of the city or the state of such violation, the city council shall
have the right to revoke such permit to operate such park in the following
manner:
A notice shall be served on the person holding such permit, setting forth
wherein permittee has failed to comply with the ordinances of the city or laws
of the state and citing permittee to appear before the city council at a day
and hour therein specified, not less than three days after the personal service
of such notice of such permittee or agent in charge of such manufactured home
park and show cause, if any, why such permit should not be revoked or
suspended. At the time and place mentioned in such notice, the permittee shall
have the right to appear in person or by counsel and to introduce evidence.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-11   Permit; Transferability
No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable.
21-12   Permit; Expiration
All permits granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 following the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked.
21-13   Parking On Private Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit the parking of any
manufactured home on private or public property unless such property is within
an approved zoning district permitting manufactured homes, or within a
permitted manufactured home park or an approved space. A permit for the
placement of the manufactured home must be issued by the City Building
Department prior to placement.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-14   Annual Inspections; Reports
It shall be the duty of the chief building official or his/her designee to
inspect all manufactured home parks now existing in the city and in the area
two miles beyond its corporate limits, and all manufactured home parks
hereafter established at least annually. No charge shall be made for such
inspection, and the owners of such manufactured home parks shall be furnished
in writing the results of such inspection.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-15   Register Of Manufactured Homes In Park
The owner or operator of any manufactured home park shall keep a register
containing a record of all manufactured homes within the park to include the
name, address, and occupation of each owner; the make, year, model, width,
trade name, and length of each manufactured home; the present license plate of
each manufactured home; and the date of arrival and departure of each
manufactured home. Such record shall at all times be open for inspection to
police officials or other officials of the city.
21-16   Condition And Repair Of Park Grounds
Every person owning, operating or caring for a manufactured home park shall
maintain such park ground, service buildings, baths, or other permanent
equipment in connection herewith in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
maintain such equipment in a state of good repair and shall in all respects
comply with all the ordinances of the city.
21-17   Restriction On Location Of Parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or conduct a manufactured home
park within the city or in the two-mile area beyond its corporate limits except
in districts zoned for that purpose.
21-18   Location, Area, General Layout And Improvements
The manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall be
so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply. A Storm Water
Drainage Plan shall be submitted and approved by the Director of Public Works.
All such manufactured home parks shall be in the areas free from marshes,
swamp, or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
The area of the manufactured home park shall be large enough to accommodate:
   A.   The designated number of home spaces
   B.   Necessary streets and roadways
   C.   Off-street parking of automobiles shall be provided; such spaces shall
be hard surfaced and in the amount of two (2) per dwelling. Parking spaces may
be provided on unit space where trailers are parked, by separate parking areas,
or both.
Each manufactured home space shall contain a minimum of three thousand (3,000)
square feet.
Every manufactured home space shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with
unobstructed access to a public street. Such places shall be defined and
enumerated.
Manufactured homes shall be parked in such spaces so that there will be a
minimum of fifteen feet between manufactured homes and so that no manufactured
home will be less than ten feet from the exterior boundary of the manufactured
home park. It shall be unlawful to locate a manufactured home less than thirty
feet from any state highway, or so that any part of such manufactured home will
obstruct any roadway or walkway in a manufactured home park.
It shall be unlawful to allow any manufactured home to be occupied in a
manufactured home park unless the manufactured home is situated on a
manufactured home space.
Access roads shall be provided to each manufactured home space. Each access
road shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall connect with a street
or highway, shall have a minimum width of forty feet, and provide for emergency
vehicle access.
All newly constructed roadway, access roads and parking spaces shall be
constructed with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as asphaltic cement
concrete, portland cement concrete, or paving brick.
The ten (10) foot exterior boundary shall be landscaped as per requirements
identified in §36-36.1 of this code.
Recreational Vehicle Sites shall provide the following:
   A.   A minimum site of 1,500 square feet.
   B.   A minimum site width of 30 feet.
   C.   A minimum setback to site boundary of 5 feet.
   D.   A minimum separation between vehicles of 12 feet.
   E.   One hard surfaced vehicle parking pad of 180 square feet for a
passenger vehicle.
   F.   All recreational vehicle sites shall be served with a single meter and
service for electrical and water utilities, except where multiple spaces are
separated by access roadways, in which case separate services and meters may be
allowed for each grouping of recreational vehicle sites.
   G.   All applicable provisions of the Building, Electrical, and Plumbing
codes shall apply.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9005, effective 9-28-2005)
21-19   Water Supply
An adequate supply of potable water from the city's water system for drinking
and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of such park
ground. Such water supply shall be connected by pipes to all manufactured home
spaces for connection to manufactured home units.
21-20   Sewage Disposal
Each manufactured home park shall have an adequate connection with the sanitary
sewer system of the city, and there shall be a sanitary sewer connection on
each unit space in such park for connection with manufactured homes when unit
spaces are occupied. It is expressly provided that when such unit spaces are
unoccupied the outlet in the sanitary sewer shall be capped by a device which
would require tools to remove.
21-21   Private Water And Sanitary Sewage Systems
In all cases where manufactured home parks or manufactured home lots are so
situated that connections with the city water main or with sanitary sewer are
not available, the private water supply and sanitary sewer disposal system for
such parks or lots shall be located and constructed or reconstructed to meet
the standards of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city.
21-22   Appurtenances; Accessory And Administrative Buildings
All accessory and service buildings shall be detached and located the same as
regulations concerning accessory buildings provided in
Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code, and shall be constructed in
conformance with the City Building, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes pursuant to
a permit issued by the Building Department prior to construction. No additions
shall be permitted onto a manufactured home except an add-on unit constructed
by a manufacturer of manufactured homes recognized by the State of Nebraska.
Such add-ons shall receive a permit from the Building Department prior to
placement and attachment to the manufactured home and shall be placed onto a
foundation system equal to that which the manufactured home rests upon.
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   A one hundred twenty (120) square foot or less entry porch (no living
space) which is open on at least two (2) sides;
   B.   Carport or patio cover open on at least three (3) sides;
   C.   Manufactured home on a private lot placed upon a permanent foundation.
No additions shall be constructed without first obtaining a permit from the
Grand Island Building Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-23   Refuse Storage And Collection
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home park
shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
All refuse shall be stored in approved containers. Containers shall be provided
in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse.
Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container
racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate
cleaning around them.
All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection
service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the manufactured
home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected
and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.
Common use or central collection sites shall be visually screened or fenced.
21-24   Exterior Electrical And Lighting Facilities
An electrical outlet supplying at least one hundred and fifteen volts shall be
provided for each manufactured home space. The installation shall comply with
all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical
outlets shall be grounded and weatherproof. No main power supply line shall be
permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than eighteen feet above
the ground.
Streets, driveways and walkways shall be adequately lighted.
21-25   Manufactured Home Stands And Skirting
If a manufactured home is not placed upon a permanent foundation, the
manufactured home shall then be placed upon a manufactured home stand to
provide an adequate and approved foundation for the positioning of the
superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation, or overturning in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications.
Skirting shall be required for all manufactured homes placed on a manufactured
home stand unless such unit will be on the manufactured home stand for less
than forty-five (45) days. The skirting shall be sufficient to withstand wind
load requirements and shall not provide a harborage for junk or rodents, nor
create a fire hazard. Such skirting shall be provided with removable or hinged
access panels sufficient to provide easy access to all utility connection
points of the manufactured home and its subsequent connection to the utility
risers if they are located within the skirted area.
21-26   Dogs, Cats, Etc., Running At Large
No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, or other pet animal shall permit it
to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any manufactured
home park.
21-27   Fuel Storage Tanks
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to manufactured homes
shall be copper or other acceptable tubing and shall be permanently installed
and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be
securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the
manufactured home or less than five feet from any manufactured home exit.
21-28   Fire Prevention
   A.   Fire prevention in all manufactured home parks shall be under the
direct supervision of the City Fire Department.
   B.   Manufactured home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and
other flammable materials.
   C.   Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all other places designated
by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in good operating
condition.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-29   Authority Of Officials To Inspect
All proper officials, agents and employees of the city charged with the duty of
inspection of manufactured home parks or the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter or of repairing and maintaining the utilities constructed on such
park grounds shall have the right and they are hereby empowered to enter upon
the premises of any manufactured home park ground now operating or which may
hereafter be operated within the city or the two-mile area thereto to inspect
the same and all accommodations connected therewith or located thereon and to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
21-30   Existing Manufactured Home Parks
This chapter shall not apply to existing mobile home parks, now referred to as
manufactured home parks, in existence prior to March 10, 1975, except in the
following instances:
   A.   Any installation, reconstruction, remodeling, or reconfiguration of
manufactured home spaces, utility connections, streets, sidewalks, or other
infrastructure upon which work is commenced after April 30, 1998, shall comply
with all provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any placement of a new or different manufactured home on an existing
manufactured home space occurring after April 30, 1998, shall comply with all
provisions of this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006)
21-31   Minimum Construction Code
All manufactured homes and manufactured home parks shall comply with the
minimum housing standards as set forth in
Chapter 8 - Buildings, Article VII. Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Grand Island and Title 178 - Nebraska Department of Health, Chapter 5 - Rules,
Regulations and Standards Governing Mobile Home Parks, Section 001, Definitions
and Scope, 005, Utility Systems, 006, Sanitary Conditions and 007, Observance
of Regulations. In any instance in which there is a conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Nebraska
Department of Health, the more stringent provisions shall govern.
CHAPTER 22
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Article 22-I   In General
Article 22-II   Vehicles And Operators
Article 22-III   Traffic Regulations
Article 22-IV   Operation Of Vehicles
Article 22-V   Serious Traffic Offenses
Article 22-VI   Miscellaneous Offenses
Article 22-VII   Stopping, Standing, And Parking
Article 22-VIII   Minibikes
Article 22-IX   Recreational Vehicles And Vessels
Article 22-X   School Safety Patrol
Article 22-XI   Handicapped Parking
Article 22-XII   Off-Street Parking
Article 22-XIII   Repealed
Article 22-I
In General
22-1   Definitions
22-2   Traffic Division; Establishment
22-3   Traffic Division; Duties
22-4   Chief Of Police; Powers And Duties
22-5   Temporary Traffic Regulations
22-6   Police Officers; Powers
22-7   Traffic Division Record
22-8   Locations Where Ordinances Apply
22-9   Chapter Does Not Affect Civil Liability
22-10   Authorized Emergency Vehicles
22-11   Issuance Of Citation
22-12   Failure To Appear
22-1   Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Acceleration or Deceleration Lane shall mean a supplementary lane of a highway
lane for traffic, which adjoins the traveled lanes of a highway and connects an
approach or exit road with such highway.
Alley shall mean a street intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular
traffic.
Alley entrance shall mean the extension of the alley from the property line to
the street curb line.
Arterial street shall mean any street designated by the city council as part of
a major arterial system of streets or used primarily for through traffic.
Autocycle shall mean any motor vehicle:
   A.   Having a seat that does not require the operator to straddle or sit
astride it,
   B.   Designed to travel on three wheels in contact with the ground,
   C.   Having antilock brakes,
   D.   Designed to be controlled with a steering wheel and pedals, and
   E.   In which the operator and passenger ride either side by side or in
tandem in a seating area that is equipped with a manufacturer-installed three-
point safety belt system for each occupant and that has a seating area that
either (a) is completely enclosed and is equipped with manufacturer-installed
airbags and a manufacturer-installed roll cage or (b) is not completely
enclosed and is equipped with a manufacturer-installed rollover protection
system.
Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the Fire Department, the
Police Department, or ambulance owned by public or privately-owned ambulance
services.
Automatic traffic signals shall mean any device electrically or mechanically
controlled by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.
Bicycle shall mean:
   A.   every device propelled solely by human power, upon which any person may
ride, and having two, three or four wheels, any one or of which being more than
fourteen inches in diameter; and
   B.   An electric bicycle.
Bus shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten
passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle
other than a taxicab designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
Class I Electric Bicycle means a device with the following components:
   A.   Two, three, or four wheels;
   B.   A saddle or seat for the rider;
   C.   Fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power; and
   D.   An electric motor:
      a.   Not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power;
      b.   That produces no more than one brake horsepower;
      c.   Capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no
more than twenty miles per hour on level ground;
      d.   That only provides power when the rider is pedaling; and
      e.   That does not provide power if the electric bicycle is traveling at
a speed of more than twenty miles per hour.
Class II Electric Bicycle means a device with the following components:
   A.   Two. Three, or four wheels;
   B.   A saddle or seat for the rider;
   C.   Fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power; and
   D.   An electric motor:
      a.   Not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power;
      b.   That produces no more than one brake horsepower;
      c.   Capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no
more than twenty miles per hour on level ground;
      d.   Capable of providing power whether or not the rider is pedaling; and
      e.   That does not provide power if the electric bicycle is traveling at
a speed of more than twenty miles per hour.
Class III Electric Bicycle means a device with the following components:
   A.   Two, three, or four wheels;
   B.   A saddle or seat for the rider;
   C.   Fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power; and
   D.   An electric motor:
      a.   Not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power;
      b.   That produces no more than one brake horsepower;
      c.   Capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no
more than twenty-eight miles per hour on level ground;
      d.   That only provides power when the rider is pedaling; and
      e.   That does not provide power if the electric bicycle is traveling at
a speed of more than twenty-eight miles per hour.
Congested district shall include that portion of the City within the following
bounds: South Front Street from Oak Street to Walnut Street; Third Street from
the Burlington Northern-Sante Fe Railroad Company right-of-way to Eddy Street;
Second Street from the Burlington Northern-Sante Fe Railroad Company right-of-
way to Elm Street; First Street from Sycamore Street to Cedar Street; Fourth
Street from Eddy Street east to Sycamore Street; Oak Street from Second Street
to Fourth Street; Kimball Avenue from Second Street to South Front Street;
Sycamore Street from First Street to Fourth Street; Pine Street from Court
Street to Sixth Street; Locust Street from South Front Street to Charles
Street; Wheeler Avenue from South Front Street to Koenig Street; Walnut Street
from First Street to Fifth Street; Cedar Street from First Street to South
Front Street; Elm Street from Second Street to Fourth Street; Cleburn Street
from Second Street to Fourth Street; and Eddy Street from Second Street to
Fourth Street.
Crosswalk shall mean:
   A.   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
roadway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edge of
the roadway; or
   B.   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
designated by competent authority and marked for pedestrian crossing by lines,
signs, or other devices.
Curb shall mean the lateral boundaries of that portion of a street designed for
the use of vehicles, whether marked by curb stones or not so marked.
Drive shall mean to operate or be in the actual physical control of a motor
vehicle.
Driver or operator shall mean any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device shall mean a self-balancing, two-
nontandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person and containing
an electric propulsion system with an average power of seven hundred fifty
watts or one horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when
powered solely by such a propulsion system and while being ridden by an
operator who weighs one hundred seventy pounds, is less than twenty miles per
hour.
Electric Bicycle shall mean a Class I Electric Bicycle, a Class II Electric
Bicycle, and a Class III Electric Bicycle.
Golf Car Vehicle shall mean a vehicle that has at least four wheels, has a
maximum level ground speed of less than twenty miles per hour, has a maximum
payload capacity of one thousand two hundred pounds, has a maximum gross
vehicle weight of two thousand five hundred pounds, has a maximum passenger
capacity of not more than four persons, is designed and manufactured for
operation on a golf course for sporting ad recreational purposes, and is not
being operated within the boundaries of a golf course.
Intersection or street intersection shall mean the area embraced within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two or more highways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection. The junction of any alley with a street shall not constitute an
intersection.
Low-Speed Vehicle shall mean:
   A.   A four-wheeled motor vehicle
      a.   Whose speed attainable in one mile is more than twenty miles per
hour and not more than twenty-five miles per hour on a paved, level surface;
      b.   Whose gross vehicle weight rating is less than three thousand
pounds; and
      c.   That complies with 49 C.F.R. part 571, as such part existed on
January 1, 2023; or
   B.   A three-wheeled motor vehicle
      a.   Whose maximum speed attainable is not more than twenty-five miles
per hour on a paved, level surface;
      b.   Whose gross vehicle weight rating is less than three thousand
pounds; and
      c.   Which is equipped with a windshield and an occupant protection
system. A motorcycle with a sidecar attached is not a low-speed vehicle.
Median shall mean that part of a divided street or highway, such as a physical
barrier or clearly indicated dividing section or space, so constructed as to
impede vehicular traffic across or within such barrier, section, or space, or
to divide such highway or street into two roadways for vehicular travel in
opposite directions.
Median Crossover shall mean a connection between roadways of a divided highway
or street the use of which may permit a vehicle to reverse its direction by
continuously moving forward.
Median Opening shall mean a gap in a median provided for crossing and turning
traffic.
Minibike shall mean a two-wheel motor vehicle which has a total wheel and tire
diameter of less than fourteen inches or an engine-rated capacity of less than
forty-five cubic centimeters displacement, a seat height less than twenty-five
inches from the ground or any other two-wheel motor vehicle primarily designed
by the manufacturer for off-road use only. Minibike shall not include an
electric personal assistive mobility device.
Minitruck shall mean a foreign-manufactured import vehicle or domestic-
manufactured vehicle which:
   A.   Is powered by an internal combustion engine with a piston or rotor
displacement of one thousand five hundred cubic centimeters or less;
   B.   Is sixty-seven inches or less in width;
   C.   Has a dry weight of four thousand two hundred pounds or less;
   D.   Travels on four or more tires;
   E.   Has a top speed of approximately fifty-five miles per hour;
   F.   Is equipped with a bed or compartment for hauling;
   G.   Has an enclosed passenger cab;
   H.   Is equipped with headlights, taillights, turn signals, windshield
wipers, a rearview mirror, and an occupant protection system; and
   I.   Has a four-speed, five-speed, or automatic transmission.
Moped shall mean a device with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human
power, an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not
exceeding fifty cubic centimeters which produces no more than two brake
horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum design speed of
no more than thirty (30) miles per hour.
Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, excluding tractors and electric personal assistive mobility
devices. Motorcycle includes an autocycle.
Motor-driven Cycle shall mean every motorcycle, including every motor scooter,
with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower as measured at
the drive shaft, mopeds, and every bicycle with a motor attached except for an
electric bicycle. Motor-driven cycle shall not include an electric personal
assistive mobility device or an autocycle.
Motor Vehicle shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated on
rails, except bicycles, mopeds or self-propelled chairs used by persons who are
disabled, and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
Official Traffic Signals shall mean all signals not inconsistent with this
chapter, placed or erected by authority of the city council or official having
authority for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.
One-Way Street shall mean a street designated as such by the city council upon
which vehicle traffic shall move in one direction.
Operator or Driver shall mean any person who operates, drives, or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
Operator’s or Driver’s License shall mean any license or permit to operate a
motor vehicle issued under the laws of this State, including:
   A.   Any replacement license or instruction permit;
   B.   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle whether such
person holds a valid license;
   C.   Any nonresident’s operating privilege which shall mean the privilege
conferred upon a nonresident by the laws of this state pertaining to the
operation of a motor vehicle in this state by such person or the use in this
state of a vehicle owned by such person;
   D.   An employment driving permit issued as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§60-4,129 and 60-4,130; and
   E.   A medical hardship driving permit issued as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§60-4,130.01 and 60-4,130.02.
Owner shall mean, with respect to a vehicle, a person, other than a person
holding a security interest, having the property in or title to a vehicle,
including a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a
security interest in another person, but excluding a lessee under a lease not
intended as security.
Park or Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street or alley, otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or a
traffic control device or temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading of merchandise or passengers.
Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot.
Person shall mean every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation.
Police Officer or Traffic Officer shall mean every officer of the Grand Island
Police Department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
make arrests for the violation of traffic regulations.
Private Road or Driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and
for vehicular travel by the owner or those having express or implied permission
from the owner but not by other persons.
Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
Railroad Sign or Signal shall mean any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad intended to give notice
of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
Registration shall mean the registration certificate or certificates and
license plates issued under the Nebraska Motor Vehicle Registration Act.
Right-of-Way shall mean the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under
such circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger
of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway shall refer to
any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Safety Zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a street
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
School Crossing Zone shall mean the area of a roadway designated by the City as
a school crossing zone through the use of a sign or traffic control device as
specified by the City in conformity with the regulations of the Nebraska
Department of Transportation but does not include any area of a freeway. A
school crossing zone starts at the location of the first sign or traffic
control device identifying the school crossing zone and continues until a sign
or traffic control device indicates that the school crossing zone has ended.
Security Interest shall mean an equitable title or property right in a vehicle
reserved or created by agreement and which secures payment or performance of an
obligation, including the interest of a lessor under a lease intended as
security, and which is perfected when it is valid against third parties
generally, subject only to specific statutory exceptions.
Semitrailer shall mean any vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to
carry persons or property and to be drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle.
Shoulder shall mean that part of the highway contiguous to the roadway and
designed for the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for
lateral support of the base and surface courses of the roadway.
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of the sidewalk space intended for use by
pedestrians or any pathway or route intended for use by pedestrians.
Sidewalk Space shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines, or
the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
use by pedestrians.
Snowmobile shall mean a self-propelled motor vehicle designed to travel on snow
or ice or a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners and propelled
by a belt-driven track with or without steel cleats.
Stand or Standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
Stop or Stopping shall mean:
   A.   When required, a complete cessation of movement.
   B.   Stop or stopping, when prohibited, shall mean any halting even
momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device.
Street or Highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary limits of
any street, road, avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel.
Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway
for purposes of travel.
Traffic Control Device shall mean any sign, signal, marking or other device
placed or erected by authority of the City of Grand Island, the County of Hall,
the State of Nebraska, or the United States of America for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
Traffic Control Signal shall mean any signal, whether manually, electrically,
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
Traffic Lane shall mean that portion of a street designated by the city council
as a path, track, or passageway within which vehicular traffic shall move.
Trailer shall mean any vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Truck shall mean any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.
Truck-tractor shall mean any motor vehicle designed and primarily used for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Viaduct shall mean a bridge-like structure carrying highway or street over
another highway or street or over railroad tracks.
All words and phrases not defined herein shall have ascribed to them the
definition set forth in Chapter, 60 Article 6, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, as
amended.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-2   Traffic Division; Establishment
There is hereby established a Traffic Division of the Police Department to be
under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police.
22-3   Traffic Division; Duties
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to enforce the traffic
ordinances, laws, and regulations of the City of Grand Island and the State of
Nebraska and make arrests and issue citations in lieu of arrest for law
violations.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to develop means of
improving traffic safety and efficient traffic flow.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to investigate traffic
accidents, make accident reports, and arrest any person who has violated a
traffic law or regulation in connection with the accident.
   D.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to keep records and to
prepare an annual report containing information on traffic accidents, traffic
law enforcement, and other pertinent data on traffic safety. The report shall
include statistical information on the number of traffic related fatalities,
injuries, and accidents, the number of persons cited for traffic law violations
and other data, plans, or recommendations related to traffic enforcement,
accidents, or safety.
22-4   Chief Of Police; Powers And Duties
   A.   The chief of police shall have charge of the supervision of the Traffic
Division.
   B.   The chief of police is hereby granted the power and authority by
effective measures to carry out all the duties imposed upon the chief of police
and upon the Traffic Division by this chapter.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to coordinate traffic
activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise
the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints
having to do with traffic matters, and to recommend to the mayor and city
council ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration
and enforcement of traffic regulations.
22-5   Temporary Traffic Regulations
The mayor, city administrator, city engineer, chief of police, or the
commanding officer in charge of the Police Department are hereby empowered
collectively and individually, to make and enforce temporary traffic
regulations to cover emergency or special conditions. It shall be unlawful for
any person to disobey the directions of such regulations as promulgated
pursuant to this section.
22-6   Police Officers; Powers
City of Grand Island police officers shall be vested with authority to
regulate, control, and direct the movement of traffic in such a manner as will
facilitate the efficient and safe movement of traffic. Such officers shall have
authority to make arrests, issue citations in lieu of arrest, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any lawful order, signal, or direction of
any police officer relating to movement of traffic.
22-7   Traffic Division Record
The Traffic Division shall maintain a record of all violations of traffic laws
and all traffic accident reports. Such records and reports shall be held for a
period of ten years, after which they may be destroyed at the direction of the
chief of police.
22-8   Locations Where Ordinances Apply
The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation of vehicles while upon streets, alleys, or other
public right-of-way of the City of Grand Island, unless a different place is
specifically referred to in an ordinance section. The ordinances pertaining to
careless, reckless, and willful reckless driving shall refer to operation of
motor vehicles throughout the City of Grand Island, whether the acts are
committed on streets, alleys, public property, or private property.
22-9   Chapter Does Not Affect Civil Liability
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or pleaded as justifying, absolving,
or rendering blameless, either directly or indirectly, any person in charge of
operating or owning any vehicle for any injury or damage to persons or property
due to the operation of any vehicle.
22-10   Authorized Emergency Vehicles
   A.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section.
   B.   The driver of such emergency vehicle may stop, park, or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this chapter, and disregard regulations
governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
   C.   The driver of such emergency vehicle may also:
      1.   Proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal, or a stop
sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safety operation.
      2.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life, limb, or property.
      3.   Except for such emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle, the
exemptions granted in this section to such emergency vehicle shall apply only
when the driver of such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by
bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when such
vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred
feet to the front of such vehicle.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of such
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect such driver from the consequences of
his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
22-11   Issuance Of Citation
   A.   Whenever there is any violation of any ordinance regulating traffic in
the City, a police officer finding the violation shall, except as otherwise
provided in this section, take the name, address, and driver's license number
of the person violating such ordinance, and the license number of the motor
vehicle involved. The officer shall issue a citation or otherwise notify such
person in writing to appear at a time and place specified in the citation. The
citation shall include a description of the violation or offense charged, the
time and place at which the person cited is to appear, a warning that failure
to appear in accordance with the command of the citation is a punishable
offense, and such other matter as is deemed appropriate. Unless the person
cited requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least three
days after the issuance of the citation. One copy of the citation shall be
delivered to the person cited, and the duplicate thereof shall be signed by
such person, giving his promise to appear at the time and place stated therein.
Such person thereupon shall be released from custody.
   B.   The foregoing provisions for issuance of citation and for release of
the person arrested shall not apply and the person may be confined in jail when
the accused fails to identify himself or herself satisfactorily, or refuses to
sign the citation, or when the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that:
      1.   The accused will refuse to respond to the citation;
      2.   Such custody is necessary to protect the accused or others when his
continued liberty would constitute a risk of immediate harm;
      3.   Such action is necessary in order to carry out legitimate
investigative functions;
      4.   The accused has previously failed to appear in response to a
citation.
      5.   The accused has committed a felony.
22-12   Failure To Appear
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court or otherwise
comply with the command of a citation after signing a promise to appear in
court on the citation.
Article 22-II
Vehicles And Operators
22-13   Motor Vehicle Registration; General
22-14   Registration Plates; Motor Vehicles
22-15   Motor Vehicle Registration Plates; Trailers
22-16   Operator's License Required
22-17   Operator's License; Duty To Carry
22-18   Operator's License; Acts Prohibited
22-19   Audible Horn Required; Siren Prohibited
22-20   Motor Vehicle; Lights
22-21   Lights; Parked Vehicle
22-22   (Reserved)
22-23   Dimming Headlights
22-24   Brakes
22-25   Vehicles Operated Upon Streets
22-26   Projecting Loads
22-13   Motor Vehicle Registration; General
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or operate a motor vehicle
or trailer upon a highway, street or alley within the City or public parking
lot owned by the City without having registered the motor vehicle or trailer in
compliance with the motor vehicle registration statutes of the State of
Nebraska as found in Chapter 60 Article 3.
   B.   The registration certificate for a motor vehicle shall at all times be
carried in or upon the motor vehicle, and it shall be unlawful to fail to
exhibit the registration certificate for inspection upon the request of a
police officer.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-14   Registration Plates; Motor Vehicles
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park or operate a motor vehicle or trailer upon
any highway, street or alley within the City or public parking lot owned by the
City without having attached thereto the registration plates furnished by the
State or County in connection with the Motor Vehicle Registration statutes of
the State of Nebraska.
      1.   Where two registration plates are issued, one shall be prominently
displayed at all times on the front and one on the rear of the registered
vehicle; when only one plate is issued it shall be prominently displayed on the
rear of the registered vehicle, except for truck-tractors upon which is shall
be prominently displayed on the front thereof. The registered plate issued for
a motorcycle shall be attached to the rear thereof.
      2.   In each registration period in which new license plates are not
issued, previously issued license plates shall have affixed thereto the
validation decals issued pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-3,101.
      3.   In all cases such registration plates shall be securely fastened in
an upright position to the motor vehicle or trailer so as to prevent such
plates from swinging, and so as to be at a minimum distance of twelve inches
from the ground to the bottom of the license plate.
      4.   No person shall attach to or display on such motor vehicle or
trailer any
         1.   License plate or registration certificate other than as assigned
to it for the current registration period,
         2.   Fictitious or altered license plates or registration certificate,
         3.   License plates or registration certificate that has been canceled
by the department, or
         4.   License plates lacking current validation decals.
   B.   All letters, numbers, printing, writing, and other identification marks
upon such plates and certificate shall be kept clear and distinct and free from
grease, dust, or other blurring matter, so that they shall be plainly visible
at all times during daylight and under artificial light in the nighttime.
   C.   This section shall not apply to mopeds.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-15   Motor Vehicle Registration Plates; Trailers
Any motor vehicle or trailer parked or operated upon any highway, street, or
alley within the City or public parking lot owned by the City in violation of §
22-13 and §
22-14 of this Code is declared detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of
the inhabitants of this City and shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to
removal and impoundment by the Police Department pending compliance with the
motor vehicle registration statutes of the State of Nebraska or forfeiture. The
cost of removal and impoundment shall be paid by the owner of the motor vehicle
or trailer prior to release from impoundment.
22-16   Operator's License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street
or highway within the City without having in full force and effect an
operator's license to operate the same as provided by the laws of the State of
Nebraska.
22-17   Operator's License; Duty To Carry
The operator's license shall at all times be carried by the licensee when
operating a motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the City and shall be
presented by the licensee for examination, or shall present proof of ownership
of the same, upon demand by a police officer of the City. It shall be unlawful
for any person when operating a motor vehicle to fail to display his license
card upon demand of any police officer.
22-18   Operator's License; Acts Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To lend his or her operator's license to any person or knowingly permit
the use thereof by another;
   B.   To display or represent as one's own any operator's license not issued
to said person;
   C.   To authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by or under the
control of said person to be driven upon any street or highway of the city by
any person who is not authorized to do so.
   D.   To cause or knowingly permit his or her child or ward under the age of
sixteen years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor is not
authorized under Nebraska law or is in violation of any provisions of the
Nebraska Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Act.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-19   Audible Horn Required; Siren Prohibited
Every motor vehicle when operated upon a roadway shall be equipped with a horn
in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions
from a distance of not less than two hundred feet. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or
for any person to use upon a vehicle any sire, exhaust, compression, or spark
plug whistle of for any person at any time to use a horn, otherwise than as a
reasonable warning, or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh
sound by means of a horn or other warning device. Every police and fire
department and fire patrol vehicle and every ambulance used for emergency calls
shall be equipped with a bell, siren, or exhaust whistle.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-20   Motor Vehicle; Lights
   A.   Every motor vehicle upon a roadway within this state during the period
from sunset to sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light
to render clearly discernible persons or vehicles upon the roadway at a
distance of five hundred feet ahead shall be equipped with lighted headlights
and taillights as respectively required by Nebraska law for different classes
of vehicles.
   B.   Every motor vehicle, other than an autocycle, a motorcycle, a road
roller, or road machinery, shall be equipped with two or more headlights, at
the front of and on opposite sides of the motor vehicle. The headlights shall
comply with the requirements and limitations set for in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§60-
6,221 and 60-6,223.
   C.   Every motor vehicle and trailer, other than an autocycle, a motorcycle,
a road roller, or road machinery, shall be equipped with one or more
taillights, at the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer, exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the rear of such
vehicle.
   D.   Every autocycle or motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and
not more than two headlights and with a taillight exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the rear of such
autocycle or motorcycle. The headlights shall comply with the requirements and
limitations set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§60-6,221 and 60-6,223.
   E.   The requirement in this section as to the distance from which lights
must render obstructions visible or within which lights must be visible shall
apply during the time stated in this section upon a straight, level, unlighted
roadway under normal atmospheric conditions.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any motor vehicle to
operate such vehicle upon a roadway unless:
      1.   The condition of the lights and electric circuit is such as to give
substantially normal light output;
      2.   Each taillight shows red directly to the rear, the lens covering
each taillight is securely fastened, and the electric circuit is free from
grounds or shorts;
      3.   There is no more than one spotlight except for law enforcement
personnel, government employees, and public utility employees;
      4.   There are no more than two auxiliary driving lights and every such
auxiliary light meets the requirements for auxiliary driving lights provided in
Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,225;
      5.   If equipped with any lighting device, other than headlights,
spotlights, or auxiliary driving lights, which projects a beam of light of an
intensity greater than twenty-five candlepower, such lighting device meets the
requirements of subsection (4) of Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,225; and
      6.   If equipped with side cowl or fender lights, there are no more than
two such lights and each such side cowl or fender lights emits an amber or
white light.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-21   Lights; Parked Vehicle
Whenever a motor vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or should adjacent
thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in section
22-20, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lights which exhibit a
lights in such color as designated by the Department of Motor Vehicles on the
roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the front of such
vehicle and a red light visible from a distance for five hundred feet to the
rear, except when such vehicle is stopped or parked in accordance with City of
Grand Island parking regulations upon a roadway where there is sufficient light
to reveal any person or obstruction within a distance of five hundred feet upon
such roadway.
Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed and
turn signals shall not be flashed on one side only. If the vehicle is equipped
with an emergency switch for flashing all directional turn signals
simultaneously, such vehicle shall exhibit such turn signals.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-22   (Reserved)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-23   Dimming Headlights
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Nebraska Rules of the Road or this
Chapter:
   A.   Whenever any person operating a motor vehicle on any roadway meets
another person operating a motor vehicle, proceeding in the opposite direction
and equipped with headlights constructed and adjusted to project glaring or
dazzling light to persons in front of such headlights, upon signal of either
person, the other shall dim the headlights of his or her motor vehicle or tilt
the beams of glaring or dazzling light projecting therefrom downward so as not
to blind or confuse the vision of the operator in front of such headlights; and
   B.   Whenever any person operating a motor vehicle on any roadway follows
another vehicle within two hundred feet to the rear, he or she shall dim the
headlights of his or her motor vehicle or tilt the beams of glaring or dazzling
light projecting therefrom downward; and
   C.   For purposes of this section, signal shall mean the alternating
flashing of the headlights from low beam to high beam.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-24   Brakes
   A.   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with
brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such
vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which
means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels and so
constructed that no part which is liable to failure shall be common to the two,
except that a motorcycle shall be required to be equipped with only one brake.
All such brakes shall be maintained at all times in good working order.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any motor vehicle,
other than a motorcycle, to operate such motor vehicle upon a highway unless
the brake equipment thereon qualifies with regard to maximum stopping distances
from a speed of twenty miles per hour on dry asphalt or concrete pavement free
from loose materials as follows:
      1.   Two-wheel brakes, maximum stopping distance, forty feet;
      2.   Four or more wheel brakes, vehicles up to seven thousand pounds
gross weight, maximum stopping distance, thirty feet;
      3.   Four or more wheel brakes, vehicles seven thousand pounds or more
gross weight, maximum stopping distance, thirty-five feet;
      4.   All hand, parking, or emergency brakes, vehicles up to seven
thousand pounds gross weight, maximum stopping distance, fifty-five feet; and
      5.   All hand, parking, or emergency brakes, vehicles seven thousand
pounds or more gross weight, maximum stopping distance, sixty-five feet.
   C.   All braking distance specified in this section shall apply to all
vehicles whether unloaded or loaded to the maximum capacity permitted by law.
   D.   The retarding force of one side of the vehicle shall not exceed the
retarding force on the opposite side so as to prevent the vehicle stopping in a
straight line.
   E.   For purposed of this section, motorcycle does not include an autocycle.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-25   Vehicles Operated Upon Streets
Every motor vehicle operated upon the streets, highways, or alleys of the City
shall meet the following requirements, to wit:
   A.   Windshield Wipers. All vehicles shall be equipped with a windshield
wiper in good working condition that will wipe off moisture uniformly over the
entire sweep of the wiper.
   B.   Rear View Mirror. All vehicles shall be equipped with a rear view
mirror, sufficiently large and in good reflective condition, so located,
fastened and adjusted as to reflect to the driver at all times a clear view of
the highway for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of
such vehicle.
   C.   Glass. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
with any object placed or hung in or upon the motor vehicle, except required or
permitted equipment of the motor vehicle, in such a manner as to significantly
and materially obstruct or interfere with the view of the operator through the
windshield or to prevent the operator from having a clear and full view of the
road and condition of traffic behind the motor vehicle. Any sticker or
identification authorized or required by the Federal Government or any agency
thereof or the State of Nebraska or any political subdivision thereof may be
placed upon the windshield of the motor vehicle without violating this section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a ;motor vehicle with glass that
is broken, cracked, discolored, or obscured to such an extent that the
visibility of the operator is impaired.
   D.   Tires. All vehicle tires shall be in a safe condition. A tire shall be
considered unsafe if it has:
      1.   Any bump, bulge, or knot affecting the tire structure;
      2.   A break which exposes a tire body cord or it repaired with a boot or
patch;
      3.   A tread depth of less than two thirty-seconds of an inch measured in
any two tread grooves at three locations equally spaced around the
circumference of the tire or, on those tires with tread wear indicators, been
worn to the point that the tread wear indicators contact the road in any two
thread grooves at three locations equally spaced around the circumference of
the tire, except that this subdivision shall not apply to truck tires with ten
or more cord plies which are mounted on dual wheels; or
      4.   Such other conditions as may be reasonably demonstrated to render
the tire unsafe.
   E.   Wheel Alignment. Wheels shall be aligned so that side slippage due to
error in alignment as indicated by an alignment indicator shall not exceed 30
feet per mile.
   F.   Steering Equipment. All steering equipment on vehicles shall be in good
condition and wheel play shall not exceed twenty-five degrees.
   G.   Muffler. All motor vehicles shall be equipped with a muffler in good
working condition and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise. No "muffler cut-out" shall be used on any vehicle. It shall be unlawful
to use a muffler cutout, bypass, or slimier device on any motor vehicle upon a
roadway. The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so
equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.
   H.   Height. No vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13
feet, 6 inches; provided, however, the owners, lessees, and operators, jointly
and severally, of vehicles exceeding 12 feet, 6 inches, in height shall assume
the risk of loss to the vehicle or its load, and shall be liable for any
damages that result to overhead obstructions from operation of a vehicle
exceeding 12 feet, six inches, in height.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9539, effective 06-30-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-26   Projecting Loads
Whenever the load on any vehicle extends more than four feet beyond the rear of
the bed or end of the body of such vehicle, and to fail to attach a there shall
be displayed at the end of such load in such position as to be clearly visible
at all times from the rear of such load a red flag not less than twelve inches
both in length and width, except that between sunset and sunrise, there shall
be displayed at the end of any such load a red light plainly visible under
normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred feet from the rear of such
vehicle.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 22-III
Traffic Regulations
22-27   City Council; Regulation Of Traffic
22-28   Traffic Signs Or Signals; Obedience
22-29   Automatic Signals
22-30   Defacing Traffic Signs And Signals
22-31   Reserved
22-32   Reports; Property Damage Accidents
22-27   City Council; Regulation Of Traffic
The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, regulate or entirely prohibit
traffic upon any street, alley, or portion thereof, and when so regulated or
prohibited may direct the placing of traffic control devices upon such streets
to indicate such regulation or prohibition.
22-28   Traffic Signs Or Signals; Obedience
It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
22-29   Automatic Signals
   A.   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, number, or symbol, and
such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians a
follows:
      1.   Green
         a.   Solid Green. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green indication
may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right-of-ay to another vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such indication is exhibited.
         b.   Green Arrow. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow indication,
shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time, and such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         c.   Pedestrian. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control
signal, pedestrians facing any green indication, except when the sole green
indication is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked crosswalk.
      2.   Yellow
         a.   Solid Yellow. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a
red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection, and upon display of a steady yellow
indication, vehicular traffic shall top before entering the nearest crosswalk
at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may
be driven cautiously through the intersection.
         b.   Flashing Circular Yellow. Vehicular traffic and pedestrian
traffic facing a flashing yellow signal may proceed through the intersection
and past such signal only with caution and after reducing speed.
         c.   Yellow Arrow. Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow
indication may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, and such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-
way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
         d.   Pedestrian. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is
shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
      3.   Red
         a.   Solid Red. Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
indication alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall stop, if
there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection.
The traffic shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown
except as provided in subsections (3)(b) and (3)(c) of this section.
         b.   Right Turn on Red. Except where a traffic control device is in
place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
indication may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after
stopping as required by subdivision (3)(a) of this section. Such vehicular
traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         c.   Flashing Circular Red. Vehicular traffic facing a flashing
circular red signal shall come to a complete stop at such signal and before
entering the intersection and crosswalk and regardless of the direction, shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestrians upon the street to be
entered or crossed.
         d.   Red Arrow. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow indication
alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall stop, if there is no
such line, befoe entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection. The traffic
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown.
         e.   Pedestrian. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control
signal, pedestrians facing a stead red indication alone shall not enter the
roadway.
   B.   If a traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other
than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except
as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the
stop shall be made at the signal.
   C.   If a traffic control signal at an intersection is not operating because
of a power failure or other cause and no peace officer, flag person, or other
traffic control device is providing direction for traffic at the intersection,
the intersection shall be treated as a multi-way stop.
   D.   If a traffic control signal is not in service and the signal heads are
turned away from traffic or covered with opaque material, subdivision (A) of
this section shall not apply.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-30   Defacing Traffic Signs And Signals
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to
attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any traffic
control device, railroad sign or signal, or any part of such a device, sign or
signal.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any commercial advertising
upon any traffic control device.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-31   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-32   Reports; Property Damage Accidents
   A.   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident which occurs
anywhere within the City of Grand Island and results in damage to property
shall:
      1.   Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident; and
      2.   Give his or her name, address, telephone number and the operator’s
license number to the owner of the property struck, or the driver or occupants
of any other vehicle involved in the collision.
   B.   If the accident involves a collision with a an unattended vehicle or
property, the operator of the vehicle which strikes the unattended vehicle
shall immediately stop such vehicle and leave in a conspicuous place in or on
the unattended vehicle or property a written notice containing the information
required by subsection (A) of this section. In addition, such driver shall,
without unnecessary delay, report the collision, by telephone or otherwise, to
an appropriate peace officer.
   C.   A peace officer may remove or cause to be removed from a roadway,
without the consent of the driver or owner, any vehicle, cargo, or other
property which is obstructing the roadway creating or aggravating an emergency
situation or otherwise endangering the public safety. Any vehicle, cargo, or
other property obstructing a roadway shall be removed by the most expeditious
means available to clear the obstruction, giving due regard to the protection
of the property removed.
   D.   Any person violating subsection (A) or (B) of this section, as part of
any sentence, suspended sentence, or judgment of conviction under this section,
the court may order the defendant not to drive any motor vehicle for any
purpose in the State of Nebraska for a period of up to one year from the date
ordered by the court. If the court orders the defendant not to drive any motor
vehicle for any purpose in the State of Nebraska for a period of up to one year
from the date ordered by the court, the court shall also order that the
operator’s license of such person be revoked for a like period.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 22-IV
Operation Of Vehicles
22-33   Right-Of-Way; Intersections
22-34   Right-Of-Way; Left Turn
22-35   Entering Street; Yield Right-Of-Way
22-36   Right-Of-Way; Parked Vehicle To Yield
22-37   Stop Signs; Yield Right-Of-Way
22-38   Yield Signs; Right-Of-Way
22-39   Right-Of-Way; Emergency Vehicles
22-40   Right-Of-Way; Blind Persons
22-41   Forfeiture Of Right-Of-Way
22-42   Pedestrians; Right-Of-Way
22-43   "U" Turns
22-44   Turning At Intersections
22-45   Turning And Stopping Signals
22-46   Driving On Right Half Of Street
22-47   Overtaking And Passing
22-48   Passing On The Right
22-49   Passing On The Left; Precautions
22-50   Passing On The Left; Limitations
22-51   Speed Limitations
22-33   Right-Of-Way; Intersections
   A.   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a
vehicle entering a street from an acceleration lane or any other approach road,
it shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle on the street entering such
merging area at the same time, regardless of whether the approach road is to
the left or the right of the main roadway, unless posted signs indicate
otherwise.
   C.   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a paved roadway from an
unpaved roadway and who is not subject to control by a traffic control device
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such paved roadway.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-34   Right-Of-Way; Left Turn
The driver of a vehicle who intends to turn left at an intersection or into any
alley, private road, or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection, or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-35   Entering Street; Yield Right-Of-Way
22-35.1   Direction Of Traffic In Alley
   A.   The driver of a vehicle entering a street from an alley, building,
parking lot, private drive, or private road, shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on such street.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, parking lot,
private drive, or private road to shall stop such vehicle immediately before
driving onto a sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance,
parking lot entrance, private drive, or private road, and shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-35.1   Direction Of Traffic In Alley
All vehicles which traverse the alley in Block 79, Original Town, now City of
Grand Island, shall travel from east to west, more specifically, enter the
alley at Pine Street and travel west to Locust Street.
22-36   Right-Of-Way; Parked Vehicle To Yield
No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked without
yielding the right-of-way to all other vehicles and pedestrians affected by
such movement and in no event until such movement can be made with reasonable
safety.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-37   Stop Signs; Yield Right-Of-Way
Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a stop is indicated
by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no
such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection,
or, if no crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, such driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection
from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on such roadway as to
constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such
intersection.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-38   Yield Signs; Right-Of-Way
22-38.1   Roundabouts One Way
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable under the existing conditions, and, if required for safety to stop,
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if no
crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
After slowing or stopping, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection.
22-38.1   Roundabouts One Way
A vehicle which passes around a roundabout shall be driven only to the right of
the central island while on the circulatory roadway in such roundabout.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-39   Right-Of-Way; Emergency Vehicles
   A.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle which
makes use of proper audible or visual signals.
      1.   The driver of any other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to
the right-hand edge or curb of the street, or to either edge or curb of a one-
way street, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such
position until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any
police officer;
      2.   Any pedestrian using such street shall yield the right-of-way until
such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police officer.
   B.   This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street.
22-40   Right-Of-Way; Blind Persons
When the operator of a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, approaches or comes
into the proximity of a person who is using a guide dog, or who is carrying a
white cane or white stick, it shall be unlawful for the driver to fail to
immediately come to a stop and yield the right-of-way to such person if such
person is in the path of or is approaching the path of such vehicle, and shall
remain stopped until such person has reached a position well outside the course
normally used by the operator of such vehicle.
22-41   Forfeiture Of Right-Of-Way
The driver of any vehicle except an authorized emergency vehicle, traveling at
an unlawful rate of speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might
otherwise have under the provisions of this article.
22-42   Pedestrians; Right-Of-Way
   A.   Pedestrians shall obey the instructions of any traffic control device
specifically applicable to said person, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   B.   Every pedestrian who crosses a street at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the street.
   C.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   D.   No pedestrian shall cross a street intersection diagonally.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to fail to
perform or obey the requirements, duties, or provisions of this section.
22-43   "U" Turns
   A.   A "U" turn is the turning of a vehicle upon a street so as to proceed
in the opposite direction, whether accomplished by one continuous movement or
not. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a U-turn:
      1.   At any place where signs prohibiting such a turn have been erected;
      2.   Upon any curve;
      3.   Upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade where such vehicle
cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either
direction within five hundred feet;
      4.   Upon any street between intersections;
      5.   At any intersection at which traffic is being controlled in any
direction by the traffic control devices of a stop sign, yield sign, automatic
traffic signal, or flashing lights.
   B.   U-turns may be made only at intersections in areas at which traffic is
not being controlled by the traffic control devices enumerated above.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-44   Turning At Intersections
Except as otherwise directed by a police officer or any official traffic-
control device, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle intending to
turn at an intersection to fail to do so in the following manner:
   A.   Right Turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   B.   Left Turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to
leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of
the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
   C.   Intersections Where Automatic Signal Functioning. It shall be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle at any intersection where an
automatic signal is installed and actually functioning, except when such signal
is displaying a green light, or flashing yellow, or when a right hand turn on a
steady red light is not prohibited by a sign placed at the intersection, or
when a green turning arrow permits a turn.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-45   Turning And Stopping Signals
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle from the direct course of travel upon a
street, slow down or stop, or change traffic lanes, unless and until such
movement can be made in safety, and then only after giving an appropriate
signal of such intention, in the following manner.
      1.   A signal of intention to turn right or left from the direct course
of travel, or to change lanes, shall be given continuously during not less than
the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning or
changing lanes;
      2.   Under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visible
both to the front and rear of the vehicle of such signaling driver for one
hundred feet, the required signals shall be given by such signal light. If the
required signals are given by hand, such signals shall be given in the
following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows:
TURN RIGHT by extending the left hand and forearm upward from the left side of
the vehicle; TURN LEFT by extending the left hand and arm horizontally from the
left side of the vehicle; STOP or DECREASE SPEED by extending the left hand and
arm downward from the left side of the vehicle;
CHANGING LANE TO LEFT (Use turn left rule);
CHANGING LANE TO RIGHT (Use turn right rule).
      3.   If the required signals are given by a signal light of a type
approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of Nebraska, such
signals shall be given in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate
as follows:
TURNING LEFT - Flashing of only the left signal light;
TURNING RIGHT - Flashing of only the right signal light;
STOPPING or DECREASING SPEED - Flash of brake signal lights;
CHANGING LANE TO LEFT - Flashing of left signal light;
CHANGING LANE TO RIGHT - Flashing of right signal light.
   B.   The signals herein required to be given shall be given either by means
of the hand and arm as herein prescribed, or by a signal light of a type
approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of Nebraska.
   C.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-46   Driving On Right Half Of Street
   A.   Upon all streets a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the
street, except as follows:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      2.   When an obstruction exists, making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the street; Provided, that any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the street within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      3.   Upon a street divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon; or
      4.   Upon a street restricted to one-way traffic.
   B.   Upon all streets, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when preparing
for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
   C.   Upon any street having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the street, except when authorized by traffic-control
devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the street
for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as
permitted under subparagraph (2) or subsection (A) of this section. This
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the crossing of the centerline in
making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway, unless
such movement is otherwise prohibited by signs.
22-47   Overtaking And Passing
Except where overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the following
rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the
same direction:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall first give a visible signal of his or her intention and
shall pass to the left of the other vehicle at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle;
   B.   The driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor
of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his or her
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; and
   C.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle or electric personal
assistive mobility device proceeding in the same direction shall exercise due
care, which shall include, but not be limited to, leaving a safe distance of no
less than three feet clearance, when applicable, when passing a bicycle or
electric personal assistive mobility device and shall maintain such clearance
until safely past the overtaken bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility
device.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-48   Passing On The Right
22-48.1   School Crossing Zone Passing Prohibited
   A.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      1.   When the vehicle to be overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn;
      2.   Upon a two-way street with an unobstructed roadway, not occupied by
parked vehicles, of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles
going in the same direction when the passing vehicle is traveling in one of
such lanes; or
      3.   When a street has more than one lane for traffic moving in the same
direction and the act of passing on the right is accomplished in a traffic
lane.
   B.   In no event shall the driver of a vehicle overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right unless such movement may be made in safety and upon the
pavement or main traveled portion of the street. In no event shall the parking
lane of a street be used for passing on the right.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-48.1   School Crossing Zone Passing Prohibited
It is unlawful for a person operating a motor vehicle to overtake and pass
another vehicle in a school crossing zone in which the roadway has only one
lane of traffic in each direction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-49   Passing On The Left; Precautions
   A.   No vehicle shall overtake another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction on an undivided two-way street when such overtaking shall require the
overtaking vehicle to be driven on the left side of the center of the roadway
unless the left side is clearly visible for a distance sufficient to accomplish
such overtaking and is free from oncoming traffic for a distance sufficient to:
      1.   Permit the overtaking vehicle to return to an authorized lane of
traffic before coming within two hundred feet of any approaching vehicle; and
      2.   Permit the overtaking vehicle to be safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle while returning to the authorized lane of travel.
   B.   After completing such overtaking, the overtaking vehicle shall return
to the authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable.
   C.   Authorized lane of travel shall mean a traffic lane on which city
ordinances allow a vehicle to operate when not engaged in the act of overtaking
or passing.
22-50   Passing On The Left; Limitations
   A.   No driver shall overtake and pass another vehicle or drive to the left
of the center of the street whenever:
      1.   He or she approaches the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
street where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      2.   He approaches within one hundred feet of or traverses any
intersection, railroad grade crossing, bridge, tunnel or viaduct;
      3.   The section of roadway is designated as a no-passing zone.
   B.   No driver shall cross the centerline of an undivided highway providing
for two or more lanes of traffic in each direction for the purpose of
overtaking or passing another vehicle.
   C.   The limitations imposed by this section shall not apply upon a one-way
roadway, nor when an obstruction exists which requires a driver to drive to the
left of the center of the street nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left
into or from an alley, private road, or driveway unless otherwise prohibited by
signs.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-51   Speed Limitations
   A.   General Rule. No person shall operate any vehicle on, over, or upon any
street or streets in the City at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions, having due regard for the traffic, surface,
width, and condition of the road; nor at a rate of speed as to endanger life or
limb of a person. A person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or roadway
conditions.
   B.   Basic Limit. Except as may be otherwise provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle on, over, or upon any street within the City at a rate of speed greater
than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, or on, over, or upon any alley at a rate
of speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
   C.   Modification of Limits. The city council may, by resolution, establish
speed limits at a rate of speed greater or less than twenty-five (25) miles per
hour for any street or portion of a street within the City. The city engineer
shall cause the installation of speed limit signs along the street or portion
of a street, indicating the speed so established, and upon such installation,
the speed limit for such street or portion of a street shall be as indicated by
the speed limit signs installed.
   D.   Construction Zones. The maximum speed limit through any maintenance,
repair or construction zone on any street or streets within the city shall be
twenty-five miles per hour. Such speed limits shall take effect only after
appropriate signs giving notice of the speed limit are erected or displayed in
a conspicuous place in advance of the area where the maintenance, repair or
construction activity is or will be taking place and a written order
establishing the work area speed zone is approved by the Public Works Director.
The Public Works Director may increase or decrease the speed limit through any
street maintenance, repair or construction zone in increments of five miles per
hour as needed for the safety of the public and the construction workers for
the duration of the construction project.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 22-V
Serious Traffic Offenses 
22-52   Racing On Streets Prohibited
22-53   Careless Driving
22-54   Reckless Driving
22-55   Willful Reckless Driving
22-52   Racing On Streets Prohibited
   A.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any street in the City in
any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test
of physical endurance, or exhibition of speed or acceleration or for the
purpose of making a speed record, and no person shall in any manner participate
in any such race, competition, contest, test, or exhibition.
   B.   For purposes of this section:
      1.   Dreg race shall mean the operation of two or more vehicles from a
point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to
outdistance each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common
selected course, each starting at the same point and proceeding to the same
point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of
acceleration of such vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time
limit; and
      2.   Racing shall mean the use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to
outgain or outdistance another vehicle, to prevent another vehicle from
passing, to arrive at a given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles,
or to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long-distance
driving routes.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-53   Careless Driving
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any motor vehicle carelessly or
without due caution so as to endanger a person or property.
22-54   Reckless Driving
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any motor vehicle in such
a manner as to indicate an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property.
   B.   All citations for a second or subsequent offense shall be written under
Nebraska State Statute.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-55   Willful Reckless Driving
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in
such a manner as to indicate a willful disregard for the safety of persons or
property.
   B.   The court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such
person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for period of not less
than thirty days nor more than one year from the date ordered by the court and
shall order that the operator’s license of such person be revoked for a like
period. The revocation shall be administered upon sentencing, upon final
judgment of any appeal or review, or upon the date that any probation is
revoked.
   C.   All citations for a second or subsequent offense shall be written under
Nebraska State Statute.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 22-VI
Miscellaneous Offenses 
22-56   Debris On Street; Duty To Remove
22-57   Following Emergency Vehicles
22-58   Driving Over Fire Hose
22-59   Spilling Contents Of Vehicle
22-60   Toy Vehicles
22-61   Driving While Embracing Another
22-62   Overloading Front Seat
22-63   Soliciting Rides
22-64   Slow Moving Vehicles; Impeding Traffic
22-65   Following Vehicles Ahead
22-66   Backing Against Traffic
22-67   Avoiding Traffic Signal
22-68   Clinging To Motor Vehicles Prohibited
22-69   Riding On Outside Of Vehicles
22-70   Driving Within Sidewalk Space
22-71   Driving Over Newly-Laid Pavement
22-72   Truck Traffic Regulations; Definitions
22-73   Truck Traffic Regulation; Exceptions
22-74   Truck Traffic Deviating Off Truck Routes
22-75   Exceptions
22-76   Truck Routes Designated
22-56   Debris On Street; Duty To Remove
It shall be unlawful for any person removing a wrecked or damaged motor vehicle
or trailer from any street or alley to fail to remove from the street or alley
all glass, debris, or other substances incident to the wrecked or damaged motor
vehicle or trailer.
22-57   Following Emergency Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, except another authorized
emergency vehicle, to follow at a distance closer than five hundred (500) feet
an authorized emergency vehicle responding to a call, or to drive into or park
within the block where the authorized emergency vehicle has stopped in response
to a call.
22-58   Driving Over Fire Hose
It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire
Department which is laid down at any place within the City, in use or to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-59   Spilling Contents Of Vehicle
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle which is so constructed or
loaded as to permit the contents of the vehicle to drop, sift, spill, leak, or
in any manner escape from the vehicle.
22-60   Toy Vehicles
It shall be unlawful to use any skates, skateboard, sled, toy vehicle, or
similar conveyance upon the streets or alleys of the City, except while
crossing a street at a crosswalk or at an intersection.
22-61   Driving While Embracing Another
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets
of the City when the operator has another person in front of him, on his lap,
or in his embrace, or when another person, package, or other encumbrance
prevents the free and unhampered operation of such vehicle.
22-62   Overloading Front Seat
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive a motor vehicle when it is
so loaded, or when there is in the front seat such number of persons exceeding
three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the
vehicle, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism
of such vehicle.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a
position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with the driver's control or the driving mechanism of such vehicle.
22-63   Soliciting Rides
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the traveled portion of
any street or alley for the purpose of soliciting rides from the driver of any
vehicle. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment, contributions, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   B.   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street for the purposes
of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to
be parked on a street.
   C.   Pedestrians over the age of eighteen may be allowed to enter one or
more roadways, except roadways that are part of the state highway system, at
specified times and locations and approach vehicles when stopped by traffic
control devices or traffic control signals for the purpose of soliciting
contributions which are to be devoted to charitable or community betterment
purposes.
      1.   A permit shall be obtained from the Grand Island Police Department
prior to solicitation of contributions.
      2.   No preference shall be given to any individual or the members of any
organization, association or group. No organization, association or group shall
be denied a permit other than for legitimate government purposes and/or safety
of those soliciting contributions.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-64   Slow Moving Vehicles; Impeding Traffic
   A.   It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as
to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for drivers of motor vehicles traveling at a speed
less than the speed limit established for such street, or at a speed less than
the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing, to fail to drive in the right hand lane then available for traffic,
or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for a driver of a motor vehicle to impede the
normal and reasonable flow of traffic on a street having two or more lanes of
travel in one direction by operating his motor vehicle side by side with and at
the same speed as another motor vehicle in an adjacent lane.
   D.   Motor vehicles traveling in the same direction of travel shall be
operated only in a single file manner. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor
vehicle side by side with and at the same speed as another motor vehicle in the
same traffic lane.
22-65   Following Vehicles Ahead
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, and such driver shall have due regard for the
speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway.
22-66   Backing Against Traffic
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to back such motor
vehicle on City streets, except while moving out from an angle parking
position, while moving into a parallel parking position, or while moving it
from a driveway. No backing movement shall be made unless it can be made
safely.
22-67   Avoiding Traffic Signal
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive such vehicle across
property adjacent to an intersection to avoid following the instructions of a
traffic control device or signal erected at the intersection.
22-68   Clinging To Motor Vehicles Prohibited
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to permit any
pedestrian or any person traveling upon any bicycle, sled, roller skates,
skateboard, or any toy vehicle, to cling to or attach himself or his bicycle,
sled, roller skates, skateboard, or toy vehicle to such motor vehicle.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or any person traveling upon
any bicycle, sled, roller skates, skateboard, or any toy vehicle to cling to or
attach himself to any motor vehicle being operated on the streets or alleys
within the City.
22-69   Riding On Outside Of Vehicles
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to permit any
person to:
      1.   Ride on the hood, top, fenders, or outside surface of any motor
vehicle; or
      2.   Ride while sitting or standing on the doors or on the top of the
seatback of any motor vehicle; or
      3.   Ride while standing in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle,
or to ride standing in an open truck bed.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Ride on the hood, top, fenders, or outside surface of any motor
vehicle; or
      2.   Ride while sitting or standing on the doors or on top of the
seatback of any motor vehicle; or
      3.   Ride while standing in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle;
or
      4.   Ride while standing in an open truck bed.
   C.   This ordinance shall not apply to persons participating in parades
authorized by the city council.
22-70   Driving Within Sidewalk Space
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to drive such vehicle
within any sidewalk space except when such space is a permanent or temporary
driveway; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles
authorized to be used for snow removal and street cleaning as provided in §
32-75 of this Code.
22-71   Driving Over Newly-Laid Pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle over or across any
newly laid or repaired pavement, across or around which there has been placed a
barrier, or at or near which there is a person or sign warning persons against
driving over such pavement.
22-72   Truck Traffic Regulations; Definitions
For the purpose of §
22-72 through §
22-76.1, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the following meanings:
   A.   Delivery zone is any area within the City which is surrounded on all
sides by truck routes;
   B.   Deviating truck is a truck which leaves a truck route while traveling
inside the City;
   C.   Gross vehicle weight is the sum of the empty weight of a truck or
vehicle-trailer combination, plus the weight of the maximum load to be carried
thereon at any one time;
   D.   Light utility truck is a truck with a width no greater than six feet
six inches (6' 6"), a length no greater than twenty feet (20'), and a gross
vehicle weight no greater than 10,000 pounds;
   E.   Protected street is any street which has traffic control signs or
signals protecting it at every intersection along its way and which transverses
a delivery zone;
   F.   Trailer is any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle;
   G.   Truck is any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of
property;
   H.   Truck route is the system of streets as designated by §
22-76, over and along which trucks may travel within the City.
22-73   Truck Traffic Regulation; Exceptions
   A.   No person shall operate a truck or vehicle-trailer combination upon any
street not designated a truck route by §
22-76 except for the purpose of picking up or delivering property in the
ordinary course of business within a delivery zone, and then only in the manner
set forth by §
22-74 below.
   B.   The provisions of subsection (A) above shall not apply to light utility
trucks except when such vehicles are carrying property from a point of origin
for delivery to a destination point.
22-74   Truck Traffic Deviating Off Truck Routes
   A.   Single Destination. The operator of a deviating truck with a single
destination point within a delivery zone, shall follow the truck route to the
intersection thereon which is closest to the destination point and shall
deviate from the truck route only at that intersection and shall proceed
directly to the destination point. Upon leaving said point, a deviating truck
shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route.
   B.   Multiple Destinations. The operator of a deviating truck with multiple
destination points within a delivery zone shall proceed to the first
destination point in the manner required by subsection (A) above. Upon leaving
the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other
destination points within the delivery zone by the shortest possible routes
between destination points. Upon leaving the last destination point, a
deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route.
   C.   Use of Protected Streets Permitted. Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsections (A) and (B) above, the operator of a deviating truck may use any
protected street within a delivery zone as part of his or her route to reach a
destination point if the following conditions are met:
      1.   The use of the particular protected street or streets will reduce
the total necessary distance of travel on streets other than protected streets
within the particular delivery zone; and
      2.   The combined route used under subparagraph (C)(1) is the shortest
most direct combined route from the truck route to the destination point or
back to the truck route.
22-75   Exceptions
The provisions of §
22-73 shall not prohibit:
   A.   Emergency Vehicle. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street
in the City;
   B.   Public Utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the
City, public utilities, any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street
utilities within the City;
   C.   Detoured Trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case were such truck could lawfully be operated upon
the street for which such detour is established.
22-76   Truck Routes Designated
22-76.1   Engine Braking; Prohibited
The city council may, by resolution, designate truck routes along which trucks
may travel within the City in accordance with §
22-72 through §
22-76.1 of this code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9040, effective 04-12-2006) (Truck Routes Identified
in ATTACHMENT "B")
22-76.1   Engine Braking; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any operator of a motor vehicle
with a total gross vehicle weight rating of seven thousand pounds or more,
including its towed unit or units, to attempt to retard the forward movement of
said vehicle by initiating a device commonly known as jake brakes to contain
the engine’s compression, thus rapidly slowing the engine’s revolutions per
minute.
Article 22-VII
Stopping, Standing, And Parking
Division 22-VII-1   Generally
Division 22-VII-2   Violations; Procedure 
Division 22-VII-3   Impoundment Of Vehicles
Division 22-VII-4   Regulations To Facilitate Snow Removal
Division 22-VII-1
Generally
22-77   Parking Regulations; City Council
22-78   Color Legend
22-79   Responsibility Of Vehicle Owner
22-80   Manner Of Parking
22-81   Brakes To Be Set
22-82   Loading Zones
22-83   Parking So As To Obstruct Traffic
22-84   Vending Vehicles
22-85   Parking Within Sidewalk Space
22-86   Parking Near Intersections
22-87   Obstructing Private Driveways
22-88   Parking Near Fire Hydrants
22-89   Freight Vehicles Backing To Curb
22-90   Parking Vehicle For Sale
22-91   Parking For Washing, Repairing
22-92   Truck And Trailer Parking Prohibited
22-93   Angle; Parallel; Double Parking
22-94   Parking On One-Way Streets
22-95   Unauthorized Designation Of Spaces
22-96   Parking In Alleys
22-97   Parking Garbage Trucks
22-98   Parking Large Vehicle; Endgate Down
22-99   Seventy-Two Hour Parking
22-100   Parking Near Fires
22-77   Parking Regulations; City Council
The city council may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or fix a time limit for
the parking and stopping of vehicles in or on any public street, public
property, or portion thereof. The parking or stopping of any vehicle in or on
any such street, public property, or portion thereof in violation of such
regulations shall constitute a violation of this article.
22-78   Color Legend
   A.   The use of yellow paint upon the curb of any street shall indicate
obstructions such as traffic islands within the traveled way. Yellow paint or
yellow plastic markings or appropriate signs shall also be used to indicate the
boundaries of safety zones and no parking zones.
   B.   The use of yellow paint upon the curb of any street in conjunction with
appropriate signs shall designate fifteen minute parking zones or loading
zones.
   C.   The use of white paint or white plastic markings upon the surface of
the street shall indicate pedestrian lanes, traffic lanes, and parking spaces.
   D.   The use of blue paint upon the curb of any street or the paved portion
of any parking space shall indicate that such space has been set aside as a
handicapped parking space.
   E.   The use of green paint upon the curb of any street in conjunction with
appropriate signs shall indicate that such space has been set aside as an
express zone parking space.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-79   Responsibility Of Vehicle Owner
If any vehicle is found upon any street or alley in violation of any of the
provisions of this article regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner, or
person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie
responsible for such violation.
22-80   Manner Of Parking
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon the streets or in
any publicly-owned parking lot in any manner or position other than that
indicated by appropriate signs or markings, or as directed by an officer or
authorized parking lot attendant.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon any publicly-owned
property other than in an area clearly designated as a parking lot or parking
area for motor vehicles.
   C.   For the purposes of this section the words "publicly-owned" shall mean
property owned by the State of Nebraska or any of its political or governmental
subdivisions.
22-81   Brakes To Be Set
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle upon
any perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake of such vehicle and
turning the front wheels thereof toward the right-hand curb or side of the
highway.
22-82   Loading Zones
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, park, or leave such
vehicle standing at any designated loading or unloading zone for a period of
time longer than twenty minutes, except when necessary for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers, merchandise, or materials.
The Street Division shall designate such loading and unloading zones by causing
the curb to be painted yellow, and shall either paint on such curb or sidewalk
above it the words, "Loading Zone," or shall appropriately place loading zone
signs.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-83   Parking So As To Obstruct Traffic
It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of accident or emergency,
to stop any vehicle within any street intersection or alley entrance or in such
location as to obstruct any street crossing, crosswalk, or alley entrance, or
back of other vehicles parked at the curb.
22-84   Vending Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any vehicle used for the purpose
of vending merchandise, meats, vegetables, or confectionery, or any other
vehicle commonly known as a peddler's car or wagon, to stand on any street
longer than ten minutes in any one location. This section shall not apply to
holders of liquor licenses which permit vending from a moving vehicle may do so
in conformity with their properly granted license.
(Amended by Ordinance 10,050, effective 11/4/2025)
22-85   Parking Within Sidewalk Space
It shall be unlawful to park or permit any vehicle to remain within any
sidewalk space, except with a permit to do so from the chief of police.
22-86   Parking Near Intersections
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, for
any purpose whatever or for any period of time whatever, within twenty feet of
any street intersection, or on a sidewalk, or within an intersection, or on a
crosswalk, or within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or
other traffic control device located at the side of the roadway, or within 20
feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless designated as parking stalls
painted on the roadway.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-87   Obstructing Private Driveways
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle so as to
obstruct a private driveway or drive.
22-88   Parking Near Fire Hydrants
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, for
any purpose whatever or for any period of time whatever, within fifteen feet of
a fire hydrant.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-89   Freight Vehicles Backing To Curb
Vehicles while discharging freight may back to the curb and shall occupy as
little of the street as possible, leaving available not less than ten feet of
the street for free movement of vehicular traffic at all times. If such vehicle
is of the semitrailer type, the tractor part shall be turned so as to stand
parallel with the curb and headed in the direction of the traffic, and shall be
so parked only during the time necessary for the actual loading or unloading
thereof.
22-90   Parking Vehicle For Sale
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley, or public
place within the city any vehicle displayed for sale.
22-91   Parking For Washing, Repairing
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing upon any street,
alley, or public place within the city any vehicle for the purpose of washing,
greasing, or repairing such vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
wash, grease, or repair any vehicle upon any street or public place within the
city; provided, that this section shall not apply to repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
22-92   Truck And Trailer Parking Prohibited
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or permit to be parked, a
truck-tractor or semitrailer, as defined in §
22-1 above, upon any residential lot, street or alley for a period of more than
one hour unless such vehicle is, after the expiration of such period, actually
delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise or materials, or waiting an
opportunity to so load or unload materials and providing the driver is present
therewith; or
   B.   No semitrailer or trailer shall be parked upon any street or alley
except when such semitrailer or trailer is parked in connection with and in aid
of the ongoing performance of constructions upon or reparative service to or on
property in the City block in which such semitrailer or trailer is parked. Any
vehicle in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and is subject to immediate removal and impoundment.
   C.   For purposes of section (A), residential lot shall mean any tract or
parcel located within the City that is located within zoning district (LLR)
Large Lot Residential Zone, (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone, (R-2) Low Density
Residential Zone, (R-3) Medium Density Zone, (R-3SL) Medium Density Small Lot
Residential Zone, (R-4) High Density Residential Zone, (RO) Residential Office
Zone, or (RD) Residential Development Zone.
   D.   This section shall not be construed as permitting the parking of any
vehicle in any zone where parking is otherwise prohibited or restricted by this
chapter, or as extending the time of parking where such is now restricted to a
shorter period than here within allowed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9309, effective 08-30-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9841, effective 09-08-2021) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9860, effective 11-24-
2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-93   Angle; Parallel; Double Parking
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle at
any time in any part of the city, except with the right hand side thereof
parallel with the curb and not more than one foot from the curb; provided, that
the traffic division may designate any street or portion thereof where vehicles
shall be parked at an angle, and all vehicles when parked on any such street or
portion thereof shall be parked at the designated angle, with the right front
wheel of such vehicle at the curb. Where the stalls are designated either on
the curb or on the pavement, vehicles will be parked within such stalls. It
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle beside
any vehicle which is lawfully parked parallel with the curb of a street or
behind any vehicle which is lawfully parked at an angle to the curb of a
street, nor shall any vehicle be parked beside any vehicle on the main traveled
portion of the street.
22-94   Parking On One-Way Streets
On one-way streets where parking is permitted upon the left hand side of such
streets, the provisions of §
22-94 shall apply in all respects except that the left hand side of such
vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb, or, if angle parking is
permitted, the left front wheel of such vehicle shall be parked at the curb.
22-95   Unauthorized Designation Of Spaces
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint the curb of any street, or to in
any manner set aside or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in any
street or part thereof. The marking or designating of portions of streets or
alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done
only by the city through its proper officers.
22-96   Parking In Alleys
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any alley, except a
vehicle used for delivery purposes, and then only for such time as is necessary
for the actual loading or unloading thereof. Every such vehicle, while loading
or unloading in any alley, shall be parked in such a manner as will cause the
least obstruction possible to traffic in such alley.
22-97   Parking Garbage Trucks
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any wagon, automobile, or
truck used for the collection of garbage or refuse or any agent or employee of
any such owner or operator to park such wagon, automobile, or truck on the
streets or in any alley in the city except for the purpose of collecting
garbage or refuse and then only for the period of time required for the
collection thereof.
22-98   Parking Large Vehicle; Endgate Down
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle of an overall length
of twenty feet or more to stop or park such vehicle on any street where angle
parking is permitted except for the purpose of loading or unloading freight. It
shall also be unlawful for the operator of any commercial vehicle, regardless
of the length of the same, to park such commercial vehicle with the endgate of
the same down and extending beyond the body of such vehicle into the street.
22-99   Seventy-Two Hour Parking
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to permit such
vehicle to stand at one location upon the streets or upon any public "free
parking" lot for a period longer than seventy-two hours.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8959, effective 3-9-2005)
22-100   Parking Near Fires
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor vehicle to drive to,
leave such vehicle standing, whether attended or unattended, or park the same
nearer than three hundred feet to any location to which the city fire
department has been called to extinguish a fire; provided, that the provisions
of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles when used on official
business nor when the motor vehicle was so parked and left standing prior to
the outbreak of such fire.
Division 22-VII-2
Violations; Procedure
22-101   Parking Violations Bureau
22-102   Official Police Ticket To Be Issued
22-103   Parking Fines
22-104   Appearance In Response To Police Ticket
22-101   Parking Violations Bureau
There is hereby established a Parking Violations Bureau to handle parking
violations, which Bureau shall be under the supervision of the Grand Island
Police Department. The Bureau shall be open at such hours as the Police
Department may designate. It shall be the duty of the Parking Violations Bureau
to accept parking penalties and fines and issue receipts therefor pursuant to
this article and
Article XII of this chapter from such violators as are permitted and desire to
plead guilty by written waiver.
22-102   Official Police Ticket To Be Issued
Each violator of the parking provisions of this article or
Article XII in this chapter shall be given notice in the form of an official
police ticket attached to the offending motor vehicle, which notice shall
require such violator to appear at the police department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014)
22-103   Parking Fines
Parking violators of this article or
Article XII of this chapter shall pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for each violation. Fines must be paid at the Police Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9336, effective 11-01-2011)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-104   Appearance In Response To Police Ticket
Persons receiving police tickets for violations of this article or
Article XII of this chapter shall have five (5) days from the date on which the
official ticket was attached to the offending motor vehicle to report in person
to the Police Department with said official police ticket and pay the amounts
set out in §
22-103, or to mail the official police ticket and full payment as set out in §
22-103 to the Police Department. Further, said persons shall also be in
violation of the provisions of this Code and subject to the penalties provided
herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014)
Division 22-VII-3
Impoundment Of Vehicles
22-105   Vehicle Pound
22-106   Impounding Of Vehicles Generally
22-107   Towing And Storage Charges
22-108   Sale Of Impounded Vehicles
22-109   Rights Of Owner Or Lienholder
22-110   Proceeds Of Sold Impounded Vehicles
22-111   Construction Of Six Preceding Sections
22-105   Vehicle Pound
   A.   There is hereby created a pound for the impounding of vehicles which
are found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter of the City
Code.
   B.   The chief of police shall be in charge of the pound and is hereby
empowered and directed to locate and establish a pound sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The
chief of police may change the location of such pound and may designate one or
more parking stalls or other areas of the public right-of-way for use as a
temporary pound, when deemed necessary.
22-106   Impounding Of Vehicles Generally
22-106.1   Abandoned Vehicle Definition
   A.   An employee authorized by the Police Department, may remove and convey
any vehicle, or cause such vehicle to be removed and conveyed by means of
towing or otherwise, to the automobile pound when such vehicle is found to:
      1.   Be parked, abandoned, or left standing in the streets or alleys of
the City in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or
      2.   Have two (2) or more unpaid overdue parking tickets; or
      3.   Be a danger to the public, health, welfare and or safety,
   B.   A report documenting the reason for and the towing of the vehicle shall
be completed by the Police Department employee and placed in a designated
location for such reports. No impounded vehicle shall be released or removed
from impoundment prior to the public sale provided for in §
22-108 except by payment by the owner, operator, or driver of such impounded
vehicle, of all unpaid overdue parking tickets, an impounding fee as set forth
in the User Fee Schedule approved and adopted by the City Council, and any
towing and storage charge assessed against such automobile as provided for in §
22-107. Further, no impounded vehicle shall be released from impoundment
without:
      1.   The person claiming the vehicle, or another person accompanying
them, presenting for inspection a valid driver’s license; and
      2.   The vehicle being properly registered and insured for operation upon
the roadway in accordance with State Statute.
      3.   In the event that conditions (B)(1) and (2) above cannot be met, the
vehicle may be released to a towing service only after the owner arranges for
the vehicle to be towed from the impoundment facility by the towing service and
is not operated on the roadway.
   C.   When, and if, the owner, operator, or custodian of such automobile
presents himself/herself at the Police Department, it shall be the duty of the
Police Department to inform such person of the nature of the violation for
which such vehicle was impounded. In case the owner, driver, or custodian of
any impounded vehicle executes an affidavit denying the facts upon which the
impoundment has been based, and protesting the payment of such impounding,
towing, and storage fees, the receipt for the same shall be marked, "Paid Under
Protest," and in such case it shall become the duty of the chief of police to
make complaint in conformity with the provisions of this Code, or other
ordinances of the City. If such person is charged with a felony or misdemeanor
related to the offense for which the vehicle was taken into custody, but is not
convicted, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to refund to such person
the fees so paid under protest. Vehicles impounded as a nuisance or in
violation of City Ordinance shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees.
   D.   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any
abandoned vehicle shall be removed, nor the City of Grand Island shall be
liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal
or while in the possession of the City or its contractual agent, or as a result
of any subsequent disposition.
   E.   It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or their designee, to
account for any fees collected by the Police Department under the provisions of
this section to the city treasurer, who shall place the same in the police
fund. The chief of police, or their designee, shall keep a record of each
impounded vehicle containing the name of the owner, the registration plate
numbers, (if any), the make, model and year of the vehicle, the nature of each
violation involved and the ultimate disposition of each impounded vehicle.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-106.1   Abandoned Vehicle Definition
   A.   A motor vehicle is an abandoned vehicle:
      1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid In Transit
stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed thereto,
for more than six hours on any public property;
      2.   If left unattended for more than twenty-four hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
      3.   If left unattended for more than forty-eight hours, after the
parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public
property on which parking is legally permitted;
      4.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner is terminated;
      5.   If left for more than thirty days in the custody of a law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1903.01; or
      6.   If removed from private property to a municipal ordinance.
   B.   An all-terrain vehicle, a utility-type vehicle, or a minibike is an
abandoned vehicle:
      1.   If left unattended for more than twenty-four hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
      2.   If left unattended for more than forty-eight hours, after the
parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public
property on which parking is legally permitted;
      3.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner is terminated;
      4.   If left for more than thirty days in the custody of a law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1903.01; or
      5.   If removed from private property pursuant to a municipal ordinance.
   C.   A mobile home is an abandoned vehicle if left in place on private
property for more than thirty days after a local governmental unit, pursuant to
an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each of the last-
registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating that the
mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set forth in
Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1903.
      1.   For purposes of this section:
         1.   Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling constructed to
be towed on its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or
without a permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or
more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional
capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined
into one integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as defined in
Neb. Rev. Stat. §71-4603. Mobile home does not include a mobile home or
manufactured home for which an affidavit of affixture has been recorded
pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-169;
         2.   Public property means any public right-of-way, street, highway,
alley, or park or other state, county, or municipally owned property; and
         3.   Private property means any privately owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.
   D.   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-431
shall be an abandoned vehicle under this section.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-107   Towing And Storage Charges
   A.   In addition to the impoundment fee established by §
22-106, there shall be assessed against each impounded vehicle, the actual
towing charge for said vehicle, plus storage charges, as set forth in the User
Fee Schedule approved and adopted by the City Council, during the period of
impoundment.
   B.   The chief of police is authorized to negotiate with one or more towing
services and thereby establish the actual towing charges for each vehicle
towed, based upon the type of vehicle, the condition of the vehicle, the
weather conditions, and any other factor affecting the cost of such towing,
including the availability of a towing service.
22-108   Sale Of Impounded Vehicles
   A.   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no number
plates of the current year affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into
consideration the condition of the vehicle, of five hundred dollars or less,
title shall immediately vest in the City of Grand Island as provided by the
laws of the State of Nebraska.
   B.   Except for vehicles governed by subsection (A) above, the City of Grand
Island Police Department having custody of an abandoned vehicle, shall make an
inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as follows:
      1.   Abandoned vehicle with number plates affixed, to the jurisdiction
which issued such number plates; or
      2.   Abandoned vehicle with no number plates affixed, to the Department
of Motor Vehicles.
   C.   The chief of police shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, and
any lienholder, if any, within fifteen business days that the vehicle in
question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed,
either (a) it will be sold at public auction after five days from the date of
such notice was mailed or (b) title will vest in the City of Grand Island
thirty days after the date such notice was mailed. If the agency described in
subsection (A) of this section also notifies the chief of police that a lien or
mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee.
Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal
and storage of such vehicle.
   D.   Title to such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the City
of Grand Island as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska (a) five days
from the date such notice is mailed if the vehicle will be sold or offered at
public auction, (b) thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the City
of Grand Island will retain the vehicle or (c) if the last-registered owner
cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.
   E.   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to subsection (D)
of this section, the City of Grand Island may retain for use, sell, or auction
the abandoned vehicle. If the City of Grand Island has determined that the
vehicle should be retained for use, the City shall, at the same time that the
notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the
jurisdiction an announcement that the City of Grand Island intends to retain
the abandoned vehicles for its use and that title will vest in the City thirty
days after the publication.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-109   Rights Of Owner Or Lienholder
The owner of any impounded vehicle or the holder of any registered lien on any
impounded vehicle may obtain possession of such impounded vehicle by paying to
the City of Grand Island the charges assessed against such automobile for the
impounding fee, towing charge and storage charges at any time prior to the sale
of such impounded vehicle as provided for in §
22-108.
22-110   Proceeds Of Sold Impounded Vehicles
All money paid for impounding fees, towing charges or storage charges on
impounded vehicles, and all money paid for the purchase of impounded vehicles
sold according to the provisions of §
22-108 of this Code shall be paid to the chief of police, whose duty it shall
be to account for such money collected by him to the city treasurer, who shall
hold the same for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period of two
years. If not claimed within such two-year period, such proceeds shall be paid
into the general fund of the City of Grand Island.
22-111   Construction Of Six Preceding Sections
Nothing in the six preceding sections shall be construed as superseding any
other provisions of this chapter concerning the proper parking or operation of
vehicles of any character in the City, and the impounding of any vehicle and
the collection of a fee therefor under the preceding six sections shall not
prevent or preclude prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter concerning the parking or operation of vehicles in the City. It
shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle within the City of Grand
Island.
Division 22-VII-4
Regulations To Facilitate Snow Removal
22-112   Parking Restricted On Certain Streets
22-113   Snow Emergency Routes
22-114   Snow Alert; Parking Prohibition
22-115   Parking On Residential Streets
22-116   Vehicles On Snow Emergency Routes
22-117   Snow Alert/Emergency; Notice
22-118   Temporary Provisions; Precedence
22-119   Removal Of Stalled Or Parked Vehicles
22-120   Penalty
22-112   Parking Restricted On Certain Streets
To facilitate the removal of snow from the streets, highways, and alleys of the
City, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicles standing
or parked on the streets named in this section between the hours of 12 Midnight
and 8 a.m., from October 15 through April 15:
Cedar Street, between First Street and Union Pacific Railroad;
Division Street, between Locust Street and Walnut Street;
East Sixth Street, between Vine Street and Plum Street;
Elm Street, between Second Street and Union Pacific Railroad;
First Street, between Cedar Street and Sycamore Street;
Fourth Street, between Eddy Street and Beal Street;
Locust Street, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;
Locust Street, between Koenig Street and South Front Street;
Pine Street, between First Street and Sixth Street;
Second Street, between Cedar Street and Sycamore Street;
South Front Street, between Walnut Street and Kimball Avenue;
Sycamore Street, between First Street and Fifth Street;
Third Street, between Clark Street and Kimball Avenue;
Walnut Street, between Division Street and Fifth Street;
Wheeler Avenue, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;
Wheeler Avenue, between Koenig Street and South Front Street.
This section shall take precedence over all other parking regulations involving
the aforementioned streets when in direct conflict therewith.
22-113   Snow Emergency Routes
The City Council may, by resolution, designate snow emergency routes within the
City in accordance with Section
22-113 through
22-117 of the City Code. Appropriate signs or other traffic control devices
shall be installed indicating the existence of such snow emergency routes. A
designation of any street, avenue, road, or highway, or portion thereof, as a
snow emergency route shall in no way affect designation of that street, avenue,
road or highway for any other purpose.
Adams Street between Stolley Park Road and Anna Street;
Anna Street between Blaine Street and Locust Street;
Bismark Road between Locust Street and BNSF Railway Right-of-Way (City Limits);
Blaine Street between Wildwood Drive and Third Street (within City Limits);
Broadwell Avenue between Anna Street and U.S. Highway 281/Airport Road (City
Limits);
Cannon Road between North Road and Mansfield Road;
Capital Avenue between Engleman Road and 1/2 Mile East of Sky Park Road (City
Limits);
Cherry Street between Bismark Road and Sutherland Street;
College Street between Broadwell Avenue and Webb Road;
Custer Avenue between Third Street and Capital Avenue;
Diers Avenue between Old Potash Highway and Capital Avenue;
Eddy Street between Anna Street and State Street;
Eighteenth Street between the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad and St.
Paul Road;
Faidley Avenue between Redwood Road and Broadwell Avenue;
Fonner Park Road between Stuhr Road and Adams Street;
Fourth Street between Broadwell Avenue and Sky Park Road;
Harrison Street between Stolley Park Road and Anna Street;
Howard Avenue between Faidley Avenue and Tenth Street;
Husker Highway between U.S. Highway 30 and U.S. Highway 28;
Independence Avenue between Manchester Road and Nebraska Highway No. 2;
Koenig Street between Blaine Street and Plum Street;
Lafayette Avenue between State Street and Capital Avenue;
Lincoln Avenue between Anna Street and Broadwell Avenue;
Locust Street between 1,200 feet north of Interstate 80 (City Limits) and First
Street;
Manchester Road between Viking Road and Mansfield Road;
Mansfield Road between Thirteenth Street and Manchester Road;
Nebraska Highway 2 between 1,400 feet west of Independence Avenue and U.S.
Highway 281;
North Front Street between Webb Road and Broadwell Avenue;
North Road between Husker Highway and Nebraska Highway No. 2;
Old Lincoln Highway between Custer Avenue and Broadwell Avenue;
Old Nebraska Highway No. 2 between Broadwell and U.S. Highway 281;
Old Potash Hwy between 540 Feet West of Arapahoe Avenue and Custer Avenue;
Old U.S. Highway 30 between West Intersection with U.S. Highway 30 and East
Intersection with U.S. Highway 30 Overpass;
Pine Street between Court Street and South Front Street;
Pleasant View Drive between Bismark Road and Fonner Park Road;
Plum Street between Sutherland Street and Second Street;
Prairieview Street between Rae Rd and Husker Hwy;
Rae Rd between U.S. Highway 281 and Prairieview Street;
Redwood Road between Faidley Avenue and Thirteenth Street;
Riverside Drive between Stagecoach Road and Stolley Park Road;
St. Paul Road between Fourth Street and Capital Avenue;
Schimmer Drive between 1/2 Mile West of U.S. Highway 281 (City Limits) and
Blaine Street (City Limits);
Second Street between Webb Road and Garfield Street;
Seedling Mile Access Road between Seedling Mile Road and U.S. Highway 30
Seeding Mile Road between 1/4 Mile West of Museum Drive and 1/4 Mile East of
Shady Bend Road (City Limits);
Seventeenth Street between Walnut Street/State Street Intersection and the
Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad;
Shady Bend Road between Bismark Rd and Union Pacific Railroad Right-of-Way
(within City Limits)
Shady Bend Road between 1910 Feet North of Capital Avenue and Airport Road;
Sky Park Road between Fourth Street and White Cloud Road;
South Front Street between Vine Street and Walnut Street;
Stagecoach Road between Blaine Street and Locust Street;
State Street between Seventeenth Street/Walnut Street Intersection and North
Road;
Stolley Park Road between 920 Feet West of Freedom Drive and Stuhr Road;
Stuhr Road between North Intersection with Stolley Park Road and U.S. Highway
30;
Sutherland Street between Cherry Street and Plum Street;
Swift Road between Stuhr Road and 3/4 Mile East of Stuhr Road;
Sycamore Street between Court Street and Capital Avenue;
Tenth Street between Broadwell Avenue and St. Paul Road;
Third Street between Blaine Street and Vine Street;
Thirteenth Street between 910 Feet West of Branding Iron Lane and Wheeler
Avenue;
U.S. Highway 30 between Husker Highway and Grant Street;
U.S. Highway 30 (Second Street) between Grant Street and Greenwich Street;
U.S. Highway 30 (Eastbound)/Greenwich Street between First Street and Second
Street;
U.S. Highway 30 (First Street/Second Street) between Greenwich Street and Plum
Street;
U.S. Highway 30 between Plum Street and 270 Feet West of Shady Bend Road (City
Limits);
U.S. Highway 34 (Husker Highway) between U.S. Highway 281 and 1/4 mile East of
Locust Street (City Limits);
U.S. Highway 281 between 1/4 Mile South of Wildwood Drive and Broadwell Avenue
(within City Limits);
Walnut Street between Locust Street/Charles Street Intersection and Fourth
Street;
Webb Road between South Intersection with U.S. Highway 281 and North
Intersection with U.S. Highway 281;
Wheeler Street between Fourth Street and Capital Avenue;
Wildwood Drive between 380 Feet West of Elk Drive (City Limits) and Locust
Street (within City Limits);
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8780, effective 11-27-2002) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9087, effective 11-08-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-
2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9563, effective 11-17-2015) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9566, effective 12-15-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9788,
effective 10-07-2020)
22-114   Snow Alert; Parking Prohibition
Whenever the mayor or his or her designated representative, shall find, on the
basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of an official
forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau predicting snow accumulation, sleet, or
freezing rain, that such weather conditions will make it necessary that motor
vehicle traffic be expedited, they may declare a snow alert/emergency. Such
declaration of a snow alert/emergency shall state the time that said alert/
emergency will be in effect. During such snow alert/emergency all parking of
vehicles on snow emergency routes shall be prohibited. The prohibition imposed
under this section shall remain in effect until snow or threat of snow as
indicated by the U.S. Weather Bureau has passed and the emergency snow route
cleared, or until the formal declaration of a snow alert/emergency has been
terminated by the mayor or said designated representative.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-115   Parking On Residential Streets
Whenever during a snow alert/emergency the mayor shall determine that
conditions make it necessary that parking on local and residential streets
should be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the
mayor may put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or on all local and
residential streets by declaring that parking be prohibited on one side of the
local and residential streets, designating either the odd or even address
numbered side, at their discretion. In such declaration, the mayor shall state
the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall take effect. The
prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement by the
mayor, who may then declare that there shall be in effect a parking prohibition
on the opposite side of those local and residential streets designated above,
which prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of
the mayor. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to
remain parked any vehicle on any side of a street whereon parking is
prohibited.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9309, effective 08-30-2011)
22-116   Vehicles On Snow Emergency Routes
Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, on any snow emergency
route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating
such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed
off the roadway of such snow emergency route, either onto the nearest cross
street which is not a snow emergency route, or other appropriate location. No
person shall abandon or leave a vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency
route, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time
necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station,
or other place of assistance and return without delay.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-117   Snow Alert/Emergency; Notice
The mayor or their designated representative shall cause each declaration of a
snow alert/emergency made pursuant to this chapter, to be publicly announced by
means of broadcast or telecast from broadcasting stations with a normal
operating range covering the city, and may cause such declaration to be further
announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement
shall describe the action taken, including the time it became or will become
effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected.
When the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter no longer exist, the mayor or their
designated representative may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or
in part, effective immediately upon announcement or at a later specified time.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-118   Temporary Provisions; Precedence
Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by declaration of the
mayor or their designated representative upon the occurrence of a snow alert/
emergency, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of law while in
effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law
relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency
vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-119   Removal Of Stalled Or Parked Vehicles
   A.   Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or
have removed a vehicle from a street to another place or location on a street
or to a lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the
police department when:
      1.   The vehicles on a snow emergency route are in violation of this
division.
      2.   The vehicle is stalled on a snow emergency route on which there is a
parking prohibition in effect and the person who is operating said vehicle does
not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   The vehicle is parked on any street in violation of this division.
   B.   Such vehicle removal may be made by towing to the city automobile
pound, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 22, Article IV, Division 3, of
this Code, or the police department may cause such vehicles to be removed to a
private lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility; and any such
vehicle shall not be released therefrom except upon payment by the owner of the
vehicle to the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard, or
other similar facility for the cost of towing, and the cost of storage, at the
appropriate charges as listed in the most current fee schedule, during which
time the vehicle remains stored, and a receipt for such fees shall be issued to
the owner of the vehicle.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the lot,
garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the police
department to keep a record of the name of the owner of all vehicles towed in
under the provisions hereof, together with the registration number of each
vehicle, and the nature and circumstances of each violation, and the amount of
fees collected hereunder, and to deliver a report of each day's transactions to
the chief of police not later than one day following the day for which the
report is made.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009)
22-120   Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this division of the Grand Island City
Code, notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5, nor more than $100, together
with administrative costs for necessary towing upon being deemed guilty. Such
fine and costs may be paid upon issuance of a police tag at the police
department within five days of the issuance. All persons failing to report to
the police department in response to the aforesaid police tag within the five
days period shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code and subject to
the penalties provided herein.
Article 22-VIII
Minibikes
22-121   Reserved
22-122   Minibikes; Prohibited On City Property
22-121   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-122   Minibikes; Prohibited On City Property
No person shall operate any minibike on any property owned by the City of Grand
Island, Nebraska, unless specifically permitted by this Code.
Article 22-IX
Recreational Vehicles And Vessels
22-124   Definitions
22-125   Parking And Storing RVs
22-124   Definitions
For the purposes of this article, Recreational Vehicle is defined as, and shall
include, the following:
Boat Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed to
transport a boat for recreational vacation use, which is eligible to be
licensed or registered and insured for highway use;
Camper Trailer. A folding or collapsible vehicle structure without its own
motive power, designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping,
recreation and vacation use, and eligible to be licensed or registered and
insured for highway use;
Horse Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed
primarily for the transportation of horses, and which, in combination with the
carrying vehicle, is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for
highway use;
Motor Home. A vehicular unit primarily designed to provide temporary living
quarters which are built into an integral part of or permanently attached to, a
self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or van, containing permanently installed
independent life-support systems that meet the state standard for recreational
vehicles and providing at least four of the following facilities: cooking;
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating, air conditioning, or
both; a potable water supply system including a faucet and sink; separate one-
hundred-twenty-nominal-volt electrical power supply; or LP gas supply;
Recreational Vessel. A term applying to all manner of water craft, other than a
seaplane on water, whether impelled by wind, oars, or mechanical devises, and
which is designed primarily for recreational or vacation uses. A recreational
vessel, when mounted upon a boat trailer, and its towing recreational vehicle,
when parked or stored in the side or rear yard or behind the required front
yard, shall be considered one unit, exclusive of its towing recreational
vehicle.
Residential district means a contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing
residential properties and public rights-of-way or parts thereof primarily
abutted by residential property or residential and non-commercial property such
as schools, parks, churches, hospitals, colleges, and nursing homes.
Residential property means a tract or platted lot of less than one acre in
total area on which no more than eight residential dwelling units are located.
Travel Trailer. A rigid vehicular structure, without its own motive power,
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation or vacation
use, and eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use;
Truck Camper. A portable structure, without its own motive power, designed to
be transported on a powered vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel,
camping, recreation or vacation use, and which, in combination with the
carrying vehicle, is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for
highway use;
Utility Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power, designed
and/or used primarily for the transportation of all manner of motor vehicles,
goods or materials, and eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for
highway use.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9841, effective 9-08-2021)
22-125   Parking And Storing RVs
No owner, lessee, or bailee, of a recreational vehicle as defined in §
22-124, shall park or store such recreational vehicle within a residential
district, except as follows:
   A.   Such recreational vehicle shall be licensed, registered, and operable
and maintained in a clean, sanitary state so as not to attract pests or vermin
of any nature, and shall not exceed the maximum width, length or height
permitted by Nebraska Revised Statutes Chapter 60, Article 6, as amended.
   B.   If such recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied petroleum gas
containers, such containers shall meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce
Commission or the Federal Department of Transportation or the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers, as such standards existed on September 23, 1975.
Further, the valves of such liquefied petroleum gas containers must be closed
when the recreational vehicle is not being readied for immediate use, and in
the event that leakage is detected from such liquefied petroleum gas
containers, immediate corrective action must be taken.
   C.   At no time shall such parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied
or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except as provided in
subsection (D) of this section.
   D.   It shall be lawful for only nonpaying guests at a residence in a
residential district to occupy one recreational vehicle parked or stored on a
residential property, subject to the provisions of this chapter, for sleeping
purposes only for a period not exceeding one week. The total number of days
during which a recreational vehicle may be occupied under this subsection shall
not exceed 30 days in any calendar year.
   E.   Such recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in the following
manner:
      1.   Parking is permitted inside any closed structure, which structure
otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone where
located;
      2.   Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or in the rear yard
behind a required front yard;
      3.   Parking is permitted outside within the required front yard area on
a driveway or a hard-surfaced pad adjacent to the driveway for one recreational
vehicle, provided:
         a.   The recreational vehicle is parked perpendicular to the front
curb;
         b.   The recreational vehicle is not parked within or obstructing a
public sidewalk space;
         c.   The recreational vehicle must be at least 10 feet in back of the
front curbing;
      4.   Parking is permitted upon the public street for a period not to
exceed 24 consecutive hours or 24 total hours in a seven day period provided,
however, no such vehicle shall be parked in a manner that blocks or obstructs
the street traffic lane or sidewalk space located in the public right-of-way.
   F.   The city council shall have the power to grant relief from any of the
foregoing provisions in such selected instances as it may deem appropriate
under the circumstances.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9841, effective 9-08-2021)
Article 22-X
School Safety Patrol
22-127   School Safety Patrol; Duties
22-127   School Safety Patrol; Duties
   A.   The principal of any public or private school or institution of
learning, in the City of Grand Island, shall with the approval of the chief of
police, appoint or cause to be appointed from the student body students who
shall be known as members of the school's Safety Patrol, who shall serve
without compensation and at the pleasure of the authorities so making the
appointment. The members of such school Safety Patrol shall wear a badge or
other appropriate insignia when in performance of their duties. They are hereby
authorized to assist school children in crossing public roadways at designated
intersections. Members of the school Safety Patrol shall be subordinate to and
obey the orders of any police officer present and having jurisdiction.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to fail to
stop such vehicle when approaching an intersection in which school children are
crossing and being assisted by a member of the school's Safety Patrol who at
the time is wearing or displaying appropriate insignia.
Article 22-XI
Handicapped Parking
22-128   Definitions
22-129   Handicapped Parking; Parking Spaces Designated
22-130   Removal Of Unauthorized Vehicles
22-131   Violation; Penalty; Persons Responsible
22-132   Permits For Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Issuance; Procedure
22-133   Permits; Motor Vehicles Transporting Handicapped Or Disabled Persons;
Issuance; Procedure
22-134   Permits; Contents; Issuance; Duplicate Permit
22-135   Permit Fee; Renewal
22-136   Non Transferability Of Permits
22-128   Definitions
For the purpose of this Article, handicapped or disabled person shall mean any
individual with a severe visual or physical impairment which limits personal
mobility and results in an inability to travel unassisted more than two hundred
feet without the use of a wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic,
or other assistant device, any individual whose personal mobility is limited as
a result of respiratory problems, and any individual who has permanently lost
all or substantially all the use of one or more limbs.
Temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall mean any handicapped or
disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such
manner for no longer than one year.
22-129   Handicapped Parking; Parking Spaces Designated
The City and any person in lawful possession of any offstreet parking facility
may designate parking stalls or spaces for the exclusive use of (a) handicapped
or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the distinguishing license
plates issued to such individuals pursuant to §60-311.14, R.R.S. Neb. 1943 (as
amended); (b) such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the City, whose motor vehicles
display the permit specified in §
22-132; and (c) such other motor vehicles, as certified by the City, which
display the permit specified in §
22-133. All such permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the
motor vehicle's rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be displayed on
the dashboard.
Designation of a stall or space for handicapped parking shall be made by
posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign
which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
adopted pursuant to §60-6,118, R.R.S., Neb. 1943 (as amended). In addition to
such sign, the space may also be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of
the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space.
22-130   Removal Of Unauthorized Vehicles
The owner or person in lawful possession of an offstreet parking facility,
after notifying the police or sheriff's department, as the case may be, and the
City providing onstreet parking, or owning, operating, or providing an off-
street parking facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons,
of any vehicle not displaying the permit specified in §
22-132 or §
22-133 or the distinguishing license plates specified in §60-311.14, R.R.S.
Neb. 1943 (as amended) if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible
from such stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area
so designated as a tow-in zone.
22-131   Violation; Penalty; Persons Responsible
A person who parks a vehicle in any onstreet parking space which has been
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons,
or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any offstreet parking
facility, without properly displaying the permit specified in §
22-132 or §
22-133 or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom, as the
case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not enter or exit the
vehicle while it is parked in the designated space shall be guilty of a traffic
infraction and shall be fined: (1) Not more than one hundred dollars for the
first offense, (2) not more than two hundred dollars for a second offense
within a one-year period, and (3) not more than three hundred dollars for a
third and subsequent offense within a one-year period.
The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit
issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly constituted
authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete defense in any
action for a handicapped parking infraction issued pursuant to this Article.
If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this
Article cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the
vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation
and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures described in
this Article.
In the case of a privately owned offstreet parking facility, the City shall not
require the owner or person in lawful possession of such facility to inform the
City of a violation of this Article prior to the City issuing the violator a
traffic infraction citation.
22-132   Permits For Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Issuance; Procedure
The city clerk may take an application from a handicapped or disabled person or
temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent, legal
guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder thereof
or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting such holder
to park in those spaces provided for in this Article when the holder of the
permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such spaces.
For purposes of this section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily
handicapped or disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.
A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall complete an
application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall submit a completed
medical form containing the statutory criteria for qualification and signed by
a physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner certifying that the
person who will be the holder meets the definition of handicapped or disabled
person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person. In the case of a
temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying physician, physician
assistant, or nurse practitioner shall indicate the estimated date of recovery
or that the temporary handicap or disability will continue for a period of six
months, whichever is less. A person may hold only one permit under this section
and may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under section 21-
133, but not both. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall provide applications,
medical forms, and permits to the city clerk.
The application form shall contain information listing the legal uses of the
permit and that the permit is not transferable, is to be used by the party to
whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which it is issued, is not to be
altered or reproduced, and is to be used only when a handicapped or disabled
person or a temporarily handicapped or disabled person will enter or exit the
motor vehicle while it is parked in a designated parking space. It shall
indicate that those convicted of handicapped parking infractions shall be
subject to suspension of the permit for six months and possible fines. A copy
of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant. Before
issuing a permit, the city clerk shall enter all information required in the
manner prescribed by §
22-134. The city clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the
name, address, and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to
this section.
22-133   Permits; Motor Vehicles Transporting Handicapped Or Disabled Persons;
Issuance; Procedure
The city clerk may take an application from any person for a motor vehicle
permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving the motor
vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in those spaces provided
for in this Article if the motor vehicle is used primarily for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons.
Such parking permit shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was
issued is being used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person
or temporarily handicapped or disabled person and such person will enter or
exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such designated spaces.
A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant to this
section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to the city clerk
by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall demonstrate to the city clerk
that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons.
The application form shall contain information listing the legal uses of the
permit and that the permit is not transferable, is to be used by the party to
whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which it is issued, is not to be
altered or reproduced, and is to be used only when a handicapped or disabled
person or a temporarily handicapped or disabled person will enter or exit the
motor vehicle while it is parked in a designated parking space. It shall
indicate that those convicted of handicapped parking infractions shall be
subject to suspension of the permit for six months and possible fines. A copy
of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant. No more
than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A person may hold
either a permit under this section or a permit under section §
22-132, but not both. The city clerk shall issue a permit, as provided to the
city clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, to an approved applicant.
Before issuing such permit, the city clerk shall enter all information required
in the manner prescribed by §
22-134. The city clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the
name, address, and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to
this section.
22-134   Permits; Contents; Issuance; Duplicate Permit
   A.   The permit to be issued pursuant to §
22-132 or §
22-133 shall be constructed of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear
or fading for the term of the permit's issuance and printed so as to minimize
the possibility of alteration following issuance. The permit shall be of a
design, size, configuration, color, and construction and contain such
information as specified in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated
by the United States Department of Transportation in the Uniform System for
Handicapped Parking, 23 C.F.R. part 1235.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, the
permit shall show such identifying information with regard to the handicapped
or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person to whom it is
issued as is necessary to the enforcement of this Article as determined by the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
   C.   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if any
parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle and
such permit has been suspended pursuant to §18-1741, R.R.S. Neb 1943 (as
amended). At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed upon
the payment of the permit fee.
   D.   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit
is destroyed, lost, or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the
same manner as the original permit and shall be valid for the remainder of the
period for which the original permit was issued.
22-135   Permit Fee; Renewal
   A.   All permits authorized under §
22-132 or §
22-133 for handicapped or disabled parking prior to September 10, 1993, shall
be issued for a period ending January 1 of the fourth year following the date
of issuance. All permits authorized under such sections for handicapped or
disabled parking after September 9, 1993 and before September 10, 1995, shall
be issued for a period of three years Upon the expiration of a permanent
permit, it may be renewed pursuant to the provisions of this section and §
22-132 or §
22-133. After September 9, 1995, all permanently issued permits authorized by
this Article, shall be issued for a period ending on September 30 of the third
year following the date of issuance and shall expire on that date, except that
an application for the renewal of a permit filed with the issuing city or
village clerk or designated county official within thirty days of the date
after its expiration shall be deemed to have been filed prior to the date of
its expiration.
   B.   All permits authorized under this Article prior to September 10, 1995,
for temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period
ending ninety days after the date of issuance but may be renewed for up to
three additional ninety-day periods. All permits authorized under this Article
after September 9, 1995, for temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall
be issued for a period ending not more than six months after the date of
issuance but may be renewed for a one-time period not to exceed six months. For
the renewal period, there shall be submitted an additional application with
proof of a handicap or disability and the required permit fee.
22-136   Non Transferability Of Permits
Permits issued under this Article shall not be transferable and shall be used
only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which issued and
only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter or reproduce
in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this Article. Any violation of this
section shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six months
and such other punishment as may be provided by local ordinance. In addition,
the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
which may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped
parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned to
the court. At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit may
be renewed.
Article 22-XII
Off-Street Parking
22-140   Definitions
22-141   Violations; Penalty; Persons Responsible
22-142   Removal; Duty Of Property Owner
22-143   Non-Conforming Off-Street Parking; Public Nuisance
22-144   Penalty For Violation
22-145   Notice To Remove; Non-Compliance With Notice; Procedure
22-146   Assessment; Levy; Collection
22-140   Definitions
For the purpose of this Article, off-street parking shall be that as defined in
§
36-8 of this Code and any vehicles parked on such off-street parking spaces.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005)
22-141   Violations; Penalty; Persons Responsible
22-141.1   Parking In Front Yards 
22-141.2   Parking Busses In Yards
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or bailee or person to park
a motor vehicle in a non-conforming off-street parking space as defined in §
36-96 and
36-97.
   B.   If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of
this Article cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such
violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures
described in this Article.
   C.   All violations of this Section shall be enforced by the Parking
Violations Bureau and the provisions of Sections
22-101 through
22-104, inclusive.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005)
22-141.1   Parking In Front Yards
   A.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a motor vehicle on any
unimproved area of a front yard of any property in the city of Grand Island.
The term "motor vehicle" shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not
operated on rails, except mopeds or self-propelled invalid chairs. No front
yard area shall be improved for parking unless it meets all of the requirements
of the Grand Island City Code for off-street parking, including but not limited
to, the provisions of
Chapter 36.
   B.   Upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense of this section, any
vehicle found on a front yard may be removed by causing said vehicle to be
removed from the property at the expense of the registered owner; or by other
actions authorized by §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code. If the vehicle is not registered, or if
the registered owner fails to abate the nuisance, removal shall be at the
expense of the registered owner of the property from which the vehicle is
removed.
(Added by Ordinance 8828, effective 8-6-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9197,
effective 11-12-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9458, effective 11-12-2013)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-141.2   Parking Busses In Yards
It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a bus (as defined in §
22-1), in the back yard, front yard or side yard of any residence (as defined
in §
36-8) in any zone of the City of Grand Island or its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction.
(Added by Ordinance 8992, effective 8-10-2005)
22-142   Removal; Duty Of Property Owner
It shall be the duty of every owner, landlord or person in possession, charge
or control of the real estate upon which any non-designated off-street parking
is allowed, to remove or cause to be removed from the premises such vehicle
parking in the non-conforming area.
It shall be unlawful to allow such vehicle to remain in a non-conforming off-
street parking area.
22-143   Non-Conforming Off-Street Parking; Public Nuisance
   A.   It shall be unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance to allow
off-street parking in non-conforming areas, as described in §
36-96 and
36-97 or to allow to remain on any property within the City such vehicles in
non-conforming areas.
   B.   Upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense of this section, any
vehicle found on a front yard may be removed by causing said vehicle to be
removed from the property at the expense of the registered owner; or by other
actions authorized by §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code. If the vehicle is not registered, or if
the registered owner fails to abate the nuisance, removal shall be at the
expense of the registered owner of the property from which the vehicle is
removed.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-144   Penalty For Violation
Any person violating §
22-143 shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as provided in this Code.
22-145   Notice To Remove; Non-Compliance With Notice; Procedure
It shall be the duty of the Grand Island Police Department or the Code
Compliance Officer in any case where a vehicle is allowed to remain in a non-
conforming area and in any non-conforming off-street parking space, to deliver
or send a Notice to Abate and remove such nuisance to the owner of the real
estate or the owner's duly authorized agent or person, in possession, charge or
control, and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or ordinary first
class mail. Within five days after delivery or mailing of such notice, if the
owner, agent or occupant of the real estate or piece of ground fails to comply
with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, or if such owner, agent or
occupant cannot be notified by personal service or mail upon written request
from the Grand Island Police Department or the Code Compliance Officer to the
City Attorney, the City of Grand Island may proceed to abate said public
nuisance by causing said vehicle to be removed from the property at the expense
of the registered owner of the vehicle after notice has been securely attached
to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle and at least seventy-two (72)
hours have elapsed since attachment of said notice without said vehicle being
removed to a conforming and legal parking space; or by other actions authorized
by §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code. If the vehicle is nor registered, or if
the registered owner fails to abate the nuisance, removal shall be at the
expense of the registered owner of the property from which the vehicle is
removed.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-146   Assessment; Levy; Collection
   A.   No vehicles removed from property pursuant to §
22-141.1, §
22-143 or §
22-145 shall be returned to any registered owner or claimant until such time as
all expenses related to removing the vehicle from the nonconforming off-street
parking area have been paid in full and proof has been provided that the
vehicle has been properly registered and insured unless return is expressly
ordered by a Court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of
impoundment.
   B.   If the costs and expenses of removing the vehicle from the
nonconforming off-street parking area are not paid within the time provided,
the City Council shall, and it does hereby empower to, levy and assess the
costs and expenses of such removal upon the property so benefited. The same
shall be levied on all lots, tracts or parcels of land to the extent of the
special benefit to such real estate, by reason of such improvement, such
benefits to be determined by the City Council sitting as a board of
equalization after publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
City and personal notice at least ten (10) days prior thereto. The assessment
so levied shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of levy
and shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer thirty (30) days after such
levy and shall become delinquent fifty (50) days after such levy and shall bear
interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from the date they become
delinquent; and, at the time of the next certification for general revenue
purposes to the County Clerk, if not previously paid, this special tax shall be
certified to the County Clerk, be placed upon the tax list and be collected as
other real estate taxes are collected and be paid over to the City Treasurer.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
Article 22-XIII
Repealed
22-147   Reserved
22-148   Reserved
22-149   Reserved
22-150   Reserved
22-151   Reserved
22-152   Reserved
22-153   Reserved
22-154   Reserved
22-155   Reserved
22-156   Reserved
22-157   Reserved
22-158   Reserved
22-147   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-148   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-149   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-150   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-151   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9672, effective 3-1-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-152   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-153   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9672, effective 3-1-2018)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-154   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-155   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-156   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-157   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
22-158   Reserved
(Added by Ordinance 9646, effective 11-1-2017)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
CHAPTER 23
OCCUPATION TAXES
Article 23-I   Gas Manufacturers, Distributors, Etc.
Article 23-II   Telegraph Companies
Article 23-III   Telecommunication Tax
Article 23-IV   Solicitors, Peddlers, Etc.
Article 23-V   Games Of Chance, Lotteries, Etc.
Article 23-VI   Hotel Tax
Article 23-VII   Food And Beverage Retailer Occupation Tax
Article 23-VIII   Repealed
Article 23-IX   Rental Car Occupation Tax
Article 23-X   Enhanced Employment Act Area Tax
Article 23-XI   Enhanced Employment Act Area Tax CRA 28
Article 23-XI   Enhanced Employment Act Area Tax – CRA 28
Article 23-I
Gas Manufacturers, Distributors, Etc.
23-1   Occupation Tax
23-2   Federal And State Sales Exempt
23-3   Tax Payable; Interest; Penalties
23-4   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
23-5   Monthly Report Of Therms
23-6   Adjustments
23-7   Right Of City To Inspect Records
23-8   When Tax Not Reported
23-9   Right Of City To Sue
23-1   Occupation Tax
Except as provided in §
23-2, any person engaged in the business of distributing, manufacturing or
furnishing gas, either natural, manufactured or mixed gas, in the City, shall
be required to pay to the City an occupation tax in an amount equal to three
cents per therm of all such gas distributed or furnished to the inhabitants of
the City. Provided, however, the occupation tax shall be one cent per therm of
all such gas transported within the city to transport customers.
23-2   Federal And State Sales Exempt
Any person engaged in the business of selling, distributing and furnishing
natural, or manufactured, or mixed gas in the City shall not be required to pay
the occupation tax provided for by §
23-1 on the sale of such gas to the United States government, or any of its
departments, or any sold to the state, or any of its departments, or any of the
political subdivisions thereof, and no part or portion of the tax provided for
in such section shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from the
United States government, the government of the state, or any of either of
their departments or political subdivisions.
23-3   Tax Payable; Interest; Penalties
The occupation tax levied pursuant to §
23-1 shall be due and payable on the fifteenth day of each month for the gross
receipts of the month preceding such date, and each and every payment shall be
made on the fifteenth day of each month, and all deferred payments shall draw
interest at the rate of one percent per month, and after payment has been in
default six months, a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto in
addition to such interest charge which shall be paid by any person subject to
this occupation tax.
23-4   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
All occupation taxes collected in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time specified in this
article, who shall issue and deliver a receipt therefor upon payment thereof,
and the amount so paid shall be credited by the city treasurer to the general
fund of the City, unless otherwise directed by the city council.
23-5   Monthly Report Of Therms
Any person engaged in the business described in §
23-1 shall, on or before the tenth day of each month, file with the city clerk
a full, complete and detailed statement of the number of therm units of all
such gas distributed or furnished to the inhabitants of the City and all such
gas transported within the city for transport customers for the preceding
month, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by such person or by
the managing officer of any gas company.
23-6   Adjustments
Any person, when paying the occupation tax provided for by §
23-1 may show on the reports accompanying such tax payments an adjustment in
the payment of said tax made necessary by uncollectible accounts, or any other
matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in the
amount of tax paid in any previous remittance.
23-7   Right Of City To Inspect Records
The City shall have the right at any time during business hours to inspect,
through its officers, agents, or representatives, the books and records of any
person engaged in the business described by §
23-1 for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to §
23-5.
23-8   When Tax Not Reported
In case any person engaged in the business described by §
23-1 shall refuse or fail or neglect to furnish or file a report pursuant to §
23-5 at the time specified or shall refuse to permit the City, through its
officers, agents, or representatives, to inspect the business books and records
for the purpose of verifying any such report, then the occupation tax levied
pursuant to this article for the preceding month shall be the sum of three
thousand five hundred dollars, which amount shall draw interest at the rate of
one percent per month after becoming due and payable, and in addition thereto a
penalty of five percent shall be added for failure to pay such tax within six
months.
23-9   Right Of City To Sue
If any person engaged in the business described by §
23-1 shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax as provided by this
article at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right
to sue any such person in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of
occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of this article,
and may recover therein a judgment against any such person for such amount due,
together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon.
Article 23-II
Telegraph Companies
23-10   Occupation Tax; Exemption
23-11   Effective Date; Payment Periods
23-12   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
23-13   Interest And Penalty
23-14   Adjustments
23-15   Report Of Gross Receipts
23-16   Right Of City To Inspect Records
23-17   When Tax Report Not Filed
23-18   Right Of City To Sue
23-19   Railroad Companies; Exemption
23-20   Other Fees And Taxes
23-10   Occupation Tax; Exemption
Telegraph companies maintaining and operating stations and offices in the City
are required to pay to the City as an occupation tax the sum of three percent
of the gross receipts collected in the City, resulting from the business and
occupation of receiving messages in the City from persons in the City and
transmitting the same by telegraph from the City to persons and places within
the state, and receiving in the City messages by telegraph, transmitted from
persons and places in the state to persons within the City. There shall be
excepted from the provisions of this article all receipts for telegraph service
to the United States government or any of its departments and all receipts from
the state or any of its departments, and no part of the tax provided for in
this article shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from the United
States government, the government of the state or any of either of their
departments.
23-11   Effective Date; Payment Periods
The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in
semiannual payments. This article shall take effect on October 1, 1958, and the
first payment shall be for the succeeding six-month period, and the same shall
be paid within forty-five days after April 1, 1959. The next payment of such
tax shall be made within forty-five days after the first day of October 1959.
The payment of such tax in the years following shall likewise be made as set
forth in this section.
23-12   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
The occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city
treasurer at the time provided by this article who shall issue and deliver a
receipt therefor upon the payment thereof, and the amount of payment shall be
credited by the city treasurer to the general fund.
23-13   Interest And Penalty
All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article which are
made after the due date shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per
month, and after payment thereof has been in default for six months, a penalty
of five percent shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charges
which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax.
23-14   Adjustments
Each succeeding semiannual payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to
this article may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided
for by §
23-15 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any
other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in
the amount of tax paid in any previous semiannual payment.
23-15   Report Of Gross Receipts
All telegraph companies shall, at the time they make their semiannual payments
of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, file with the city clerk
a full, complete, and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such
occupation tax which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the
manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the City, or by
a higher managerial employee of such company.
23-16   Right Of City To Inspect Records
The City shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its officers,
agents or representatives, the books and records of any telegraph company, for
the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of §
23-15.
23-17   When Tax Report Not Filed
In case any telegraph company shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file
any report required by §
23-15 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit
the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of
verifying such report, then the occupation tax for the preceding six months
shall be the amount of one hundred dollars, and such amount shall be paid
within forty-five days following the end of the six months period as required
by §
23-11, and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as
provided by §
23-13.
23-18   Right Of City To Sue
In case any telegraph company shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax
provided for by this article at the time specified for such payment, the City
shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the
terms and provisions of this article, and may recover judgment against any such
company for such amount so due, together with interest and penalties, and may
have execution thereon.
23-19   Railroad Companies; Exemption
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to include railroad
companies sending messages by telegraph in connection with the operation of
such railroad.
23-20   Other Fees And Taxes
The occupation tax provided for by this article shall be in lieu of any other
occupation, license, permit or franchise fee or tax assessed against telegraph
companies under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City.
Article 23-III
Telecommunication Tax
23-21   Occupation Tax; Exemption
23-22   Payment Period And Due Date
23-23   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
23-24   Interest And Penalty
23-25   Quarterly Report Of Gross Receipts
23-26   Adjustments
23-27   Right Of City To Inspect Records
23-28   When Tax Report Not Filed
23-29   Right Of City To Sue
23-30   Other Fees And Taxes
23-21   Occupation Tax; Exemption
A.   All telephone companies and mobile telecommunications services doing
business in the City are required to pay an occupation tax to the City in an
amount equal to four (4) percent of the gross receipts from the legally
established basic monthly charges collected for local exchange telephone
service to subscribers within the City, intrastate message toll telephone
service and mobile telecommunications services for revenue in the City.
B.   As used in this section, mobile telecommunications services shall mean a
wireless communication service carried on between mobile stations or receivers
and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among themselves, and
includes:
   1.   Both one-way and two-way wireless communications services;
   2.   A mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group of base,
mobile, portable and associated control and relay stations, whether on an
individual, cooperative, or multiple basis for private one-way or two- way land
mobile radio communications by eligible users over designated areas of
operation; and
   3.   Any personal communications service.
C.   There shall be excepted from the provisions of this Article all receipts
for telephone service to the United States government or any of its
departments, and all receipts from the state or any of its departments, and no
part or portion of the tax provided for in this Article shall be levied upon or
assessed against or taken from the United States government, the government of
the state, or any of either of their departments.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9106, effective 3-1-07) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9593, effective 9-01-16) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9990, effective 9-24-24
23-22   Payment Period And Due Date
The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in
quarterly payments, using the calendar quarter year as a basis for determining
and computing the amount of tax payable. Each quarterly payment shall be due
forty-five days after the termination of each calendar quarter year.
23-23   To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
The occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city
treasurer at the time provided by this article who shall issue and deliver
receipt therefor upon the payment thereof, and the amount of payment shall be
credited by the city treasurer to the general fund.
23-24   Interest And Penalty
All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article which are
made after the due date thereof shall draw interest at the rate of one percent
per month and, after payment thereof has been in default for six months, a
penalty of five percent shall be added thereto in addition to such interest
charges, which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax.
23-25   Quarterly Report Of Gross Receipts
All telephone companies shall, at the time they make their quarterly payments
of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, file with the city clerk
a full, complete and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such
occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the
manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the city or by a
higher managerial employee of such company.
23-26   Adjustments
Each succeeding quarterly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this
article may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided for by
§
23-25 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any
other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in
the amount of tax paid in any previous quarter.
23-27   Right Of City To Inspect Records
The City shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its officers,
agents or representatives, the books and records of any telephone company, for
the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of §
23-25.
23-28   When Tax Report Not Filed
In case any telephone company shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file
any report required by §
23-25 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit
the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of
verifying such report, than the occupation tax for the preceding quarter shall
be the sum of five thousand dollars, and such amount shall be paid within
forty-five days following the end of the calendar quarter as required by §
23-22 and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as
provided by §
23-24.
23-29   Right Of City To Sue
In case any telephone company shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax
provided for by this article at the time specified for such payment, the City
shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the
terms and provisions of this article and may recover judgment against any such
company for such amount so due, together with interest and penalties, and may
have execution thereon.
23-30   Other Fees And Taxes
The occupation tax provided for by this article shall be in lieu of any other
occupation, license, permit or franchise fee or tax assessed against telephone
companies under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City.
Article 23-IV
Solicitors, Peddlers, Etc.
23-31   Occupation Tax
23-32   Proration
23-33   Receipt And Card
23-34   To Whom Payable
23-35   Registration Statement
23-36   Applicability Of Article
23-37   Exemptions
23-31   Occupation Tax
All solicitors, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise, magazines, publications, wares, and services shall pay an
occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
23-32   Proration
No proration of the tax provided for by this article shall be permitted for
less than one month.
23-33   Receipt And Card
Upon payment of the tax required by this article, the solicitor, peddler or
itinerant merchant shall be supplied with a card by the city clerk which is to
be displayed in or about the vehicle or location used by such solicitor or
peddler, and the receipt for such tax shall be carried on the person paying the
same who goes from place to place.
23-34   To Whom Payable
All solicitors, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise, magazines, publications, wares and services, desiring to display
and sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines and publications in the City
shall pay the occupation tax provided by this article to the city clerk.
23-35   Registration Statement
At the time of paying the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, the
solicitor, peddler, or other such person mentioned in §
23-34 shall register his or her name, address, firms represented, products
purveyed, the address of all firms represented and whether such firms have
provided an agent for service in the state, and, if so, such name and address.
23-36   Applicability Of Article
Except as provided by §
23-37, all persons who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange any
goods, merchandise, publications, wares and services, by going from place to
place shall be required to pay the taxes set forth by this article, and the
solicitation of orders shall be regarded as selling or offering for sale.
23-37   Exemptions
This article shall not apply to the following persons:
   A.   Persons selling to merchants and businessmen;
   B.   Persons having an established permanent place of business in the City;
   C.   Persons having an established place of residence in the county;
   D.   Persons living in the county or adjacent counties who are selling their
own produce;
   E.   Persons selling under judicial sales or sales on foreclosures of
mortgages.
Article 23-V
Games Of Chance, Lotteries, Etc.
23-38   Definitions
23-39   Tax Imposed
23-40   Games Of Chance
23-41   Gambling Devices
23-42   Unlawful Without License
23-43   License Application
23-44   License Displayed
23-45   License Fee
23-46   Nonprofit Organizations
23-47   Lotteries
23-38   Definitions
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   The phrase games of chance and/or lotteries shall mean those forms of
gambling authorized by the State of Nebraska pursuant to Article III, Section
24, of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
   B.   The phrase gambling device shall mean any and all machines or devices
used by a person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or
lotteries.
   C.   The phrase person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of
chance and/or lotteries shall mean any person who operates, owns or is the
lessee of a place of business where any game of chance and/or lottery activity
is conducted, whether or not any other type of business is conducted on the
premises; or, any person who either directly controls or manages the games of
chance and/or lotteries, or owns any machine or device used to engage in the
occupation of games of chance and/or lotteries, but does not sell, lease, or
deliver possession or custody of such a device to other persons.
   D.   The word distributor shall mean any person who engages in the business
of selling, leasing, or delivering possession or custody of gambling devices
for consideration to a person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of
chance and/or lotteries.
23-39   Tax Imposed
An occupation tax is hereby imposed on each person engaged within the City in
the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lottery activities and upon
each person engaged in the occupation of distributing gambling devices. Every
person conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall
pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in §
23-40. Every person distributing gambling devices within the City shall pay the
tax in the amount and manner specified in §
23-41.
23-40   Games Of Chance
The occupation tax for each person engaging in the occupation of conducting
games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall be 6 percent of
the gross receipts received by said person in each quarter of a calendar year.
23-41   Gambling Devices
The occupation tax for engaging in the occupation of distributing gambling
devices within the City shall be six percent (6%) of the gross receipts
received by a distributor in each quarter of a calendar year.
23-42   Unlawful Without License
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of conducting
games of chance or lottery activities without first obtaining a license to do
so.
23-43   License Application
Every person desiring a license required by the provisions of this article
shall make application to the city clerk. Accompanying each application shall
be:
   A.   A sworn statement by each designated supervising member that such
member will be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations for each
occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he supervises.
   B.   A sworn statement by the member designated as responsible for the
proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission, fee, rent, seller
profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or
organization not sanctioned by the laws of the State of Nebraska and the City
of Grand Island; and that all profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.
23-44   License Displayed
Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance and/or lottery
activity is conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
23-45   License Fee
The license fee for engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance
and lotteries within the City shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each location
wherein such activity is conducted.
23-46   Nonprofit Organizations
Nonprofit organizations that desire to participate in games of chance and/or
lotteries that are in compliance with the Small Lotteries and Raffles Act of
the State of Nebraska, are exempt from the provisions of this article.
23-47   Lotteries
Lotteries conducted pursuant to the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act which
are operated in accordance with an agreement approved by the City Council
providing for payment in lieu of the tax imposed by Article V of Chapter 23 of
the City Code shall be exempt from the provisions requiring payment of said
tax.
Article 23-VI
Hotel Tax
23-55   Hotel Accommodations
23-56   Hotel Defined
23-57   Occupied Room; Defined; Exceptions
23-58   Collection
23-59   Records
23-60   Due Date
23-61   Intent
23-62   Sunset Provision
23-63   Penalty
23-55   Hotel Accommodations
Each person engaged in the business of operating a hotel in the city shall pay
an occupation tax in the amount of two percent (2%) of the basic rental rates
charged per occupied room per night.
23-56   Hotel Defined
Hotel shall mean any facility in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist hotels, campgrounds, courts,
lodging houses, inns and nonprofit hotels; but "hotel" shall not be defined so
as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or
dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly
used to house students.
23-57   Occupied Room; Defined; Exceptions
   A.   Occupied Room shall mean any space ordinarily used for sleeping
accommodations and for which any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the
use or possession, or the right to use or possess, for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) contiguous days. The term shall include camping space, trailer
space or recreational vehicle space. The term does not include a function room
such as a ballroom, banquet room, reception room, or meeting room, provided it
is not used as temporary sleeping accommodations.
   B.   The term "occupied room" shall not mean, and no tax imposed by this
article shall be measured by or collected for:
      1.   Complimentary or other sleeping accommodations for which no
consideration is charged;
      2.   Sleeping accommodations for which the consideration is paid by a
person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act
of 1967, as it is amended from time to time; or
      3.   Sleeping accommodations leased by an employer for use by its
employees when a specific room is the subject of the lease, the lease extends
for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, and consideration is actually paid
for use during at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
23-58   Collection
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected by the hotel operator from
the occupant of each room to which the tax applies. The tax may be shown as an
add-on to the charge for occupancy of the rooms and shall be collectible at the
time the lodging is furnished, regardless of when the charge for the occupancy
is paid. The operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes imposed
whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the guests.
23-59   Records
It shall be unlawful for any hotel operator subject to this article to fail to
maintain or fail to make available to the city, upon seventy-two (72) hours
notice, written records accurately and completely evidencing the number of
rooms occupied, the dates the rooms are occupied, the amount of occupation tax
due or paid under this article, and such other information as is required by
the Director of Finance. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three
(3) years after the occupation tax is due.
23-60   Due Date
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, the tax imposed by this
article shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month next
succeeding the month during which the room was occupied. All taxes not paid by
the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due and payable shall be
deemed to be delinquent. The operator shall be assessed a penalty of ten
percent (10%) on all delinquent amounts as well as interest of one percent (1%)
per month or fraction thereof from the first of the month in which such tax
becomes due and payable until the date of payment.
23-61   Intent
It is the intent of the City Council that the city shall use the revenue
generated by the occupation tax imposed by this article to fund the maintenance
and operation of the Heartland Event Center for the purposes set forth in Neb.
Rev. Stat. §13-315 (1997).
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 10,005 on 1/14/2025
23-62   Sunset Provision
The occupation tax imposed by this ordinance shall terminate and hotels shall
cease collecting the tax at 12:00 a.m. (midnight) December 31, 2025. Nothing in
this ordinance shall prohibit the City Council from taking action by ordinance
to renew or re-establish this tax before or after the effective date of such
termination.
23-63   Penalty
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
Sections
23-55 through
23-62 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished in accordance with Section
1-7 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of Sections
23-55 through
23-62 shall constitute a separate offense.
Article 23-VII
Food And Beverage Retailer Occupation Tax
23-64   Definitions
23-65   Intent And Purpose Of Article
23-66   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
23-67   Tax Imposed For Revenue Purposes; Tax Cumulative
23-68   Return
23-69   Suspension Or Revocation Of Other Licenses
23-70   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By Finance Director
23-71   Jeopardy Assessment
23-72   Administration Of Article; Miscellaneous Provisions
23-73   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
23-74   City A Party To Title Actions For Determination Of Lien
23-75   Authority Of Finance Director To Waive Penalty
23-76   Penalty
23-77   Severability
23-78   (Reserved)
23-79   Tax Oversight Committee
23-64   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   A.   Beverage shall mean all substances, whether in liquid or frozen form,
sold for ingestion by humans and are consumed for their taste or nutritional
value and contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume.
   B.   City shall mean the City of Grand Island and the area within the
corporate limits of the City of Grand Island.
   C.   Commercial Establishment shall mean any retail location in the City
that sells food or beverages as herein defined.
   D.   Food shall mean substances, whether in liquid, concentrated, solid,
frozen, dried, or dehydrated form, that are sold for ingestion or chewing by
humans and are consumed for their taste or nutritional value, excluding
beverages as defined herein and tobacco products.
   E.   Gross Receipts shall mean the total amount of consideration, donation,
contributions, or monetary charges of any nature paid to obtain food or
beverage without any deduction on account of expenses, taxes, or other costs.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the term gross receipts shall
not include: (i.) receipts from the sale of food or beverages exempt from or
not otherwise subject to Nebraska Sales and Use Tax as provided by the Nebraska
Revenue Act of 1967 as amended from time to time; (ii.) The value of food or
beverages furnished by the commercial establishment to employees as part of
their compensation when no charge is made to the employee; and (iii.) Tips to
an employee of a food services and drinking places when the amount of the tip
is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, whether or not the tip is paid to
the employee or added to the bill and if the amount of the tip is turned over
to the employee. Amounts that are added to the price of the meal and required
to be paid by the purchaser, whether or not designated as a tip or a service
charge, shall be exempt as a tip to the extent the mandatory amount does not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the food and beverage sales price.
   F.   Finance Director shall mean the Finance Director of the City of Grand
Island.
   G.   Person shall mean any natural person, individual, partnership,
association, organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in
retail sales of food or beverages.
   H.   Retail shall mean sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any
form.
   I.   Retail location shall mean any permanent, temporary or mobile place,
location or facility where retail sales occur, including, but not limited to,
brick and mortar locations, mobile trucks and temporary stands.
   J.   Sale or to sell shall mean any transfer of possession for
consideration, donation, contributions, or monetary charges of any nature paid
to obtain or for access to food or beverage.
   K.   Taxpayer shall mean any person operating a commercial establishment
herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed.
23-65   Intent And Purpose Of Article
   A.   Pursuant to the authority of Nebraska Revised Statute R.R.S. 1943,
Section 16-205, the City Council finds, determines and declares that it is
appropriate that a tax be imposed on commercial establishments that sell food
and beverages as herein defined for the purpose of raising revenues. The
foregoing determination is made with due consideration of business in the City
and the relation of business to the municipal welfare, together with relation
thereof, to expenditures required by the City, and with consideration of just,
proper and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City and other
properly associated matters.
   B.   That revenue derived from Grand Island City Code, Article VII - the
Food and Beverages Tax shall be used for the following community enhancements:
      1.   To make the City’s quarterly payments to the Nebraska State Fair
Support and Improvement Fund as required by Neb Rev. Stat. §§2-108-110;
      2.   Promote entertainment, agricultural and livestock shows, trade shows
and similar events that will attract visitors to Grand Island;
      3.   Ongoing enhancement and development of recreation and athletic
facilities such as hike, bike and recreational trails, ball fields and other
community activity needs; and
      4.   Invest in community development projects and activities that
stimulate progress and growth for Grand Island.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9614, effective 12-07-2016)
23-66   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
   A.   On or after July 1, 2016 and in each calendar month thereafter there is
hereby imposed a food and beverages retailer occupation tax upon each and every
person operating a commercial establishment within the City for any period of
time during a calendar month. The amount of such tax shall be one and one-half
percent (1 1/2%) of all gross receipts for each calendar month derived from the
sale of food and beverages subject to this tax.
   B.   The person engaged in the sale of food and beverages may but is not
required to itemize the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the
purchaser, but each person engaged in the sale of food or beverages shall
remain liable for the tax imposed by this section.
   C.   Gross receipts subject to the tax shall include receipts from the sale
of food and beverages but excluding receipts from the sale of food or beverages
exempt from or not otherwise subject to Nebraska Sales and Use Tax as provided
by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967 as amended from time to time.
23-67   Tax Imposed For Revenue Purposes; Tax Cumulative
   A.   The tax imposed by this article is purely for revenue purposes to
support the programs of the government of the City. The levy of the tax under
this article is in addition to all other fees, taxes, excises and licenses
levied and imposed under any contract or any other provisions of this Code or
ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license imposed
by the state.
   B.   Payment of the tax imposed by this article shall not relieve the person
paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed by
contract or ordinance or by this Code, including those imposed for any business
or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. It is the
intent of this Council that the occupational taxes imposed by this article
shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.
23-68   Return
   A.   Each and every person operating a commercial establishment within the
City for the calendar month beginning July 2016, and for each and every
calendar month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the 25th day of
the month, or the next business day should the 25th fall on a Federal holiday
or weekend, following on a form prescribed by the Finance Director, a return
for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the Finance
Director the tax herein imposed. Any return that is remitted via the United
State Postal Service shall be postmarked by the 25th day of the month to be
considered an on time filing.
   B.   A commercial establishment may make reports and remittances quarterly
in lieu of monthly if their monthly remittance would be $100.00 or less.
23-69   Suspension Or Revocation Of Other Licenses
   A.   No delinquency in payment of the tax herein provided for by this
article and no revocation or conviction for violation of this article shall be
grounds for the suspension or revocation of any other license issued to any
person engaged in business within the City by the Finance Director or any other
official of the City under any licensing provisions of this Code or other
ordinances, nor shall the same be grounds for the suspension or revocation of
any other license issued by any licensing authority pursuant to the statutes
enacted by the State of Nebraska.
23-70   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By Finance Director
   A.   If any person neglects or refuses to make a return or payment of the
taxes as required by this article, the Finance Director shall make an estimate,
based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the amount of
taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and
upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto
a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof, together with interest on such
delinquent taxes, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction
thereof from the date when due.
   B.   The Finance Director shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice
of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be served
personally or by certified mail.
   C.   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment
shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director
ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by
certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the delinquent
taxpayer may petition the Finance Director for a revision or modification of
such assessment and shall, within such ten (10) day period, furnish the Finance
Director the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such
taxes.
   D.   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.
   E.   Thereupon, the Finance Director shall modify such assessment in
accordance with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted
assessment shall be made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the
taxpayer within ten (10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon
the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings
are commenced within that time for appeal in the District Court of Hall County,
Nebraska by the filing of a petition with the Clerk of the Court. This appeal
shall be conducted in conformance with the Nebraska Rules of Civil Procedure
and Rules of the Court as may be adopted by the Court or enacted by the
Legislature.
23-71   Jeopardy Assessment
   A.   If the Finance Director finds that the collection of the tax will be
jeopardized by delay, in his or her discretion, he or she may declare the
taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue notice and
demand for payment thereof, and, having done so, the tax shall be due and
payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed to collect such tax as
hereinafter provided.
   B.   Collection may be stayed if the taxpayer gives such security for
payment as shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Finance Director.
23-72   Administration Of Article; Miscellaneous Provisions
   A.   Administration by Finance Director. The administration of the
provisions of this article are hereby vested in the Finance Director, who shall
prescribe forms in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for
the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and
for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. The Finance Director
shall adopt such rules and regulation as may be necessary or desirable for the
administration and enforcement of this Article.
   B.   Duties Performed by Others. Duties of the Finance Director herein
provided may be performed by any qualified person designated by the Finance
Director.
   C.   Notices to be Sent by Registered or Certified Mail. All notices
required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions of this article shall
be in writing, and if mailed postpaid by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to him or her at his or her last known address shall be
sufficient for the purposes of this article.
   D.   Duty to Keep Books and Records. It shall be the duty of every taxpayer
to keep and preserve suitable records and other books or accounts as may be
necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder.
      1.   Records of the gross revenue by which this tax is measured shall be
kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to
facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection
of this tax.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for
a period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which
shall be open for examination at any time by the Finance Director or his or her
duly designated persons. If such person keeps or maintains his books, invoices,
accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of
the Finance Director he/she shall make the same available at a suitable place
within the City, to be designated by the Finance Director, for examination,
inspection and audit by the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized
persons.
      3.   The Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may make, permit or
cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices,
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have
entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs
and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or
audit made in such place.
   E.   Investigation of Taxpayer’s Books. For the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax
due from any person, the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized
persons, may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by
this article; and may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda
of any such person; and may require the attendance of such person, or any
officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge thereof;
and may take testimony and require proof of his or her information. The Finance
Director and his or her duly authorized persons shall have power to administer
oath to such persons.
   F.   Sale of Business. Whenever any taxpayer sells his/her food services,
drinking places business, or restaurant or quits engaging in such business, any
tax payable under this article shall become immediately due and payable and
such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due.
   G.   Status of Unpaid Tax and Bankruptcy and Receivership. Whenever the
business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article shall be placed in
receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized
under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties, and interest imposed
by this article and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under the terms
of this article shall be a prior and preferred lien against the property of the
taxpayer, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee,
pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior
to the filing of the notice as hereinafter provided on the property of the
taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such
taxpayer; and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other official shall sell the
property of any person subject to this article under process or order of any
court without first ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any
taxes due and payable under this article; and if there be any such taxes due,
owing and unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount
of such taxes out of the receipts of such sale before making payment of any
monies to any judgment creditor or other claimants of whatsoever kind or
nature, except the cost of the proceedings and other pre-existing claims or
liens as above provided.
   H.   Release of Liens. The tax imposed by this article, together with the
interest and penalties herein provided and the cost of collection which may be
incurred, shall be and, until paid, remain a first and prior lien, except as
otherwise provided by the constitution or statute, superior to all other liens,
on all the merchandise, furniture and fixtures, tools and equipment of the
taxpayer within the City, and may be foreclosed by seizing under distraint and
sale of so much of said merchandise, furniture and fixtures, tools and
equipment, as may be necessary to discharge the lien. The lien created by this
article shall apply only to tax obligations hereafter incurred. Any lien for
taxes as shown on the records of the county clerks and recorders as herein
provided shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered
thereby, be released by the Finance Director in the same manner as mortgages or
judgments are released.
   I.   Statute of Limitations. No suit for collection of any taxes imposed by
this article for any interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto may be
instituted, or any other action to collect the same shall be commenced, nor
shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant be issued, more than
four (4) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable. In case of a
false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with
interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the
collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of
such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in
writing to an extension thereof; and the period so agreed on may be extended by
subsequent agreement in writing.
23-73   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
   A.   The Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.
   B.   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
penalty or interest thereon when due, the Finance Director may recover at law
the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County,
Nebraska or of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal
place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.
   C.   The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Finance
Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.
   D.   Such actions may be actions and attachments, and writs of attachment
may be issued to the constable or sheriff, as the case may be; and in any such
proceeding no bond shall be required of the Finance Director except as may be
required by statute, nor shall any constable or sheriff require of the Finance
Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of
execution upon any judgment entered in such proceeding; and, in accordance with
the procedure established by statute, if any, the Finance Director may
prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of
providing bond therefor;
   E.   The city attorney, when requested by the Finance Director may commence
an action for the recovery of taxes due under this article; and this remedy
shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in
this article.
23-74   City A Party To Title Actions For Determination Of Lien
In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to
possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant for the
purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon the property
involved therein.
23-75   Authority Of Finance Director To Waive Penalty
The Finance Director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any
penalty assessed as in this article provided; and any interest imposed in
excess of six percent (6%) per annum shall be deemed a penalty.
23-76   Penalty
   A.   Penalties for Deficiencies Caused by Disregard of Rules. If any part of
the deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized
rules and regulations with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud,
there shall be added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency;
and in such case interest shall be collected at the rate of one percent (1%)
per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the deficiency from the time
the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest
in addition shall become due and payable within ten (10) days after written
notice and demand by the Finance Director.
   B.   Penalties for Deficiencies Caused by Fraud. If any part of the
deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall
be added fifty percent (50%) of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such
case the whole amount of the tax that is unpaid, including the additions, shall
become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the
Finance Director, and an additional one percent (1%) per month, or fraction
thereof, on said amounts shall be added from the date the return was due until
paid.
23-77   Severability
If any provisions, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
23-78   (Reserved)
23-79   Tax Oversight Committee
The Tax Oversight Committee established in Title 2 of the Grand Island City
Code will provide oversight of the city's occupation tax imposed under this
Article 23-VII.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9224, effective 07-15-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9588, effective 07-01-2016) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9994, effective 10-08-
2024)
Article 23-VIII
Repealed
23-80   Reserved
23-81   Reserved
23-82   Reserved
23-83   Reserved
23-84   Reserved
23-85   Reserved
23-86   Reserved
23-80   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-81   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-82   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-83   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-84   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-85   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
23-86   Reserved
(Added by Ordinance No. 9582, effective 05/03/2016)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
Article 23-IX
Rental Car Occupation Tax
23-87   Purpose
23-88   Definitions
23-89   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
23-90   Return
23-91   Tax Cumulative
23-92   Use Of Revenue
23-93   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By City Finance
Director
23-94   Administration Of Chapter; Miscellaneous Provisions
23-95   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
23-87   Purpose
Pursuant to the authority of Nebraska Revised Statute R.R.S. 1943, Section 15-
203, the City Council finds, determines and declares that it is appropriate
that a tax be imposed on all car rental businesses as herein defined for the
purpose of raising revenues. The foregoing determination is made with due
consideration of business in the City and the relation of business to the
municipal welfare, together with relation thereof, to expenditures required by
the City, and with consideration of just, proper and equitable distribution of
the tax burdens within the City and other properly associated matters.
23-88   Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   A.   Car rental business shall mean the business of renting cars,
automobiles, vans, or trucks with three-fourths (3/4) ton or less
manufacturer’s rated capacity without a driver, operator or chauffeur. The tax
will still apply to any business even if the above items are not their primary
business.
   B.   Person shall mean any natural person, individual, partnership,
association, organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in
the car rental business.
   C.   Rent shall mean to hire out vehicles at stipulated rates per mile, per
hour, per day, per week, or per month; provided, however, that such term shall
not include the act of hiring out vehicles for a period exceeding thirty (30)
consecutive days, and no tax shall be collected pursuant to this section for
any vehicle rental contract to the same renter for a period exceeding thirty
(30) consecutive days.
   D.   Taxpayer shall mean any person engaged in a car rental business herein
defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed.
   E.   Vehicle rental contract shall mean each agreement with a car rental
business to rent a vehicle for thirty (30) or fewer consecutive days and each
vehicle rented under a single document shall be considered a separate vehicle
rental contract. A vehicle rental contract shall be considered to be made
within the city if the rental contract is executed by the renter within the
city or the renter takes possession of the vehicle within the city.
EXCEPTIONS: The tax imposed by this section shall not be measured by, and no
tax shall be collected for:
      1.   Any vehicle rental contract in which the vehicle is provided on a
complimentary basis or for which no consideration is charged; and
      2.   Any vehicle rental contract for which the consideration is paid by a
person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act
of 1967, as it is amended from time to time.
   F.   City Finance Director shall mean the person appointed by the Mayor to
that position or the individual designated by the City Finance Director to
perform these duties for him or her.
23-89   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
Beginning October 1, 2017, each person engaged in a car rental business shall
pay an occupation tax in the amount of six percent (6%) of the actual rental
rates charged for each vehicle rental contract made by that person within the
city.
The tax imposed by this chapter may be shown as an add-on to the charge for
renting a vehicle and shall be collectible at the time the vehicle is
furnished, regardless of when the charge for the vehicle is paid. The car
rental business operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes
imposed, whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the customers.
23-90   Return
Each and every person engaged in a car rental business within the City for the
calendar month beginning October 2017, and for each and every calendar month
thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the 25th of the month
following on a form prescribed and furnished by the City Finance Director, a
return for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the City the
tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified and sworn to by the officer in
charge of the business. The return shall be considered filed on time if mailed
in an envelope properly addressed to the City Finance Department, postage
prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the 25th of the appropriate month.
23-91   Tax Cumulative
   A.   The levy of the tax under this chapter is in addition to all other
fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any
other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the City, in addition to any
fee, tax, excise or license imposed by the state.
   B.   Payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall not relieve the person
paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed by
contract or ordinance or by this Code, including those imposed for any business
or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The
occupational taxes imposed by this chapter shall be cumulative except where
otherwise specifically provided.
23-92   Use Of Revenue
The six percent (6%) occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall be used for
the purpose of leasing or purchasing equipment for the Public Works Streets
Division.
23-93   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By City Finance
Director
   A.   If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of
the taxes as required by this chapter, the City Finance Director shall make an
estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the
amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is
delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in
addition thereto (1) interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of one
percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof from the date when due and, (2) a
late fee equal to ten percent (10%) thereof. Any such interest due may be
compounded quarterly.
   B.   The City Finance Director shall give the delinquent taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, late fees, and interest, which notice must be
served personally or by certified mail.
   C.   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment
shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the City Finance
Director ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of
mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the
delinquent taxpayer may petition the City Finance Director for a revision or
modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish
the City Finance Director the facts and correct figures showing the correct
amount of such taxes.
   D.   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.
   E.   The City Finance Director may then modify such assessment in accordance
with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be
made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within ten
(10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of
thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced
within that time for appeal in the District Court.
23-94   Administration Of Chapter; Miscellaneous Provisions
   A.   The administration of the provisions of this chapter are hereby vested
in the City Finance Director who shall prescribe forms in conformity with this
chapter for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and
collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and
enforcement hereof.
   B.   All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions
of this chapter shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by first class or
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer at
his or her last known address.
   C.   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder.
      1.   Records of the gross revenue by which this tax is measured shall be
kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to
facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection
of this tax.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for
a period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which
shall be open for examination at any time by the City Finance Director. If such
person keeps or maintains their books, invoices, accounts or other records, or
any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of the City Finance Director he/
she shall make the same available at a suitable place within the City, to be
designated by the City Finance Director, for examination, inspection and audit
by the City Finance Director. The taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the
reasonable costs of the examination, inspection and audit if the City Finance
Director determines that the taxpayer paid ninety percent or less of the tax
owing for the period of the examination.
      3.   The City Finance Director in his or her discretion, may make, permit
or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices,
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have
entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs
and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or
audit made in such place.
   D.   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the
purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the City Finance
Director, or his/her duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations
concerning any matters covered by this chapter; and may examine any relevant
books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person.
23-95   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
   A.   The City Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.
   B.   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
late fee or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount
of such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County, Nebraska or
of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of
business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.
   C.   The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City Finance
Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.
   D.   The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due
under this chapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing
remedies, or remedies provided in this chapter.
   E.   The City Finance Director may turn over any unpaid amount due to the
City to a 3rd party collections agency, following any notice required by State
law.
Article 23-X
Enhanced Employment Act Area Tax
23-98   Findings And Determinations
23-99   Definitions
23-100   Agreement To Impose Tax
23-101   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
23-102   Business Classifications
23-103   Return
23-104   Tax Cumulative
23-105   Use Of Revenue
23-106   Failure To File Return; Assessment By The City Administrator
23-107   Administration; Miscellaneous Provision
23-108   Recover Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
23-109   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses For Failure To Pay Tax; Hearing
23-110   Sunset Provision
23-98   Findings And Determinations
The Mayor and Council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska (the “City”) hereby
find and determine as follows:
   A.   Pursuant to Chapter 18, Article 21, Reissue Revised Statutes of
Nebraska, as amended (the “Act”), the Community Redevelopment Authority of the
City of Grand Island (the “CRA”) has prepared and adopted the Amended and
Restated Site Specific Redevelopment Plan, Grand Island CRA Area 9, which, in
part, (1) provides for the development of a commercial shopping center (the
“Redevelopment Project”) between State Street and Capital Avenue and between
U.S. Highway 281 and Webb Road in the Redevelopment Project Area as shown on
Exhibit “A” (attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference) and (2)
designates the area shown in Exhibit “B” (attached hereto and incorporated
herein by reference) as an “enhanced employment area” as defined in Section 18-
2103(22) of the Act (the “Enhanced Employment Act Area”).
   B.   Pursuant to Section 18-2142.02 of the Act, the City is authorize to
agree to and to levy and collect a general business occupation tax upon the
businesses and users of space within the Enhanced Employment Act Area for the
purpose of paying all or any part of the costs and expenses of the Enhanced
Employment Act Project within the Enhanced Employment Act Area.
   C.   It is necessary, desirable, advisable and in the best interests of the
City that a general business occupation tax be imposed within the Enhanced
Employment Act Area as provided by the Act for the purpose set forth in
subsection B.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-99   Definitions
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
General Retail Business means any activity engaged in by any Person or caused
to be engaged in by such Person in which products or services are sold, leased
or rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or subrent, except
that “General Retail Business” shall not mean any transaction which is subject
to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-4,146,
77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or which is exempt from tax
under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes.
Person means any natural person, individual, partnership, association,
organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the business
of operating a General Retail Business.
Taxpayer shall mean any Person engaged in the business of operating a General
Retail Business as herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein
imposed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-100   Agreement To Impose Tax
The City hereby agrees to impose an occupation tax upon every Person operating
a General Retail Business within the Enhanced Employment Act Area, and the
Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute such
documents and take such actions as are necessary to carry out this Ordinance,
including, but not limited to, entering into a Redevelopment Contract with the
CRA and a redeveloper in substantially the form as set forth in Exhibit “C.”
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-101   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
   A.   On or after October 1, 2015 and in each calendar month thereafter there
is hereby imposed a retail business occupational tax upon each and every Person
operating a General Retail Business within the Enhanced Employment Act Area for
any period of time during a calendar month. The amount of such tax shall be one
percent (1.00%) of all General Retail Business transactions which the State of
Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as allowed by the Nebraska Local Option
Revenue Act for each calendar month derived from the General Retail Business
subject to this tax. Such tax shall be imposed on transactions which the State
of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as allowed by the Nebraska Local
Option Revenue Act resulting from the sales of products or services within the
limits of the Enhanced Employment Act Area which are subject to the sales and
use tax imposed by the State of Nebraska, except that no occupation tax shall
be imposed on any transaction which is subject to tax under Sections 53-160,
66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 of the
Nebraska Revised Statutes or which is exempt from tax under Section 77-2704.24
of the Nebraska Revised Statutes.
   B.   The Person engaged in operating a General Retail Business may itemize
the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each
Person engaged in such business shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this
Ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-102   Business Classifications
Pursuant to Section 18-2142.02 of the Act, the City hereby makes the following
classifications of businesses, users of space, or kinds of transactions for
purposes of imposing the occupation tax:
   A.   General Retail Business. Any activity engaged in by an Person or caused
to be engaged in by such Person in which products or services are sold, leased
or rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or subrent, except
that “General Retail Business” shall not mean any transaction which is subject
to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-146,
77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, or which is
exempt from tax under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as
amended.
   B.   Non-Occupation Tax Retail. Users of space, or kinds of transactions
where an occupations tax cannot be imposed pursuant to Section 18-2142.02 of
the Act, which includes, but is not limited to 1) manufacturers or wholesalers
of alcoholic liquor; 2) producers, suppliers, distributors, wholesalers, or
importers of motor fuel and/or gasoline; 3) stamping agents engaged in
distributing or selling cigarettes at wholesale; 4) the first owner of tobacco
products in the state of Nebraska; and 5) the gross receipts from the sale,
lease, or rental of and the storage use, or other consumption of food or food
ingredients except for prepared food and food sold through vending machines.
   C.   Other. Businesses that are not either General Retail or Non-Occupation
Tax Retail.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-103   Return
Each and every Person engaged in the operation of a General Retail Business
within the Enhanced Employment Act Area for the calendar month beginning
October 1, 2015, and for each and every month thereafter, shall prepare and
file, on or before the 25th day of the following month thereafter on a form
prescribed and furnished by the City Administrator, a return for such month,
and at the same time pay to the City the tax herein imposed. The return shall
be verified and sworn to by the officer in charge of the business. The return
shall be considered filed on time if mailed in an envelope properly addressed
to the City Administrator, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of
the 25th day of the appropriate month.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-104   Tax Cumulative
   A.   The levy of the tax under this Ordinance is in addition to all other
fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any
other ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license
imposed by the State of Nebraska.
   B.   Payment of the tax imposed by this Ordinance shall not relieve the
Person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed
by contract or ordinance or by this Ordinance, including those imposed for any
business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The
occupational tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be cumulative except where
otherwise specifically provided.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-105   Use Of Revenue
The one percent (1.00%) occupation tax imposed by this Ordinance, less any
administrative expenses, shall be used to fund any expenditures that the City
is lawfully authorized to make in connection with the Enhanced Employment Act
Project as permitted by the Act.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-106   Failure To File Return; Assessment By The City Administrator
   A.   If any Person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of
the taxes as required by this Ordinance, the City Administrator shall make an
estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the
amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the Taxpayer is
delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in
addition thereto a penalty equal to one percent (1.00%) thereof, together with
interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of ten percent (10.00%), per
month, or fraction thereof from the date when due. Any such interest due may be
compounded quarterly.
   B.   The City Administrator shall give the delinquent Taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be
served personally or by certified mail.
   C.   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment and such assessment
shall be final and due and payable from the Taxpayer to the City Administrator
ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by
certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the delinquent
Taxpayer may petition the City Administrator for a revision or modification of
such assessment and shall, within such ten-day (10) period, furnish the City
Administrator the facts and correct figures showing the correct amounts of such
taxes.
   D.   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the Taxpayer.
   E.   The City Administrator may then modify such assessment in accordance
with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be
made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the Taxpayer within ten
(10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of
thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced
within that time for appeal in the District Court.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-107   Administration; Miscellaneous Provision
   A.   The administration of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
vested in the City Administrator, or his designee, who shall prescribe forms in
conformity with this Ordinance for the making of returns, for the
ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for
the proper administration and enforcement hereof.
   B.   All notices required to be given to the Taxpayer under the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the Taxpayer at
his or her last known address.
   C.   It shall be the duty of every Taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder.
      1.   Records of the transactions which the State of Nebraska is
authorized to impose a tax allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act by
which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of
other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and
records as necessary for the collection of this tax.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every Taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which
shall be open for examination at any time by the City Administrator or his or
her duly designated persons. If such Person keeps or maintains his books,
invoices, accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon
demand of the City Administrator he/she shall make the same available at a
suitable place within the City, to be designated by the City Administrator, for
examination, inspection and audit by the City Administrator or his or her duly
authorized persons. The Taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the reasonable
costs of examination, inspection and audit if the City Administrator determines
that the Taxpayer paid ninety percent or less of the tax owing for the period
of the examination.
      3.   The City Administrator, in his or her discretion, may make, permit
or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books invoices
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such Person outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such Person shall have
entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs
and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or
audit made in such place.
   D.   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the
purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any Person, the City
Administrator or his or her duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations
concerning any matters covered by this Ordinance; and may examine any relevant
books, papers, records or memoranda of any such Person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-108   Recover Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
   A.   The City Administrator may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.
   B.   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
penalty or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of
such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County, Nebraska or of
the county wherein the Taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business
having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.
   C.   The return of the Taxpayer or the assessment made by the City
Administrator, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount
due.
   D.   The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due
under this Ordinance and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing
remedies, or remedies provided in this Ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-109   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses For Failure To Pay Tax; Hearing
If the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, after holding a hearing, shall find that
any Person has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax
imposed by this Ordinance, such official may suspend or revoke any City
license, permit or other approval held by such tax evader. Such Person shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven
(7) days after notice is given of the time and place of the hearing to be held,
addressed to the last known place of business of such Person. Pending the
notice, hearing and finding, any licensee, permit or other approval issued by
the City to the Person may be temporarily suspended. No suspension or
revocation hereunder shall release or discharge the Person from civil liability
for the payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution
for such offense.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
23-110   Sunset Provision
The occupation tax imposed by this Ordinance shall terminate and collection of
the tax shall cease upon the earlier of 1) payment in full of all indebtedness
issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of Section 18-2124 of the Act,
for which such occupation tax receipts have been pledged; or, 2) twenty (20)
years after the effective date of the Ad Valorem Tax Provision, as provided for
in the Redevelopment Contract.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9509 on 10/28/2014
Article 23-XI
Enhanced Employment Act Area Tax CRA 28
23-115   Definitions
23-116   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
23-117   Business Classifications
23-118   Return
23-119   Tax Cumulative
23-120   Use Of Revenue
23-121   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By The City Finance
Director
23-122   Administration; Miscellaneous Provision
23-123   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
23-124   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses For Failure To Pay Tax; Hearing
23-125   Sunset Provision
23-126   Tax Imposed on Enlarged Area of CRA 28; Collection of Tax
23-127   Sunset Provision on Enlarged Area of CRA 28
23-115   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Article, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   A.   Person means any natural person, individual, partnership, association,
organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the business
of operating a General Retail Business.
   B.   General Retail Business means any activity engaged in by any Person or
caused to be engaged in by such Person in which products or services are sold,
leased or rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or subrent,
except that “General Retail Business” shall not mean any transaction which is
subject to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145,
66-4,146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or which is
exempt from tax under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes.
   C.   Taxpayer shall mean any Person engaged in the business of operating a
General Retail Business as herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein
imposed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-116   Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
   A.   On or after the effective date of this tax and in each calendar month
thereafter there is hereby imposed a retail business occupational tax upon each
and every Person operating a General Retail Business within the Enhanced
Employment Act Area for any period of time during a calendar month. The amount
of such tax shall be one and one-half percent (1.50%) of all General Retail
Business transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax
as allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act for each calendar month
derived from the General Retail Business subject to this tax. Such tax shall be
imposed on transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a
tax as allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act resulting from the
sales of products or services within the limits of the Enhanced Employment Act
Area which are subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the State of
Nebraska, except that no occupation tax shall be imposed on any transaction
which is subject to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-
4,145, 66-146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or which is
exempt from tax under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes.
   B.   The Person engaged in operating a General Retail Business may itemize
the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each
Person engaged in such business shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this
Article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-117   Business Classifications
Pursuant to Section 18-2142.02 of the Act, the City hereby makes the following
classifications of businesses, users of space, or kinds of transactions for
purposes of imposing the occupation tax:
   A.   General Retail Business: means any activity engaged in by an Person or
caused to be engaged in by such Person in which products or services are sold,
leased or rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or subrent,
except that “General Retail Business” shall not mean any transaction which is
subject to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145,
66-146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, or
which is exempt from tax under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised
Statutes, as amended.
   B.   Non-Occupation Tax Retail: means users of space, or kinds of
transactions where an occupations tax cannot be imposed pursuant to Section 18-
2142.02 of the Act, which includes, but is not limited to 1) manufacturers or
wholesalers of alcoholic liquor; 2) producers, suppliers, distributors,
wholesalers, or importers of motor fuel and/or gasoline; 3) stamping agents
engaged in distributing or selling cigarettes at wholesale; 4) the first owner
of tobacco products in the state of Nebraska; and 5) the gross receipts from
the sale, lease, or rental of and the storage use, or other consumption of food
or food ingredients except for prepared food and food sold through vending
machines.
   C.   Other: businesses that are not either General Retail or Non-Occupation
Tax Retail.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-118   Return
Each and every Person engaged in the operation of a General Retail Business
within the Enhanced Employment Act Area upon the effective date of this tax as
stated in the ordinance and Redevelopment Contract for the Enhanced Employment
Act Area, and for each and every month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on
or before the 25th day of the following month thereafter on a form prescribed
and furnished by the City Finance Director, a return for such month, and at the
same time pay to the City the tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified
and sworn to by the officer in charge of the business. The return shall be
considered filed on time if mailed in an envelope properly addressed to the
City Finance Director, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the
25th day of the appropriate month.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-119   Tax Cumulative
   A.   The levy of the tax under this Article is in addition to all other
fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any
other ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license
imposed by the State of Nebraska.
   B.   Payment of the tax imposed by this Ordinance shall not relieve the
Person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed
by contract or ordinance or by this Ordinance, including those imposed for any
business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The
occupational tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be cumulative except where
otherwise specifically provided.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-120   Use Of Revenue
The one and one-half percent (1.50%) occupation tax imposed by this Ordinance,
less an administrative fee of 0.50% retained by the City, shall be used only to
fund the indebtedness issued by the CRA pursuant to the provisions of Section
18-2124 of the Act, for which such occupation tax receipts have been pledged
for the benefit of the Enhanced Employment Act Project and pursuant to the
City’s lawful authority under the Act.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-121   Failure To File Return; Delinquency; Assessment By The City Finance
Director
   A.   If any person neglects or refuses to make a return or payment of the
taxes as required by this article, the Finance Director shall make an estimate,
based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the amount of
taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and
upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto
a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof, together with interest on such
delinquent taxes, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction
thereof from the date when due.
   B.   The City Finance Director shall give the delinquent Taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be
served personally or by certified mail.
   C.   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment and such assessment
shall be final and due and payable from the Taxpayer to the City Finance
Director ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of
mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the
delinquent Taxpayer may petition the City Finance Director for a revision or
modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day (10) period,
furnish the City Finance Director the facts and correct figures showing the
correct amounts of such taxes.
   D.   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the Taxpayer.
   E.   The City Finance Director may then modify such assessment in accordance
with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be
made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the Taxpayer within ten
(10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of
thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced
within that time for appeal in the District Court.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-122   Administration; Miscellaneous Provision
   A.   The administration of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
vested in the City Finance Director, or designee, who shall prescribe forms in
conformity with this Ordinance for the making of returns, for the
ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for
the proper administration and enforcement hereof.
   B.   All notices required to be given to the Taxpayer under the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the Taxpayer at
their last known address.
   C.   It shall be the duty of every Taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which they are liable hereunder.
      1.   Records of the transactions which the State of Nebraska is
authorized to impose a tax allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act by
which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of
other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and
records as necessary for the collection of this tax.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every Taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which
shall be open for examination at any time by the City Finance Director or duly
designated persons. If such Person keeps or maintains his books, invoices,
accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of
the City Finance Director they shall make the same available at a suitable
place within the City, to be designated by the City Finance Director, for
examination, inspection and audit by the City Finance Director or duly
authorized persons. The Taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the reasonable
costs of examination, inspection and audit if the City Finance Director
determines that the Taxpayer paid ninety percent or less of the tax owing for
the period of the examination.
      3.   The City Finance Director, in their discretion, may make, permit or
cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books invoices
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such Person outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such Person shall have
entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs
and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or
audit made in such place.
   D.   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the
purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any Person, the City Finance
Director or their duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations
concerning any matters covered by this Ordinance; and may examine any relevant
books, papers, records or memoranda of any such Person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-123   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law
   A.   The City Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.
   B.   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
penalty or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of
such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County, Nebraska or of
the county wherein the Taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business
having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.
   C.   The return of the Taxpayer or the assessment made by the City Finance
Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.
   D.   The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due
under this Ordinance and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing
remedies, or remedies provided in this Ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-124   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses For Failure To Pay Tax; Hearing
If the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, after holding a hearing, shall find that
any Person has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax
imposed by this Ordinance, such official may suspend or revoke any City
license, permit or other approval held by such tax evader. Such Person shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven
(7) days after notice is given of the time and place of the hearing to be held,
addressed to the last known place of business of such Person. Pending the
notice, hearing and finding, any licensee, permit or other approval issued by
the City to the Person may be temporarily suspended. No suspension or
revocation hereunder shall release or discharge the Person from civil liability
for the payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution
for such offense.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-125   Sunset Provision
The occupation tax imposed by this Ordinance shall terminate and collection of
the tax shall cease upon the earlier of 1) payment in full of all indebtedness
issued by the CRA pursuant to the provisions of Section 18-2124 of the Act, for
which such occupation tax receipts have been pledged; or, 2) thirty (30) years
after the effective date of the occupation tax in the Enhanced Employment Area,
as provided for in the Redevelopment Contract between City and Developer.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9909 on 1/4/2023
23-126   Tax Imposed on Enlarged Area of CRA 28; Collection of Tax
   A.   On or after the effective date of this tax and in each calendar month
thereafter there is hereby imposed a retail business occupational tax upon each
and every Person operating a General Retail Business within the Enlarged Area
for any period of time during a calendar month. The amount of such tax shall be
one and one-half percent (1.50%) of all General Retail Business transactions
which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as allowed by the
Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act for each calendar month derived from the
General Retail Business subject to this tax. Such tax shall be imposed on
transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as
allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act resulting from the sales of
products or services within the limits of the Enhanced Employment Act Area
which are subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the State of Nebraska,
except that no occupation tax shall be imposed on any transaction which is
subject to tax under Sections 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145,
66-146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or which is exempt
from tax under Section 77-2704.24 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes.
   B.   The definitions and procedures contained in
23-115 through
23-124 shall be applicable to the Enlarged Area and shall be effective on the
date stated in the ordinance and Amended Redevelopment Contract for the
enlarged area, and continuing each and every month thereafter.
History
Adopted by Ord. 9967 on 3/12/2024
23-127   Sunset Provision on Enlarged Area of CRA 28
   The occupation tax imposed by this section shall terminate and collection of
the tax shall cease upon the earlier of 1) payment in full of all indebtedness
issued by the CRA pursuant to the provisions of Section 18-2124 of the Act, for
which such occupation tax receipts have been pledged; or, 2) thirty (30) years
after the effective date of the occupation tax established by Ordinance 9909 of
the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
History
Adopted by Ord. 9967 on 3/12/2024
CHAPTER 24
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND LAKES
Article 24-I   Parks And Recreational Facilities
Article 24-II   Lakes
Article 24-III   Miscellaneous
Article 24-IV   Trees In Public Right-Of-Way 
Article 24-V   Tree Board
Article 24-I
Parks And Recreational Facilities
24-1   Rules And Regulations
24-2   (Reserved)
24-3   Vehicles In Parks, Hike/Bike Trails, And Detention Cells
24-4   Horses In Parks And Detention Cells
24-5   Curfews In City Parks
24-1   Rules And Regulations
   A.   The person or persons placed in charge of the various City parks and
recreational facilities by the mayor may establish rules and regulations for
the use of said parks and facilities by the general public, subject to approval
by the mayor.
   B.   The mayor may submit any or all such approved rules and regulations to
the city council for adoption under this section.
   C.   The violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the city council
pursuant to this section shall be punished as a violation of the City Code.
   D.   Copies of the rules and regulations adopted by the city council under
this section shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office, the Parks and
Recreation Department office, and, where appropriate, shall be posted at the
facility or facilities regulated thereby.
24-2   (Reserved)
24-3   Vehicles In Parks, Hike/Bike Trails, And Detention Cells
   A.   With the exception of Class 1 Electric Bicycles, Motorized Wheel
Chairs, and Other Power Driven Mobility Devices, it is unlawful for any person
to operate or park any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, minibikes, and
snowmobiles, in any city park, hike/bike trail, or any portion thereof, except
on the roads, paths, or areas established therein for such operation or
parking.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
      1.   Class 1 electric bicycle means an electric bicycle that is equipped
with an electric motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that stops providing assistance when the electric bicycle reaches a speed
of 20 miles per hour.
      2.   Motorized wheelchair means any self-propelled vehicle designed for
and used by a handicap person.
      3.   Other Power Driven Mobility Devices (OPDMD) means any mobility
device that is used by individuals with mobility disabilities for the purpose
of locomotion but is not a wheelchair. OPDMD’s shall not be capable of speeds
over 20 miles per hour.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle,
including motorcycles, minibikes, and snowmobiles, in any storm detention cell
or any portion thereof, except on the roads, paths, or areas established
therein for such operation or parking.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9819, effective May 12, 2021)
24-4   Horses In Parks And Detention Cells
24-4.1   Dogs On Leash
It is unlawful for any person to tether, ride, walk, or otherwise permit, a
horse or horses, in any city park, storm detention cell, or in any portion
thereof, including the roads, streets, or paths therein, except upon the paths
posted as bridle paths or trails.
24-4.1   Dogs On Leash
No person owning or possessing a dog shall permit such dog on or along the
hike/bike trails unless such dog is securely fastened on a leash, cord or
chain.
24-5   Curfews In City Parks
   A.   The city council may, by resolution, establish, or alter, a curfew in
any city park or playground, and prohibit access to, and the use of, such park
or playground during the hours of the curfew so established.
   B.   Signs shall be posted in any park or playground for which a curfew has
been established, indicating the hours of such curfew.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a park or playground
during the curfew hours posted for such park or playground.
Article 24-II
Lakes
24-6   Stocking Fish In City Lakes
24-7   Fishing In City Lakes
24-8   Swimming In City Lakes
24-6   Stocking Fish In City Lakes
   A.   For the purpose of providing fishing for citizens, Pier Park Lake,
Eagle Scout Park Lake, and other bodies of water capable of maintaining fish
life may be stocked with fish.
   B.   The Parks and Recreation Director is authorized and directed to make
application to the Nebraska Games and Parks Commission to obtain such fish.
24-7   Fishing In City Lakes
   A.   The public shall be permitted to fish in Pier Park Lake, L.E. Ray Lake,
Eagle Scout Park Lake, and such other bodies of water that have been stocked
with fish, subject to the limitations set forth in this Code section.
   B.   Fishing in Pier Lake will be limited to persons under sixteen years of
age and persons over 65 years of age; or persons (2 maximum) between the ages
of 16 and 62 when accompanying an actively fishing child. All other stocked
lakes shall be open to fishing by persons of all ages.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the above
provisions or any state statute or regulation pertaining to fishing.
24-8   Swimming In City Lakes
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim at any hour in Pier Park
Lake, L.E. Ray Lake, Eagle Scout Park Lake, or any other body of water owned
and maintained by the City, except that swimming shall be allowed in the
municipal pools.
   B.   Scuba diving shall be allowed at L.E. Ray Lake in accordance with
Nebraska Game and Parks Commission regulations.
   C.   The Parks and Recreation Director shall cause all lakes and bodies of
water wherein swimming is prohibited to be posted. Such posting shall not be
mandatory for enforcement of this section if such person has actual or
constructive notice of this prohibition.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
24-8(A) through (C), swimming at City lakes may be permitted for special events
when approved by the Mayor and Parks Director under conditions and limitations
as they may require.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8971, effective April 27, 2005) (Amended by Ordinance
No. 9675, effective March 6, 2018)
Article 24-III
Miscellaneous
24-9   Destruction Or Removal Of Park Signs
24-10   Fees
24-9   Destruction Or Removal Of Park Signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, vandalize, or otherwise
interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this chapter.
24-10   Fees
The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed any
person or group for the reservation of any park area or recreational facility,
and for the use of the various city recreational facilities regulated hereby.
Article 24-IV
Trees In Public Right-Of-Way
24-11   Trees As A Community Concern
24-12   Property Owners Have Primary Responsibility
24-13   Recommended Trees
24-14   Minimum Placement
24-15   Unlawful To Top
24-16   Violation Of Selected Trees
24-17   Penalty
24-11   Trees As A Community Concern
The Mayor and Council, or their designated representative, hereby determine
that the selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees within the
public right-of-ways in the City of Grand Island substantially affects the
degree of pedestrian and vehicular safety, the location and maintenance of
utility services, tree maintenance costs, the incidence of tree diseases, and
the general appearance and beautification of the City; that removal of trees
due to disease, private development, or public works improvements has resulted
in a loss of their important contribution to people and environment, and
therefore it is determined that such selection, planting, maintenance and
removal of trees in public right of ways are a community concern over which the
City must exercise control.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-12   Property Owners Have Primary Responsibility
Abutting property owners have the primary responsibility of planting,
maintaining and removal of trees within that portion of the public right-of-way
known as the parking or terrace, but the City shall retain the right to
recommend the variety and location of trees that may be planted, may implement
a street tree planting program, and parks planting program, and control removal
of existing trees.
24-13   Recommended Trees
The City Tree Board is empowered to recommend trees to be placed in the public
right-of-way. The following trees are recommended by the City Tree Board for
planting within public right-of-way because of their superior resistance to
insects and disease, maximum ability to resist wind or storm breakage,
desirable life spans, and minimal maintenance requirements. The full spread as
indicated shall be used for spacing purposes:
   A.   In all zoning districts except in locations where overhead utility
lines are present.
Variety Spread
Variety                                Spread
Maple: sugar, black, red, Norway       40 feet
Hackberry                              40 feet
Honeylocust                            40 feet
Pear (Ornamental Pear Varieties)       25 feet
Oak: red, scarlet, English, bur, pin   40 feet
Linden: American, European, Littleleaf 40 feet
Linden: Redmond                        25 feet
Ginkgo: maidenhair (male variety)      40 feet
Black Walnut                           40 feet
Ohio Buckeye                           25 feet
Kentucky Coffee Tree                   30 feet
Catalpa                                30 feet
Japanese Pagoda Tree                   40 feet
 
   B.   In business and manufacturing zoning districts, and in other districts
in locations where overhead utility lines are present:
Variety Spread
Variety                               Spread
Maple: Trident, hedge, amur, tatarian 20 feet
East Redbud                           20 feet
Hawthorn: lavelle, Washington         20 feet
Crabapple: fruitless                  20 feet
Purpleleaf Plum                       20 feet
Flowering Cherry                      20 feet
Ash: European or mountain             20 feet
Saucer Magnolia                       20 feet
Japanese Tree Lilac                   20 feet
Amur Cork Tree                        20 feet
 
Trees not included on the above recommended lists are prohibited within public
right-of-way.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-14   Minimum Placement
The following standards for minimum spacing, location, area requirement and
minimum size of seedlings shall be utilized for the placement of trees within
the public right-of-way, greenways, and city parks:
   A.   Recommended trees shall not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet
measured from center to center of each tree.
   B.   Recommended trees shall not be placed closer than forty (40) feet from
the corner of a curb at intersections or closer than three (3) feet to the edge
of a driveway.
   C.   Recommended trees shall not be planted closer than the width of its
full spread to a standard or pole, measured from the center of the tree to the
center of the pole.
   D.   Recommended trees shall not be planted when at least six (6) feet of
space between curb and sidewalk or other obstruction is not available.
   E.   Recommended trees shall generally be planted equidistant between the
curb and street edge of a conventional sidewalk or equidistant between the
property line and edge of a curb-type sidewalk, unless specifically directed
differently on the required permit in order to avoid conflict with existing or
proposed utilities.
   F.   Recommended trees shall be planted in an area containing at least nine
square feet of ground for each tree and no impervious material shall be placed
nearer than thirty inches to the center of a tree.
   G.   No tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet from any fire plug.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-15   Unlawful To Top
It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person, firm, or municipal
department to top any tree within public right-of-way. Topping is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the
determination of the Parks & Recreation director or his/her appointed
representative. Topping of trees within the public right-of-way shall comply
with ANSI A300 pruning standards.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-16   Violation Of Selected Trees
It shall be a violation for any property owner to permit, allow, or maintain
any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets within the
corporate limits of the city, and said dead or diseased trees shall constitute
an nuisance. Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of the right
to a hearing shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and
to the occupant, if any, by personal, residential, publication, certified mail,
or first class mail. If notice is given by first-class mail, such mail shall be
conspicuously marked as to its importance. Within five days after receipt of
such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a
hearing with the city to appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by
filing a written appeal with the office of the city clerk. A hearing on the
appeal shall be held within fourteen days after the filing of the appeal and
shall be conducted by the City Parks and Recreation Director. The hearing
officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after
the conclusion of the hearing.
If the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and remove the
dead or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground
does not request a hearing with the city within five days after receipt of such
notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the
city may have such work done. The city may levy and assess all or any portion
of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so
benefited as a special assessment.
Diseased trees that are dead or dying shall be removed following disposal
methods recommended by the Nebraska Forestry Service.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-17   Penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly cut down,
destroy, by girdling or tapping, or otherwise injure any tree within the public
right-of-way unless authorized to do so by the owner of the abutting property
or by an authorized representative of the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
Article 24-V
Tree Board
24-18   Through 24-20 (Reserved)
24-21   Penalty
24-22   Tree Board Established Membership
24-23   Term Of Office Of Members Of Tree Board
24-24   Compensation Of Members Of Tree Board
24-25   Duties Of Tree Board
24-26   Organization And Meetings Of Tree Board
24-18   Through 24-20 (Reserved)
24-21   Penalty
Failure to comply with any section of this Article shall be unlawful, and shall
be punishable in accordance with §
1-7 of the Grand Island City Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-22   Tree Board Established Membership
There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the City, which shall
consist of seven (7) members, citizens and residents of the City, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The City Parks
and Recreation Director and Hall County Extension Officer shall be ex officio
members of the Tree Board.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9583 effective 05-18-16) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-23   Term Of Office Of Members Of Tree Board
The terms of the seven (7) persons appointed to the City’s Tree Board shall be
three (3) years, except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to
the first Board shall be for only one (1)year and the terms of two (2) members
of the first Board shall be for two (2) years. If a vacancy shall occur during
the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-24   Compensation Of Members Of Tree Board
Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-25   Duties Of Tree Board
The duties and responsibilities of the Tree Board shall be as follows:
   A.   To promote and encourage responsible planting, care, replacement, and
maintenance of trees in the City.
   B.   To conduct fund raising activities, the proceeds of which shall be
designated for the planting of trees, shrubs, and bushes.
   C.   To plan and sponsor activities in celebration of Arbor Day.
   D.   To provide educational materials and programs to the public concerning
the planting and care of trees.
   E.   To make recommendations to City Department Directors concerning
landscape plans for any new or existing public facilities constructed by the
City.
   F.   When requested by the City Council, to consider, investigate, make
finding, report, and recommend upon any special matter or question relating to
trees.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
24-26   Organization And Meetings Of Tree Board
The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018)
CHAPTER 25
PAWNBROKERS, TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
Article 25-I   Pawnbrokers
Article 25-II   Tattooing And Body Piercing
Article 25-III Cryptocurrency Machines
Article 25-I
Pawnbrokers
25-1   License Generally
25-2   Bond
25-3   Occupation Tax
25-4   Only One Business Location Permitted
25-5   Record Book Generally
25-6   Daily Report
25-7   Ticket To Be Attached
25-8   Sale Of Pledged Articles
25-9   Unlawful Receipts
25-1   License Generally
All persons who shall engage in the business of pawnbroker are hereby required
to make application to the mayor and city council for a license to operate such
business and upon granting the same shall thereafter pay to the city treasurer
an annual license fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule,
and the city treasurer shall give a receipt therefor, and no receipt shall run
beyond the first day of May following the date of such payment. The license fee
shall be paid in advance and shall be good for one year. The city council may
at its discretion issue a license for a six months' period.
25-2   Bond
Before any license to operate the business of a pawnbroker shall be granted,
the person applying for such license shall give a bond to the City in the sum
of five thousand dollars, with surety, to be approved by the mayor and council,
conditioned on the faithful performance of the trust imposed by law or by usage
upon pawnbrokers.
25-3   Occupation Tax
There is hereby levied on all persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker an
annual occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule,
which occupation tax shall be paid to the city treasurer who shall give a
receipt for such payment. If the city council in its discretion grants a
license to operate as a pawnbroker for a six months' period to any person
applying therefor, the occupation tax to be charged in such an event shall be
in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
25-4   Only One Business Location Permitted
No person shall do business as a pawnbroker in more than one place.
25-5   Record Book Generally
All persons who shall engage in the business of pawnbroker shall keep a book in
which shall be legibly written in ink any loan or purchase, an accurate account
or description in the English language of the goods, articles or things pawned,
pledged or purchased, the amount of money loaned or paid therefor, the time the
same was received, and the name, residence, and place of residence of the
person pawning or pledging such goods; and, when purchased or received from a
minor, the name of the father and mother of such minor and where the father and
mother reside, which book, together with the article pawned, shall be at all
times open to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the police
department.
25-6   Daily Report
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the chief
of police every day before the hour of 12:00 Noon a legible and correct copy
from the book required in §
25-5 of all the personal property or other valuable things received, deposited
or purchased during the preceding day, together with all the other matters
required to be kept in such book pertaining to such articles purchased or
pawned.
25-7   Ticket To Be Attached
In addition to the record to be kept by persons engaged in the business of
pawnbroker as set forth in §
25-5, there shall be attached to each article pawned or pledged a ticket which
shall plainly state the interest charged or to be charged, the amount of money
advanced, and all other charges whatsoever necessary to be paid to redeem the
property so put in pawn.
25-8   Sale Of Pledged Articles
No personal property received on deposit or purchased by any pawnbroker shall
be sold or permitted to be redeemed from the place of business of such person
for the space of twenty-four hours after the copy and statement required to be
delivered to the chief of police shall have been delivered as required by §
25-6.
25-9   Unlawful Receipts
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a pawnbroker to purchase from,
or to take, or receive upon deposit, pawn, or pledge any personal property of
any kind from a minor, unless such person shall be doing business wholly on his
or her own account, which fact shall be noted upon the book or record required
by §
25-5; and it shall also be unlawful for any such licensed pawnbroker to
knowingly receive on pawn or deposit any personal property of any kind from any
person not being the owner thereof, or from any intoxicated person.
Upon conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this section, the
city council may at its option revoke the license of such pawnbroker.
Article 25-II
Tattooing And Body Piercing
25-11   Tattoo/Body Piercing; License Required
25-12   License Application; Types; When Issued
25-13   Definitions
25-14   Health And Sanitary Requirements
25-15   Storing Of Instruments
25-16   Sterilizing Of Instruments
25-17   Use Of Instruments
25-18   Incineration Of Wastes
25-19   Records
25-20   Infections
25-21   Pigments And Dyes
25-22   Bandages And Surgical Dressings
25-23   Certificate Of Inspection
25-24   Inspections
25-25   Tattooing And/Or Body Piercing Of Minors
25-26   Hours Of Operation
25-27   Penalty
25-11   Tattoo/Body Piercing; License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a
tattoo and/or a body piercing establishment without first obtaining a license
to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
25-12   License Application; Types; When Issued
   A.   All applications for a new or renewal license shall be filed with the
Central District Health Department accompanied by a fee established and adopted
by the Board of Health. Upon payment of the license fee, receipt of the
application, and receipt of the certificate of inspection, the Health
Department Director shall issue a license to the applicant, which he/she shall
keep displayed in his/her place of business at all times.
   B.   Any change of ownership or change of location of the business licensed
shall require a new application and license, with payment of fees therefor.
   C.   Application for all licenses shall be made prior to the operation of
any tattoo and/or body piercing work.
   D.   Licenses shall be non-transferable.
   E.   Type of Licenses:
      1.   Annual License. An annual license may be issued for businesses,
valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. Renewals of such annual
license shall be made by application prior to the expiration of the existing
license.
      2.   Temporary License. A temporary license may be issued for businesses,
valid for no more than three (3) consecutive days, such dates to be specified
on the license. Licenses issued on a temporary basis requires compliance with
this article and with the Temporary Tattoo/Body Piercing Event Regulations
promulgated and adopted by the Board of Health.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-13   Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Certificate of Inspection. The term “certificate of inspection” shall mean
written approval from the Central District Health Department that said
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment has been inspected and meets all
of the terms of this Article relating to operation, maintenance, physical
facilities, equipment and layout for operation of such business.
Body Piercing. The term “body piercing” shall mean the act of penetrating the
skin, excluding the earlobes, to make generally permanent in nature, a hole,
mark, or scar.
Health Department Director. The term “Health Department Director” shall mean
the Director of the Central District Health Department or his/her authorized
representative.
Operator. The term “operator” shall mean any individual, firm, company,
corporation or association that owns or operates an establishment where
tattooing and/or body piercing is performed and any individual who performs or
practices the art of tattooing and/or body piercing on the person of another.
Tattoo. The term “tattoo” shall refer to any method of placing designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin
with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the
aid of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-14   Health And Sanitary Requirements
Each person who operates a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment shall
comply with the following requirements:
   A.   The room in which tattooing and/or body piercing is done shall have an
area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet. The walls, floors and
ceiling shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface.
   B.   A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible
at all times that the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment is open for
business. A separate lavatory will be accessible to the operator to wash his/
her hands prior to applying a tattoo or body piercing to a patron. The lavatory
shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels,
and shall be cleaned and sanitized at least daily.
   C.   All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable
material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable
finish, and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a panel
at least four (4) feet high or by a door.
   D.   The entire premises and all equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
   E.   The operator shall wash his/her hands thoroughly with soap and water
before starting to tattoo and/or body pierce; the hands shall be dried with
individual, single-use towels. After washing his/her hands, the operator shall
rinse his/her hands in seventy percent (70%) alcohol (Rubbing Alcohol) or in an
antiseptic solution approved by the Central District Health Department. The
operator will then don new disposable surgical gloves, and shall wear them
while in contact with the customer. Upon completion of his/her work on each
customer, the operator shall dispose of the gloves by incineration or
autoclave. The operator shall not perform service on more than one (1) person
at a time; that is, he/she shall commence and complete or terminate services
with a customer, prior to commencing work on another individual.
   F.   No tattooing and/or body piercing shall be done on any skin surface
that has rash, pimples, boils, infections or manifests any evidence of
unhealthy conditions.
   G.   In the event a tattoo, blemish, birthmark or scar is changed, removed,
camouflaged, or altered, a record must be made and kept in the client's record.
   H.   Only disposable razors with a new, single-service blade shall be used
on each customer or patron and then shall be sterilized and disposed of as soon
as possible by incineration.
   I.   The area to be tattooed and/or pierced shall first be thoroughly washed
for a period of two (2) minutes with warm water to which has been added an
antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the
area. After shaving and before tattooing and/or piercing is begun, a solution
of seventy percent (70%) alcohol shall be applied to the area with a single-use
sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument. Sponges shall be disposed of
by sterilization and incineration.
   J.   Only sterile petroleum jelly in single-service disposable containers,
if available, or collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent as
approved by the Central District Health Department, shall be used on the area
to be tattooed and/or pierced and it shall be applied with sterile gauze which
shall then be discarded and disposed of by incineration or autoclave. Petroleum
jelly or an approved alternate substance shall not be applied directly with the
fingers.
   K.   The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptics to
check the flow of blood is prohibited.
   L.   Inquiry shall be made of each customer, and anyone giving a history of
jaundice, hepatitis, lymphadenopathy or lymphadenitis (swelling of lymph nodes)
Aids (HIV+) positive, or a history of blood donation exclusion (for other than
hypertension and immediate illness) may not be tattooed and/or body pierced.
Inquiry shall be recorded on an appropriate form which shall be executed by the
customer and operator, and retained by the licensee for a period of not less
than three (3) years.
   M.   Single-service individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for
each patron, and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after
completing work on a patron and any dye in which the needles were dipped shall
not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin
with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be
used only on one (1) person and then immediately discarded and disposed of with
other hazardous medical waste. After completing work on any person, the
tattooed and/or pierced area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with
an antiseptic soap solution approved by the Central District Health Department,
or a seventy percent (70%) alcohol solution. The tattooed and/or pierced area
shall be allowed to dry and sterile petroleum jelly from a single-service
disposable container, if available, or from collapsible metal or plastic tubes,
shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be
fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive and/or the pierced area as needed.
   N.   All tattoo and/or body piercing work shall be performed with a single-
service sterile needle, which shall be disposed of immediately after use on one
(1) customer by sterilization and incineration. The operator shall not remove
tattoos, nor shall they be done over the site of obviously recent hypodermic
injections. A single-service tube should be used in conjunction with a new
needle. After use the tube shall be sterilized.
   O.   Operator is responsible for issuing after-care instructions for each
body piercing.
   P.   No animals may be kept or allowed in the place of business at any time.
   Q.   Private residences or dwelling units are prohibited in the place of
business unless the tattooing and/or body piercing operation is conducted in a
separate and distinct location from the normal living quarters of a residential
dwelling.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-15   Storing Of Instruments
All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a closed
glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
25-16   Sterilizing Of Instruments
A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all needles
and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron.
(Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approve by
the Central District Health Department.) Sterilization of equipment will be
accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least sixty (60) minutes at a
minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch, temperature of two
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°) or one hundred twenty-one degrees
Celsius (121°C).
Preparation of Instruments for Sterilization. After each tattoo job, the tattoo
machine shall be placed in an ultrasonic type machine to remove the excess dye
from the tubes and needle bars. When this process is completed the tubes and
needle bars shall be removed from the tattoo machines. They shall then be
placed into a covered container for sterilization by autoclaving.
Sterilizing of Instruments. Steam sterilizers, approved by the Central District
Health Department, shall be provided for each establishment. All needle bars,
grips, tubes and instruments which pierce the skin, directly and in piercing
the skin or come in contact with instruments which pierce the skin shall be
sterilized before using on each customer by autoclaving under fifteen (15)
pounds pressure for fifteen (15) minutes. The temperature maintained in
autoclaving shall not be less than two hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°F)
or one hundred twenty-one degrees Celsius (121°C).
Storing of Instruments. All tubes, grips and needle bars shall be left in the
wrappers used during the autoclaving process. These wrapped articles shall be
stored in a closed glass case or storage cabinet and shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner at all times. The wrappers shall not be removed from the tubes,
grips or needle bars until a tattoo and/or body piercing job is begun.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-17   Use Of Instruments
The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled
and temporarily placed during tattooing and/or body piercing so that they will
not be contaminated. Each operator should have a minimum of eight (8) sets of
tubes. (A set consist of 1 outliner, 1 shade).
25-18   Incineration Of Wastes
All used items and equipment must be autoclaved at fifteen (15) PSI and two
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°F) for fifteen (15) minutes, and then
discarded in double-lined plastic bags in clean closable receptacles, and shall
be incinerated as soon as possible after use.
25-19   Records
   A.   Permanent records for each patron or customer shall be maintained by
the licensee or operator of the establishment. Before the tattooing and/or body
piercing operation begins, the patron or customer shall be required personally
to enter, on a record form provided for such establishments, the date, his/her
name, address, age, driver’s license number or other acceptable photo
identification, the responses to the inquiries set forth in §
25-14(L), and his/her signature. A copy of the driver's license or photo
identification shall be attached to and retained with the permanent record.
   B.   Daily logs must be kept detailing sterilization of instruments.
   C.   All such records required to be retained shall be kept by the operator
or licensee for a period of not less than five (5) years. In the event of a
change of ownership or closing the business, all such records shall be made
available to the Central District Health Department or law enforcement officer
of the City upon request.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-20   Infections
No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the
skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed and/or body pierced. All
infections resulting from the practice of tattooing and/or body piercing which
become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to the Central District
Health Department by the person owning or operating the tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment, and the infected client shall be referred to a
physician.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-21   Pigments And Dyes
All pigments, dyes, colors, etc. used in tattooing shall be sterile and free
from bacteria, virus particles and noxious agents and substances, and the
pigments, dyes and colors used from stock solutions for each customer or patron
shall be placed in a single-service receptacle and such receptacle and
remaining solution shall be discarded and disposed of after use on each
customer or patron.
25-22   Bandages And Surgical Dressings
All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing and/
or body piercing of a person shall be sterile.
25-23   Certificate Of Inspection
An applicant for a license to operate a tattooing and/or body piercing
establishment shall first obtain a certificate of inspection from the Central
District Health Department, indicated the establishment has been inspected and
is in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
25-24   Inspections
The Health Department Director shall conduct periodic inspections of any
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment for the purpose of determining
whether or not said establishment and the persons performing the art of
tattooing and/or body piercing thereon are in compliance with all applicable
health provisions contained within this Article and other pertinent ordinances
at least once each calendar year. It shall be unlawful for any person or
operator of a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment willfully to prevent
or restrain the Health Department Director from entering any licensed
establishment where tattooing and/or body piercing is being performed for the
purpose of inspecting said premises, after proper identification is presented
to the operator.
25-25   Tattooing And/Or Body Piercing Of Minors
No person in the City shall tattoo and/or body pierce any unmarried minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years unless the parent, guardian or other person
having charge and custody of said minor shall first have given his/her written
consent to such tattooing and/or body piercing of such minor. The identity of
the consenting party shall be verified by drivers license number or other
acceptable photo identification. The written consent must be signed at the
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment by the parent, guardian or other
person having charge and custody of said minor. A copy of the driver's license
or photo identification shall be attached to and retained with the written
consent. The burden for ensuring compliance with this section shall be on the
operator.
25-26   Hours Of Operation
Operators of tattoo and/or body piercing businesses shall commence new tattoo
and/or body piercing work only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M.
25-27   Penalty
In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, any person
violating any provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with
the penalties set forth in §
1-7 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
ARTICLE 25-III CRYPTOCURRENCY MACHINES
25-30 Intent
25-31 Definitions
25-32 Posted Warning Required
25-33 Penalties and Confiscation
25-30 Intent
The intent of this Article is to require any person or business operating or
housing a Virtual Currency Kiosk, Crypto automated teller machine (ATM) or
Bitcoin teller machine (BTM), on its premises to post a written warning
providing users with notice of potential fraud risks, to protect the citizens
of Grand Island and to provide criminal punishment for failure to provide such
notice.
(Added by Ord. No. 10,051, effective 11-4-2025)
25-31 Definitions
As used in this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
   1.   Cryptocurrency: A virtual currency that utilizes cryptography to secure
transactions that are digitally recorded on a cryptographically secured,
distributed ledger (blockchain).
   2.   Crypto ATM or Bitcoin ATM: A stand-alone electronic kiosk that allows
users to buy and sell cryptocurrency in exchange for cash or with a debit card.
   3.   Virtual Currency Kiosk: A person acting on behalf of, or a mechanical
agent of, the virtual currency kiosk operator to enable the virtual currency
kiosk operator to facilitate the exchange of virtual currency for money, bank
credit, or other virtual currency, including but not limited to by (1)
connecting directly to a separate "virtual currency exchange" that performs the
actual virtual currency transmission, or (2) drawing upon the virtual currency
in the possession of the electronic terminal's operator.
   4.   Blockchain: A decentralized digital ledger that stores information
across a network of computer or nodes in blocks that are verified and validated
to ensure legitimate and accurate transactions.
(Added by Ord. No. 10,051, effective 11-4-2025)
25-32 Posted Warning Required
Any person or business operating or providing access to a functioning Crypto
automated teller machine (ATM), Bitcoin teller machine (BTM) or Virtual
Currency Kiosk on its premises shall post a written warning in the form of a
sign on or adjacent to the Kiosk, Crypto ATM or BTM providing notice to
customers and users of the potential fraud or scam risks associated with
utilizing the Kiosk, Crypto ATM or BTM.
All text must be at least 18 point font and must be conspicuously posted so
that it shall be noticeable, viewable, and readable, to a user of the Kiosk,
ATM or BTM while standing in front of the Kiosk, ATM or BTM.
(Added by Ord. No. 10,051, effective 11-4-2025)
25-33 Penalties and Confiscation
It shall be unlawful for any person or business operating or providing access
to a functional Virtual Currency Kiosk, Crypto automated teller machine (ATM)
or Bitcoin teller machine (BTM) not to post such a notice and/or to fail to
maintain it in conformity with Sec. 25-32. All persons with control over the
premises upon which said machine is stored, owners of the machine or premises,
businesses owning the machine or premises, or registered agent of any corporate
business operating, housing, leasing, or otherwise maintaining control over the
Kiosk, Crypto ATM or BTM shall be presumed to be responsible for compliance
with this section of code. Anyone cited for violation of this Article and found
guilty thereof shall receive a five-hundred dollar ($500.00) fine for the
violation. Each day a Kiosk, Crypto ATM or BTM remains on a premises in non-
conformity with this regulation shall constitute a new violation.
(Added by Ord. No. 10,051, effective 11-4-2025)
CHAPTER 26
PLUMBING
Article 26-I   Uniform Plumbing Code
Article 26-II   Plumbers, Contractors, Installers and Plumbing Inspector
Article 26-III   Violations
TABLE 26-3.1
Article 26-I
Uniform Plumbing Code
26-1   Uniform Plumbing Code Adopted
26-2   UPC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
26-3   UPC - Public Copy
26-4   UPC - Amendment Of Section 101.1
26-5   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 103.1.1
26-6   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 104.1
26-7   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 104.5
26-8   (Reserved)
26-9   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 313.2
26-10   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 604.1 26-10.1 UPC - Amendment Of Table
604.1
26-11   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 604.3 Exception
26-12   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 608.2
26-13   Electric Bonding And Grounding Of Water Services
26-14   UPC - Amendment Of Section 717.1
26-15   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 722.1
26-16   Water Discharge Requirements
26-17   Reserved
26-18   UPC - Amendment Of Appendix A
26-1   Uniform Plumbing Code Adopted
A. The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition, published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted, together
with Appendices as set forth hereafter, and any amendments thereto as may be
made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the Grand
Island City Code. One copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition, and all
supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city
clerk as provided by law.
The following appendices shall be used with the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted
by this section:
   A.   Appendix A – Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System.
   B.   Appendix B – Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems.
   C.   Appendix C – Alternative Plumbing Systems
   D.   Appendix D – Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9118, effective 05-15-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9487, effective 06-15-2014) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9669, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9806,
effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9914 on 1/10/2023
26-2   UPC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of
the Uniform Plumbing Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be of
no force and effect:
   A.   Table 104.5 - Plumbing Permit Fees.
   B.   Section 612.0 – Residential Fire Sprinkler Systems.
   C.   Chapter 13 – Health Care Facilities and Medical Gas and Medical Vacuum
Systems.
   D.   Chapter 15 – Alternative Water Sources for Nonpotable Applications.
   E.   Chapter 16 – Nonpotable Rainwater Catchment Systems.
   F.   Appendix E – Manufacture/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle
Parks.
   G.   Appendix F – Firefighter Breathing Air Replenishment Systems
   H.   Appendix G – Sizing of Venting Systems
   I.   Appendix H – Private Sewage Disposal Systems.
   J.   Appendix I –Installation standards.
   K.   Appendix J – Combination of Indoor and Outdoor Combustion and
Ventilation Opening Design
   L.   Appendix K – Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems
   M.   Appendix L – Sustainable Practices
   N.   Appendix M – Peak Water Demand Calculator
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9118, effective 05-15-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-
2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9669, effective 01-01-2018) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-3   UPC - Public Copy
Not less than one copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted pursuant to §
26-1 shall be kept on file by the city clerk for inspection by and use of the
public.
26-4   UPC - Amendment Of Section 101.1
Section 101.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
101.1. Title.
This document shall be known as the "Uniform Plumbing Code" together with
Appendices and any amendments thereto, and shall be cited as such, and will be
referred to when used herein or in Chapter 26 of the Grand Island City Code as
"this Code".
26-5   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 103.1.1
Subsection 103.1.3 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include
the following:
(A)   No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any
work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and
unrevoked plumbing license as required by this chapter, except when and as
otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.
(B)   No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work
under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his or her employ.
(C)   No person or concern who has obtained a plumber's license pursuant to
this article, shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or
concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or
work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this
section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.
(D)   A permit may be issued to a properly licensed person not acting in
violation of any current contractor licensing law.
(E)   Any permit by this code may be issued to do any work regulated by this
code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings in the event that such person is the bona fide owner of any such
dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same are currently
occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all
material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therein. This,
however, shall exclude all gas piping and venting of fuel combustion
appliances.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8882, effective 01-07-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9024, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-
2007) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-6   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 104.1
Subsection 104.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the
following:
104.1 Permits Required.
A permit and inspection are required when repairing, replacing, or installing a
sewer lateral, sewer tap, or sewer cap within five (5) feet of the City main,
and when repairing or replacing fifty (50) percent or more of the sewer
lateral. Any repair, replacement, or installation of a new sewer tap shall be
done in compliance with the Grand Island City Code, Chapter 30, Articles
IV and
V.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-7   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 104.5
Subsection 104.5 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
104.5 Permit Fees.
The fee for each permit identified in this chapter shall be set forth in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-8   (Reserved)
26-9   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 313.2
Subsection 312.2 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the
following:
Cutting, notching and boring of floor joists and studs shall comply with Table
26-3-1, which is attached and adopted herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-10   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 604.1
Subsection 604.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the
following:
All installers of the PEX systems must hold a certificate of training from the
manufacturer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-10.1   UPC - Amendment Of Table 604.1
Table 604.1 of the Uniform Plumbing code is hereby amended to delete the use of
CPVC.
26-11   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 604.3 Exception
Subsection 604.3 Exception: of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Type M copper tubing may be used for water piping when piping is above ground
in a building. Copper tube for underground water piping within a building shall
have a weight of not less than Type L. Copper tube for underground water
service piping shall have a weight of not less than Type K.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-12   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 608.2
Subsection 608.2 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to increase
excessive water pressure from eighty (80) pounds per square inch to one hundred
(100) pounds per square inch.
26-13   Electric Bonding And Grounding Of Water Services
609.13 Electrical Bonding and Grounding of Water Services. Electrical Bonding
and Grounding of all new and existing water services, whether metallic or
plastic shall be under the scope of NFPA 70.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9914 on 1/10/2023
26-14   UPC - Amendment Of Section 717.1
Subsection 717.1 of the Uniform Plumbing code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
717.1 General. The minimum size of any a building sewer shall be determined on
the basis of the total number of fixture units drained by such sewer, in
accordance with Table 717.1. No building sewer shall be smaller than the
building drain and in no case less than four (4) inches.
For alternate methods of sizing building sewers, see Appendix C. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-15   UPC - Amendment Of Subsection 722.1
Subsection 722.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
722.1 Building (House) Sewer. Every abandoned building (house) sewer or part
thereof shall be plugged or capped in an approved manner at the city main.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-16   Water Discharge Requirements
Subsection 1014.3.2.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Waste discharge in establishments from fixtures and equipment which contain
grease, including but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks (3-
compartment and 4-compartment sinks), dishwashers, soup kettles, and floor
drains located in areas where grease-containing materials exist, shall be
permitted to be drained into the sanitary waste through the interceptor when
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-2012)
26-17   Reserved
26-18   UPC - Amendment Of Appendix A
Appendix A of the Uniform Plumbing code is hereby amended to delete Table A
104.4(2) and Table A 104.4(3).
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
Article 26-II
Plumbers, Contractors, Installers and Plumbing Inspector
Division 26-II-1   Plumbers Examining Board
Division 26-II-2   Plumbing Contractors
Division 26-II-3   Master And Journeymen Plumbers 
Division 26-II-4   Water Conditioning Appliance Installers
Division 26-II-5   Plumbing Inspector
Division 26-II-1
Plumbers Examining Board
26-26   Established; Appointment; Term
26-27   Meetings; Chairman
26-28   Duties; Examinations; Licenses
26-29   Board Of Appeals
26-30   Quorum For Board
26-31   Records
26-32   Procedures
26-33   Filing Fee
26-34   General Rules
26-26   Established; Appointment; Term
There is hereby established a Plumbers Examining Board, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, to consist of seven members. The chief building official, or his/
her designee, shall be an ex-officio member of the Board and shall act as
secretary thereof. One member shall represent the board of health, one member
shall be a contracting master plumber, one member shall represent the general
public, one member shall be a professional engineer licensed with the State of
Nebraska, and two members shall be either master or journeyman plumbers. Each
member of the board shall have had at least three years’ experience in his or
her respective field.
The members of the Board shall be appointed by the mayor. Upon expiration of
the terms of the individuals currently serving on the Board, the mayor shall
appoint three (3) members to serve for one (1) year and three (3) members to
serve for two (2) years. Thereafter, each member shall serve a term of two (2)
years.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9914 on 1/10/2023
26-27   Meetings; Chairman
The Board shall hold its first meeting upon call by the chief building
official, and within thirty days following the appointment of its members. The
members shall select a chairman from their own number, but not the chief
building official. Such chairman shall hold office until the December 31
following, or until his or her successor has been selected. The Board shall
meet upon call by the chief building official at such intervals as may be
necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less
than twice a year.
26-28   Duties; Examinations; Licenses
The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification,
examination and licensing of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers, and shall
issue an appropriate license to each person who meets the qualifications
therefore and successfully passes the standardized exam administered by
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO).
The Board shall establish written standards and procedures for the approval of
all continuing education requirements as set forth in §
26-47.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-29   Board Of Appeals
The duly appointed Board shall act as a Board of Appeals in making a correct
determination of any appeal arising from actions of the chief building official
or his authorized representative.
26-30   Quorum For Board
Four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum.
26-31   Records
The Board of Appeals shall keep an accurate record of all their official
transactions and shall submit a copy to the office of the city clerk.
26-32   Procedures
Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days from date of the chief
building official's decision. Decisions of the Board shall be made within
thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal. Decisions of the Board shall be in
writing. A copy of the Board's decision shall be delivered to the appellant
within 30 calendar days after receipt of original appeal.
26-33   Filing Fee
Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the chief building official or
his authorized representative relating to the suitability of alternate
materials or type of installation or interpretation of any provision of this
Code may obtain review of such decision upon filing a written request for
review by the Board in the office of the chief building official or his
authorized representative within thirty (30) days from the date of such
decision and payment of a filing fee as provided in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Enforcement of any decision, notice or order of the chief building official or
his authorized representative issued under this Code shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9890 effective 08-10-2022)
26-34   General Rules
   A.   All plumbing apprentices actively engaged under the supervision of a
contracting master plumber will be required to register with the Office of the
Chief Building Official. Experience accrued towards taking the journeyman
plumbers test will only be accepted as a registered apprentice. Time accrued
previous to registration will be approved and noted.
   B.   Time required for an apprentice to be actively engaged in the trade
under the supervision of a contracting master plumber will be a minimum of
three years. Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the chief building
official in writing for consideration and approval for the journeyman
examination. Any academical time to be considered in place of actual
apprenticeship time in the trade must be from a State accredited college or
Technical school and be submitted to the Board for consideration.
   C.   Applicants must hold a journeyman license for a minimum of four years
before taking the Master exam, and be actively engaged in the trade under the
supervision of a contracting master plumber for the full four years. Proof of
qualifications will be submitted to the chief building official in writing for
consideration and approval for the master examination.
   D.   The minimum age limit for a Journeyman examination will be Twenty (20)
years of age unless approved by the Board.
   E.   The allotted time for the Master and Journeyman examination will be as
administered by IAPMO.
   F.   Request for Master and Journeyman examination will be filed in the City
of Grand Island Office of the Chief Building Official prior to taking the
examination for the consideration of the chief building official or the Board.
Examination application fee will be paid with the application. No exam fee will
be refunded after taking the examination. Exam application review fees shall be
submitted directly to the Office of the Chief Building Official. Online exam
fees shall be submitted directly to IAPMO.
   G.   All applicants will submit, along with their request for examination,
letters of proof of the required apprenticeship time actively engaged in the
trade.
   H.   In the event that an applicant fails to pass the examination given, he
may make application for a subsequent exam after thirty (30) days have passed.
   I.   At the discretion of the Board, experience gained at an industrial
plant or outside the Grand Island jurisdiction may be considered as
apprenticeship time to qualify for a Journeyman examination. Information
considered by the Board shall include written proof of previous experience
record and oral examination.
   J.   All examination papers are the property of the examining Board.
Applicants will not be permitted to remain during grading or to review
examination papers after they have been submitted for grading. Test results
will be sent by mail.
   K.   Applicant must obtain a passing score on the exam. A passing score for
a Journeyman Plumber is 70% and for a Master Plumber is 80%.
   L.   An applicant with a passing score will have a 30 day grace period to
pick up a new license dated from the test date.
   M.   An applicant must supply his own copy of this Code; the Office of the
Chief Building Official will not supply copies to anyone during the test.
Photocopies, reference books, or any other reference materials will not be
allowed in the testing area during the test.
   N.   For purposes of
Chapter 26 an "employee" shall include employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors, and independent contractors so long as the "employee" is under
supervision of a registered contracting plumber and is covered by the
registered contracting plumber's insurance obligations as set forth in
26-41.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9619, effective 02-14-2017)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9974, effective 06-05-2024)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
Division 26-II-2
Plumbing Contractors
26-35   Registration Required
26-36   Registration; Individual
26-37   Registration; Firm, Corporation
26-38   Registration; Fee
26-39   Registration; Certificate
26-40   Certificate; Revocation
26-41   Insurance
26-42   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
26-35   Registration Required
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City until registered
in the office of the chief building official as a contracting plumber.
26-36   Registration; Individual
No person shall be registered as a contracting plumber unless he is licensed as
a master plumber under the provisions of this section and has in force and
effect one or more insurance policies as required by §
26-41 below.
26-37   Registration; Firm, Corporation
No firm, association or corporation shall be registered as a contracting
plumber unless the proper officers of the concern shall certify to the chief
building official that an identified master plumber, licensed under the
provisions of this section, is an officer, member or regular employee of such
concern, and that such master plumber will be in direct supervision of all of
the plumbing work contracted and done by such concern, and unless such concern
has in force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by §
26-41 below.
26-38   Registration; Fee
The fees to be collected by the chief building official for the registration of
a plumbing contractor shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
26-39   Registration; Certificate
The chief building official shall issue a certificate of registration to any
contracting plumber applying for such and qualifying under the provisions of
this section, for a period beginning on the date thereof and expiring on
December 31 of the same year. The holder of the certificate shall display same
at the regular place of business of the holder.
Renewal of a registration certificate may be obtained upon showing of
qualifications as provided for in this section and payment of the proper fee.
26-40   Certificate; Revocation
The City Council may revoke any certificate of registration of any contracting
plumber after hearing by, and recommendation of the Board for any of the
following reasons:
   A.   Lack of competency or lack of knowledge in matters relevant to the
certificate of registration;
   B.   Certificate of registration being obtained by fraud;
   C.   The lending of any certificate of registration or the obtaining of
permits thereunder for any other person;
   D.   Failure to comply with this Code and any rules issued by the chief
building official or Board;
   E.   Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or
fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;
   F.   Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when the same are
required by §
26-6.
   G.   Failure to complete the continuing education contact hours as required
by §
26-47.
The chief building official shall serve notice of such action by registered
mail to the holder of the certificate.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-41   Insurance
A.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
   A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
   B.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for
any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
   C.   The registrant shall furnish the Office of the Chief Building Official
a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.
   D.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-42   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
No person or concern who has obtained a contracting plumber's registration
pursuant to this chapter shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing
business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed
pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street
address. It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed as a master plumber
to use the words “master plumber”, “plumber” or “plumbing” in any advertising.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007)
Division 26-II-3
Master And Journeymen Plumbers
26-43   (Reserved)
26-44   Master Plumber, Journeyman Plumber, Apprentice Plumber, Defined
26-45   Plumber Licenses
26-46   Examinations
26-47   Continuing Education
26-48   (Reserved)
26-49   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
26-50   (Reserved)
26-43   (Reserved)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9379, effective 05-15-2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9619, effective 02-14-
2017) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-44   Master Plumber, Journeyman Plumber, Apprentice Plumber, Defined
26-44.1   Master Plumber
26-44.2   Journeyman Plumber
26-44.3   Apprentice Plumber
 
Any person desiring to be licensed as a master plumber or as a journeyman
plumber pursuant to this chapter shall make written application for an
examination to the chief building official. Examination application fees shall
be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Online examination
fees shall be in accordance with the testing facilities fee schedule.
Examination application fees shall accompany such application. Examination fees
are not returned but shall be forfeited in the event the applicant fails the
examination.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-44.1   Master Plumber
A Master Plumber shall mean a person who is registered with the Office of the
Chief Building Official and has completed all experience requirements as a
journeyman plumber and has passed a master level plumber's examination. A
Master Plumber has the necessary qualifications, training, experience, and
technical knowledge to properly plan, layout, install, alter and repair
plumbing systems or parts thereof including, but not limited to, plumbing
fixtures and fixture fittings; water heaters; water supply and distribution;
sanitary drainage, including onsite wastewater systems; indirect wastes; vents,
traps and interceptors; storm drainage; fuel gas piping; health care facilities
and medical gas and medical vacuum systems; firestop protection - as defined in
the UPC; alternate water sources for nonpotable applications; nonpotable
rainwater catchment systems; combination waste and vent systems; alternate
plumbing systems; boilers and pressure vessels; and hydronics; in accordance
with the standards, rules, and regulations established by the Grand Island
Plumbing Board. A practicing Master Plumber must be an employee of a registered
Contracting Master Plumber and work under a Contracting Master Plumber's
supervision.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9866, effective 01-01-2022)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-44.2   Journeyman Plumber
A Journeyman Plumber shall mean a person who is registered with the Grand
Island Office of the Chief Building Official and who has completed their
apprenticeship under the supervision of a Contracting Master Plumber. A
Journeyman Plumber has passed a journeyman level plumbing examination and has a
working knowledge and application of the skills required to be employed as a
plumber in accordance with the standards, rules, and regulations established by
the Grand Island Plumbing Board. A practicing Journeyman Plumber must be an
employee of a registered Contracting Master Plumber and work under a
Contracting master Plumber's supervision.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-44.3   Apprentice Plumber
An Apprentice Plumber is an entry-level plumber who is registered with the
Grand Island Office of the Chief Building Official and is working under the
direct supervision of a licensed Journeyman Plumber or Master Plumber and is an
employee of a registered Contracting Master Plumber.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-45   Plumber Licenses
26-45.1   License; Term, Renewal; Fees
26-45.2   License; Revocation
26-45.3   Plumber License To Apprentice Ratios
26-45.4   Temporary Journeyman Plumber's License
26-45.5   Licenses; Reciprocity
26-45.1   License; Term, Renewal; Fees
   A.   All licenses issued by the Grand Island chief building official
pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
issued, but may be renewed within thirty days thereafter upon application and
payment of fees. Any license holder who does not renew his or her license in
this manner, the holder shall apply for and qualify to recover the lapsed
license by passing an examination as required under the provisions of §26-46.
   B.   All licensees shall be required to complete six contact hours of
continuing education by December 31 of each year as required under the
provisions of §
26-47, and may renew such license upon presentation of documentary evidence of
successful completion on a form furnished by the Office of the Chief Building
Official and payment of the fee for renewal. The licensee shall have the
responsibility for record keeping and providing proof of attendance at
continuing education courses.
   Penalty for falsifying continuing education requirements will be immediate
forfeiture of license. First offense, offender will be eligible to make
application for the next available exam. Second offence will be a one year
suspension of license and then undergo a review by the plumbing board for re-
examination eligibility.
   C.   Fees for the renewal of a license shall be in accordance with the City
of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-45.2   License; Revocation
The plumbing board by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke the
license of any journeyman plumber or master plumber, if the license was
obtained through error or fraud, or failure to complete annual continuing
education requirements, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly
incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of
this article or any other provisions of City of Grand Island Code related to
plumbers. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties
prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.
Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice in writing,
enumerating the charges alleged, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the
plumbing board not sooner than five days from receipt of the notice. The
licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written,
and shall have the right of cross-examination. All testimony before the
plumbing board shall be given under oath. The plumbing board shall have power
to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses.
The decision of the plumbing board shall be based upon the evidence produced at
the hearing, and such decision shall be final. A person whose license has been
revoked shall not be permitted to reapply for another such license within one
year from the date of such revocation.
The licensee shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Grand Island
Plumbing Board to the Grand Island City Council.
26-45.3   Plumber License To Apprentice Ratios
A licensed contracting master plumber, master plumber, or journeyman plumber
must be present and directly supervise all work performed by an apprentice
plumber. A licensed plumber shall supervise no more than three apprentice
plumbers at a job site at one time. More than three apprentice plumbers may
work at the same job site at the same time as long as the ratio of licensed
plumber(s) never falls below one licensed plumber for every three apprentices.
26-45.4   Temporary Journeyman Plumber's License
The chief building official may issue a temporary journeyman plumber's license
pending examination; provided, that the applicant therefore holds a similar
license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall be valid until the next
examination by the Board.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-45.5   Licenses; Reciprocity
   A.   Any person validly licensed as a master or journeyman plumber by a
municipal jurisdiction, provided the testing mechanism of that municipality has
been verified by the chief building official or the Board to meet or exceed the
standards of an unamended standardized exam provided by a nationally licensed
testing agency, may apply for exemption from taking the examination specified
by Section 26-34 and, provided the applicant is otherwise qualified pursuant to
this Code, the chief building official may approve the applicant to receive a
valid license, and direct their designee to execute and deliver the license to
the applicant.
   B.   The chief building official shall have the right to require any
applicant to take an examination. In the event that an applicant is denied a
license, they may appeal to the plumbing board.
   C.   Any person validly licensed as a master or journeyman plumber by a
jurisdiction with a current reciprocal licensing agreement approved by board
shall be granted a licenses of the same level for the Grand Island
Jurisdiction.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-46   Examinations
26-46.1   Examinations; Fee
26-46.2   Prior Experience
26-46.3   Re-Examination
26-46.1   Examinations; Fee
Any person desiring to be licensed as a master plumber or as a journeyman
plumber pursuant to this chapter shall make written application for an
examination to the chief building official. Examination application fees shall
be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Online examination
fees shall be in accordance with the testing facilities fee schedule.
Examination application fees shall accompany such application and shall be
accounted for and turned over to the City Treasurer. Examination fees are not
returned but shall be forfeited in the event the applicant fails the
examination.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-46.2   Prior Experience
An applicant for examination must have worked under the supervision of a
licensed contracting master plumber for a minimum period of three years before
being eligible to take a journeyman plumber examination. An applicant for
examination must have been actively engaged in the plumbing trade for a minimum
period of four years after being licensed as a journeyman plumber before being
eligible to take a master plumber examination.
26-46.3   Re-Examination
Any person desiring to become a master plumber or a journeyman plumber who
fails to pass an examination pursuant to this chapter as prescribed by the
Board may make written application for a subsequent examination 30 days after
taking the examination.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-47   Continuing Education
26-47.1   Continuing Education Hour Requirements 
26-47.2   Journeyman Plumber Exam Credit
26-47.3   Master Plumber Exam Credit
26-47.1   Continuing Education Hour Requirements
All Journeyman Plumbers, Master Plumbers, and Contracting Master Plumbers are
required to complete a total of 6 hours of continuing education annually. The 6
hours shall include 4 hours of principle instruction and 2 hour of code
instruction, as defined below.
Principle instruction hours means subjects that directly relate to the
performance of plumbing services. Examples of such subjects include, but are
not limited to, the design, installation, servicing, troubleshooting, and
skills training for Plumbing Fixtures, Water Heaters & Boilers, Water Piping
Systems, DWV Systems, and Gas Piping Systems.
Code instruction hours means subjects that directly relate to regulations
governing plumbing services. Examples of such subjects include, but not be
limited to; the Uniform Plumbing Code, written and published by IAPMO, the
Nebraska American Disabilities Act, and NFPA 54.
26-47.2   Journeyman Plumber Exam Credit
Apprentices who pass the Journeyman Plumber License Examination will be exempt
from any continuing education requirement for the calendar year in which the
passing score is obtained.
26-47.3   Master Plumber Exam Credit
Journeyman Plumbers who pass the Master Plumber Examination will be exempt from
any continuing education requirement for the calendar year in which the passing
score is obtained.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-48   (Reserved)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
26-49   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another
No person or concern who has obtained a plumber's license pursuant to this
article, shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or concern,
either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work
under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this
section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.
26-50   (Reserved)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9806, effective 01-01-2021)
Division 26-II-4
Water Conditioning Appliance Installers
26-51   Conformance With Article
26-52   Water Conditioning Appliance; Defined
26-53   Water Conditioning Contractor
26-54   Water Conditioning Installer
26-55   License Required; Exception
26-56   Examinations
26-57   Re-Examination
26-58   Application Fee
26-59   License; Application
26-60   License; Fees
26-61   Licenses; Suspension And Revocation
26-62   Licenses; Expiration
26-63   Temporary Installer's License
26-64   Inspection Of Installations
26-51   Conformance With Article
All connections made to a water supply system which are not connected to the
drainage system for the purpose of installing, replacing, or relocating a water
conditioning appliance, as defined by Section
26-52 shall be made in conformance with the provisions of this article and the
city code.
26-52   Water Conditioning Appliance; Defined
For the purposes of this chapter, the term water conditioning appliance shall
mean apparatus and equipment which is designed to soften or filter or change
the mineral content of water where such apparatus and equipment is connected to
a water supply system and is not connected to the drainage system.
The term connected to a water supply system shall not be considered to include
connections to existing faucets.
26-53   Water Conditioning Contractor
   A.   No person shall engage in the water conditioning appliance business in
the city of Grand Island without first obtaining a certificate of registration
as a water conditioning contractor.
   B.   In case of any firm of more than one person or partnership engaged in
the business of installing water conditioning appliances, only one of such
persons shall be required to qualify for a contractor's license. In case of
corporations, only one officer shall be required to qualify for such license.
   C.   No license as a water conditioning contractor shall be issued by the
City of Grand Island unless the applicant therefore first shall have passed the
examination for water conditioning installer as prescribed by this article, and
shall have a regularly established place of business wherein he or she shall
have posted in a conspicuous place the license issued pursuant to this article.
   D.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      1.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      2.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
      3.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Office of the
Chief Building Official a certificate or certificates of insurance for the
above insurance coverage.
      4.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-54   Water Conditioning Installer
Any person other than a water conditioning contractor or master or journeyman
plumber, desiring to engage in the occupation of a water conditioning installer
must take an examination and obtain a license from the Board and be employed by
a water conditioning contractor.
26-55   License Required; Exception
No person shall install, replace, or relocate a water conditioning appliance
without first having obtained the necessary license from the chief building
official to do so; provided, that a master plumber and a journeyman plumber
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may perform such
work without securing an additional license.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-56   Examinations
The chief building official shall, prior to issuing any license under this
chapter, examine the applicant as to his or her technical knowledge and ability
to install water conditioning appliances, and knowledge of water supply piping
and fittings as related to the installation of water conditioning appliances.
The examination shall not include the applicant's knowledge of plumbing, house
drainage, ventilation or sanitation to the extent required to meet the
standards applied in licensing master plumbers or journeymen plumbers.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-57   Re-Examination
In case any application for a license to install a water conditioning appliance
shall be denied for failure to pass an examination satisfactory to the Board,
the applicant therefore may take another examination any time after the
expiration of thirty days.
26-58   Application Fee
Each applicant for a water conditioning installer license shall pay an
examination fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
26-59   License; Application
All applications for water conditioning licenses shall be filed with the Office
of the Chief Building Official and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name and residence and business address of the applicant.
   B.   The trade name used by the applicant or applicant's employer.
   C.   The name of persons acquainted with applicant's qualifications.
   D.   The qualifications possessed by the applicant.
   E.   Any additional relevant information requested by the Board.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-60   License; Fees
The fee to be collected by the Office of the Chief Building Official for the
registration of water conditioning contractors shall be in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-61   Licenses; Suspension And Revocation
Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the
city council upon recommendation of the Board for the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to comply with this article or any rules issued by the Board
hereunder.
   B.   Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or
fraudulent departure from plans or specifications.
   C.   Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when same are
required by this chapter.
26-62   Licenses; Expiration
All licenses granted under this section shall expire on the last day of the
year issued, and such licenses shall not be transferable.
26-63   Temporary Installer's License
The chief building official may issue a temporary water conditioning installer
license pending examination before the Board; provided, that the applicant
therefore holds a similar license from an equivalent board, or, if the person
applying for the same in the judgement of the chief building official has
demonstrated his or her ability to make such installation.
26-64   Inspection Of Installations
Within ten (10) days after notice by any water conditioning contractor of the
completion of an installation, the chief building official shall inspect, or
cause to be inspected, such installations for which permits have been issued
under this section, and such official shall indicate in writing that such
installation has been approved or disapproved.
Division 26-II-5 Plumbing Inspector
26-65   Office Created; Authority; Assistants
26-66   Duties
26-67   Inspections
26-68   Inspection Prior To Covering Installation
26-69   Procedure For Re-Inspection
26-70   Inspector May Require Testing
26-71   Authority To Condemn; Penalty
26-65   Office Created; Authority; Assistants
There is hereby created and established the office of the plumbing inspector,
who shall be the chief building official, and who shall have supervision of all
installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of plumbing systems
work in the city and the two mile area adjacent thereto. The plumbing inspector
shall have such assistance as may be necessary. Assistants shall be hired only
after being examined and recommended by the chief building official. Any such
assistant shall have the same power as the plumbing inspector.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-66   Duties
It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to issue permits and inspect all
plumbing work, private water services and private sewer services within the
City and the two mile area adjacent thereto and to investigate all reported
cases of the use of imperfect materials or workmanship on any job of plumbing
work or the violation of any of the provisions of this article by a plumber,
mechanical fitter or builder.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-67   Inspections
It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to make inspections of
installation, alteration, repair, replacement, remodel of plumbing systems, or
connection work at the request of the installer, chief building official,
owner, agent, tenant, or occupant of any building or the premises where such
plumbing work is located in order to ascertain whether or not the plumbing work
in such building or premises are in a safe condition. The inspector shall have
the authority to enter any building or upon any premises at all reasonable
hours to ascertain if the provisions of this article, or any ordinances
relating to plumbing work, or appliance installations have been or are being
violated or being complied with, and should the inspector, upon making such an
inspection as requested by the installer, owner, agent, tenant, or chief
building official, find an unsafe or unsatisfactory installation, the inspector
shall have the authority to request the Utilities Department to shut off the
service at the meter (depending upon the seriousness of the conditions as
determined by the inspector), tag same, and shall notify the installer
immediately if the job is a new installation, or the owner, agent, tenant, or
one in charge of the property to cause the same to be remedied within a
specified time, not exceeding ten days if the same is not a new installation.
Should the installer, owner, agent, tenant, or one in charge of the premises
fail to make such corrections, changes or repairs, or fail to notify the
inspector to make a re-inspection within the specified time after receiving
such notification to comply therewith, said owner, agent, tenant, installer or
person in charge, shall be considered maintaining an unsafe plumbing
installation and violating the requirements hereof, and the inspector shall
make a re-inspection of the premises and report the findings to the chief
building official, who shall in turn cause action to be taken in the proper
court to secure compliance, and the penalties as set forth in this chapter
shall apply. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the installer or
one making such correction, changes or repairs to notify the inspector within
forty-eight hours after completion of such correction, changes or repairs, and
request for re-inspection.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-68   Inspection Prior To Covering Installation
Before any part of any installation is covered from sight, a notification shall
be given the plumbing inspector who shall, within forty-eight hours, inspect
such part of the installation.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-69   Procedure For Re-Inspection
If, by reason of noncompliance with the provisions of this article or through
the use of defective material or inferior workmanship, the approval of the
plumbing inspector is not given and subsequent inspections become necessary,
the installer shall notify the plumbing inspector when such work shall be ready
for such subsequent inspection, which shall be made in the same manner as is
hereinbefore provided. The fees for re-inspection shall be provided in the fee
schedule.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-70   Inspector May Require Testing
When permits have been issued for additional fixtures or piping or alterations
to any existing system, the plumbing inspector may, if in his or her discretion
it is deemed necessary, require the installer to make a complete test of the
whole system as is required for new systems.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-71   Authority To Condemn; Penalty
Authority is hereby granted to the plumbing inspector to condemn any existing
plumbing installations which, in his discretion, is hazardous or dangerous to
human life. It shall be the duty of the property owner to immediately eliminate
the hazardous conditions by removal or repair of these conditions. Failure to
do so will be a violation of the provisions of this article.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
Article 26-III
Violations
26-72   Violations Of Chapter
26-73   Discretionary Action
26-72   Violations Of Chapter
Any person who shall violate or who shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction.
Any person holding a license under the supervision and authority of the Board
who is convicted of having violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall
have such license revoked by the city council, and any person having their
license revoked for such cause shall not be granted a new license for a period
of one year thereafter.
Any person who shall have been convicted for having done any work in a manner
prohibited by this Chapter, and who shall fail, neglect or refuse to correct
the same within ten days after such conviction shall be guilty of an
independent and separate offense for each day thereafter during which such work
is permitted to remain in such improper condition.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
26-73   Discretionary Action
In the case of discretionary actions and determinations of the chief building
official or of the Board, relevant facts shall be considered and determinations
made in the exercise of reasonable discretion, and all such determinations
shall be final in the absence of abuse of discretion.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,009, effective 02-12-2025)
TABLE 26-3.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d2d1cce0f34f560dc979feb6a482dca982b5a456/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4342.png]
 
CHAPTER 27
PROCUREMENT
Article 27-I   General Provisions
Article 27-II   Ethics In Public Contracting
Article 27-III   Contracts Funded With Federal Funds 
Article 27-IV   Miscellaneous Expenditure Act
Article 27-V   Cooperative Purchasing
Article 27-VI   Construction Alternatives
Article 27-I
General Provisions
27-1   Purpose
27-2   Application
27-3   Definitions
27-4   Public Access To Information
27-5   Purchasing Agent; Position
27-6   Purchasing Agent; Duties
27-7   Administrative Rules and Procedures
27-8   Formal Procurement Procedure
27-9   (Reserved)
27-10   Designated Professional Services
27-11   Informal Purchasing; Quotations; Small Purchases
27-12   Sole Source Procurement; Limited Source Procurement
27-13   Emergency Procurement
27-14   Cancellation Of Requests
27-15   (Reserved)
27-16   (Reserved)
27-17   (Reserved)
27-18   Bid And Performance Bonds; Bid Security
27-19   Types Of Contracts
27-20   Contract Clauses
27-21   (Reserved)
27-22   Accounting System
27-23   Right To Inspect Plant
27-24   Right To Audit Records
27-25   Anticompetitive Practices
27-26   City Procurement Records
27-27   Specifications; Competition
27-28   Specifications; Brand Name Or Equal
27-29   (Reserved)
27-30   (Reserved)
27-31   (Reserved)
27-32   (Reserved)
27-33   (Reserved)
27-34   Fiscal Responsibility
27-35   (Reserved)
27-36   (Reserved)
27-37   (Reserved)
27-38   (Reserved)
27-39   Bid Protests
27-40   Contract Claims
27-41   Authority To Settle Protests Or Claims
27-42   Remedies For Violations
27-1   Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment
of all persons involved in public purchasing by the City to maximize the
purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for
maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.
27-2   Application
This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services,
and construction, entered into by the City after June 7, 2025, unless the
parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the
effective date. For purchases made prior to June 7, 2025
Chapter 27 of City Code as it existed prior to April 8, 2025 shall apply.
It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by the City, any City
department or division, or anyone required by contract or law to follow the
Grand Island City Code for public purchasing, irrespective of the source of the
funds, unless a more restrictive requirement exists in law. In the event
federal or state assistance is used, any legal provision, rule, regulation, or
contract provision more restrictive or specific than City Code shall apply.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-3   Definitions
Architect, Engineer and Land Surveying Services. Those professional services
within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, or
land surveying, as defined by the laws of the State of Nebraska.
Blind Trust. An independently managed trust in which the employee-beneficiary
has no management rights and in which the employee beneficiary is not given
notice of alterations in, or other dispositions of, the property subject to the
trust.
Brand Name or Equal Specification. A specification limited to one or more items
by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of
quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet City
requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products.
Brand Name Specification. A specification limited to one or more items by
manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers.
Business. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint
stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.
Change Order. Any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of
delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any
contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.
Contract Modification (bilateral change). A written order signed and issued by
the purchasing agent, directing the contractor to make changes which the
"changes" clause of the contract authorizes the purchasing agent to order
without the consent of the contractor.
Confidential Information. Any information which is available to an employee
only because of the employee's status as an employee of the City and is not a
matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
Construction. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or
demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine
operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures,
buildings, or real property.
Contract. All types of City agreements, regardless of what they may be called,
for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.
Contractor. Any person having a contract with the City or a using agency
thereof.
Cost Analysis. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs
actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and
costs to be reimbursed.
Cost Data. Factual information concerning the cost of labor, material,
overhead, and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which
have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract.
Cost-Reimbursement Contract. A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed
for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract
terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee or profit, if any.
Direct or Indirect Participation. Involvement through decision, approval,
disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request,
influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering
of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity.
Disadvantaged Business. A small business which is owned or controlled by a
majority of persons, not limited to members of minority groups, who have been
deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in
the economy because of social disadvantages.
Employee. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the City, whether
elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for
the City, or any department, agency, commission, council, board, or any other
entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the City; and any
noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the City.
Financial Interest.
   A.   Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from
which, or as a result of which, a person within the past year has received, or
is presently or in the future entitled to receive, more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per year, or its equivalent;
   B.   Ownership of 1% of any property or business; or
   C.   Holding a position in a business such as officer, director, trustee,
partner, employee, or the like, or holding any position of management.
Gratuity. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, or
anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration
of substantially equal or greater value is received.
Immediate Family. A spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters.
Invitation for Bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids.
Limited Source. Means of such a unique nature that the less than three sources
of the item or service have been identified after a diligent and objective
search rendering the process of obtaining three independent quotations
impossible. It also means, for purposes of repair or maintenance of properly
procured equipment, parts or services under restrictive agreements which render
the source of the item limited by the manufacturer or distributor of the
necessary repair part or service.
Person. Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization,
or group of individuals.
Price Analysis. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the separate
cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at
prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed.
Pricing Data. Factual information concerning prices for items substantially
similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offered or
proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices.
The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices.
Procurement. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring
of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all functions that
pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or construction, including
description of requirements, selection, and solicitation of sources,
preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.
Public Agency. A public entity subject to or created by the City.
Qualified Products List. An approved list of supplies, services, or
construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to
competitive solicitation, the City has determined will meet the applicable
specification requirements.
Request for Proposals. A document, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
Responsible Bidder or Offeror. A person who has the capability in all respects
to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity, perseverance,
experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit
which will assure good faith performance.
Responsive Bidder. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
Services. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. The term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
Small Business. A United States business which is independently owned and which
is not dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or subsidiary of a
business dominant in its field of operation.
Sole Source. Means of such a unique nature that the contractor selected is
clearly and justifiably the only practicable source to provide the service or
personal property. Determination that the contractor selected is justifiably
the sole source is based on either the uniqueness of the service or personal
property or sole availability at the location required.
Specification. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics or
of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a
description of a requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply,
service, or construction item for delivery.
Supplies. All property, including but not limited to equipment, materials,
printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent
interest in land.
Using Agency. Any department, commission, board, or public agency requiring
supplies, services, or construction procured pursuant to this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-4   Public Access To Information
Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in Neb.
R.R.S. §84-712 to §84-712.09, as amended, and shall be available to the public
as provided in such statutes. Any material marked as confidential, proprietary
and/or as a trade secret will only be withheld pursuant to these statutes if
the bidder includes an explanation of why this information should be withheld
at the time of submission of their bid and establishes that the release of said
information would serve no legitimate public purpose. Bidders are expressly
advised that confidentiality is not guaranteed and should not be presumed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9831, effective 08-25-2021)(Amended by Ordinance No.
10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-5   Purchasing Agent; Position
The City shall maintain a position to be known as the Purchasing Agent. If the
position is not occupied by an individual working in that capacity full time,
the Chief Financial Officer shall be the Purchasing Agent of the City and shall
be responsible to the Mayor for the efficient conduct of his/her office. The
Purchasing Agent may use one or more designees to perform their duties as may
be needed from time to time.
The Purchasing Agent shall develop and maintain standard procedures, manuals,
paperwork, and other resources as may be needed. These procedures shall have
the full force and effect of policy so long as they are compliant with all
applicable laws and regulations to include this Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9831, effective 08-25-2021)(Amended by Ordinance No.
10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-6   Purchasing Agent; Duties
The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee(s), shall have the responsibility to:
   A.   Purchase or contract for all supplies, equipment, and contractual
services needed by any using department or agency which derives its support
wholly or in part from the City;
   B.   Develop procedures, rules, regulations, internal management, and
operational regulations of the purchasing functions so entrusted to them;
   C.   To procure for the City the highest quality in supplies, equipment, and
contractual services at the least expense to the City;
   D.   To take actions to discourage anticompetitive practices amongst all
involved in the purchasing process;
   E.   To ensure an open and competitive purchasing process to the maximum
extent possible on all purchases and sales;
   F.   To explore the opportunities available to the city to purchase bulk or
pooled supplies so as to take full advantage of discounts which may be
available;
   G.   To develop and maintain such centralized inventory systems as may be
needed to effectively use purchases or procurements made in bulk or made to
benefit the City as a whole;
   H.   To procure for the City all tax exemptions to which it is entitled;
   I.   To authorize officials and employees to make small purchases as may be
efficient from time to time;
   J.   To assist departments in the development of requests for pre-
qualification, proposals, bids, or other procurements;
   K.   To assist in the review of submissions and procurements;
   L.   To negotiate contracts in consultation with the City Attorney;
   M.   Declare vendors who default on their quotations, bids, or proposals
irresponsible vendors and to disqualify them from receiving any business from
the City for a stated period of time;
   N.   Develop and impose procedures related to debarment or disqualification
of vendors or persons involved in procurement;
   O.   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, written specifications for standard
supplies;
   P.   Work in consultation with the City Engineer in the development of cost
estimates as maybe required by law;
   Q.   Remain educated and informed on developments in the field of
purchasing, prices, market conditions, new products, and to secure for the City
the benefits of such education and information;
   R.   Develop and maintain a list of pre-approved purchasing cooperatives and
ensure membership is obtained as may be deemed necessary; and
   S.   To perform any related duties as may be assigned by the Chief Financial
Officer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-7   Administrative Rules and Procedures
The Purchasing Agent shall develop any necessary administrative rules and
procedures as they may determine are necessary for efficient and legally
compliant purchasing procedures. The Agent shall keep any administrative rules
and procedures continuously current and shall make the same available at all
times to employees and officials charged with making purchases using City
funds.
All City employees and officials permitted to make purchases shall comply with
any administrative rules and procedures as may be developed by the Purchasing
Agent.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-8   Formal Procurement Procedure
When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or contractual services exceeds
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), no formal contract for purchase shall be
authorized until the contract, if any, has been reviewed by the City Attorney,
and without prior approval of the City Council. All supplies, equipment, and
contractual services in this category shall be purchased by formal written
contract or purchase order, from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder,
after due notice inviting bids or proposals.
Notice inviting bids or proposals shall be published once in at least one
official newspaper in the city and at least ten days preceding the last day set
for the receipt of bids or proposals. The bid notice shall include a general
description of the items to be purchased, and shall state where bid forms and
specifications may be secured, and the date, time and place for opening bids.
The proposal notices shall include a description of the services to be
purchased and the criteria for evaluating said proposals if cost is not the
sole determining factor. The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall also
endeavor to distribute bid or proposal documents to responsible prospective
suppliers of whom the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, may be aware.
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, bid or
proposals deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids or
proposals. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of surety
required by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. The successful bidder
shall forfeit his/her bid deposit upon failure on his/her part to enter a
contract within ten days after the award.
Bids or proposals shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope. Bids or proposals shall be opened in public
on the date and at the time and place stated in the public notices. A
tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection.
Proposals shall be evaluated in the manner prescribed in the solicitation but
no tabulation shall be required to be prepared or made available for public
inspection.
When possible, objective evaluation factors should be used in evaluating
solicitations by proposal. Proposals shall include a scoring sheet to be
evaluated by no less than three evaluators. At least one evaluator shall be the
Purchasing Agent. No evaluator shall participate who has been directly
solicited by any company offering a proposal, who has a conflict of interest,
or who has received ex-parte communication from any proposer about the subject
of the procurement within 60 days prior to the solicitation or at any time
during the solicitation.
The City Council shall have the authority to reject all bids or proposals,
parts of all bids or proposals, or all bids or proposals for any one or more
supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the
public interest will be served thereby.
The City Council shall have the authority to not accept the bid or proposal of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of city collected taxes,
licenses, or other monies due the City.
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, or
the proposal which best represents the lowest responsible and responsive
proposal likely to meet the criteria set forth in the solicitation. In
determining "lowest responsible bidder", in addition to price, the City Council
shall consider:
   A.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract
required;
   B.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
   C.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract within the time specified;
   D.   The quality of performance of previous contracts;
   E.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract;
   F.   The life-cost of the personal property in relation to the purchase
price and specific use of the item;
   G.   The performance of the personal property, taking into consideration any
commonly accepted tests and standards of product usability and user
requirements;
   H.   Energy efficiency ratio as stated by the bidder for alternative choices
of appliances or equipment;
   I.   The information furnished by each bidder when deemed applicable by the
Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, concerning life-cycle costs between
alternatives for all classes of equipment, evidence of expected life, repair
and maintenance costs, and energy consumption on a per-year basis; and
   J.   Such other information as may be secured having a bearing on the
decision to award the contract.
   K.   A "responsive bidder" shall be defined as a person or company who has
submitted a bid that conforms in all material respects to the "invitation for
bids".
When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement
of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the
Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, and filed with other papers relating to
the transaction.
No contract in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for enlargements
or general improvements, such as (by way of illustration, not limitation)
water/sewer main extensions, street improvements, park improvements, or airport
improvements, shall be awarded by the City Council until the plans/
specifications and estimate of the cost are approved by the City Council.
Except in the case of tie bids, there shall be neither formal nor tacit local
vendor's preference policies. The City shall neither impose nor condone any
bidding or procurement policies that result in exclusionary or anti-competitive
bidding or violate state or federal antitrust laws, or which violate the City’s
conflict of interest policy. If all bids received are for the same total amount
or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded
to a local bidder. Where there is no local bidder or when two or more local
bidders are equal, the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall award the
contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.
The City, whenever applicable, may, by the use of purchasing under a State of
Nebraska contract, purchase supplies, equipment or services without the
necessity of using the formal bid requirements as set forth in this section.
The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing of supplies, equipment
or services when the best interests of the City would be served thereby. The
Purchasing Agent shall be empowered to authorize purchasing from these
cooperative partnerships in the same manner as they may make purchases under a
State of Nebraska contract.
Decision of the Purchasing Agent. All claims by a contractor against the City
relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to
the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor may request a conference
with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims include, without limitation,
disputes arising under a contract, and those based upon breach of contract,
mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or
rescission.
Notice to the Contractor of the Purchasing Agent's Decision. The decision of
the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be
immediately mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested or otherwise
furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the
decision reached.
Finality of Purchasing Agent's Decision. The purchasing agent's decision shall
be final and conclusive unless the contractor files a timely claim under Neb.
R.R.S. 16-726.
Failure to Render Timely Decision. If the purchasing agent does not issue a
written decision regarding any contract controversy within ten days after
written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be
agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed as if an
adverse decision had been received.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to settle any protest regarding
the solicitation or award of a City contract, or any claim arising out of the
performance of a City Contract, prior to an appeal to the City Council or the
commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
In the event all bids exceed the estimated amount by 5%, the Purchasing Agent
and City Attorney may attempt to negotiate a contract with the lowest
responsible bidder for an amount which does not exceed the estimated amount by
5%. In the event the lowest responsible bidder declines to reduce their bid to
amount not to exceed 5% over the estimated cost, the bid shall be canceled, re-
estimated, new solicitations must be obtained.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-9   (Reserved)
27-10   Designated Professional Services
For the purpose of procuring professional services, to the extent possible the
processes for obtaining formal contract shall be followed except that
professional services of an attorney, physicians, dentists, accountants, or
veterinarians may be obtained without formal procurement; except that retention
of lawyers may only be done by the City Attorney.
The Purchasing Agent may utilize a system of pre-qualification when deemed
necessary prior to soliciting requests for proposals for professional services.
This request for qualifications shall detail the anticipated professional
service needs and the minimum acceptable qualifications. If at least three
respondents meet these pre-qualification criteria, a solicitation may be
limited only to those pre-qualified respondents.
Professional services must be solicited by a request for proposals published in
the same manner as all formal contracts.
The Purchasing Agent, in conjunction with the head of a using department
requesting such professional services, shall develop all solicitation materials
and shall evaluate all submitted proposals. Discussions held between the
Purchasing Agent and the using Department shall be conducted in a way to avoid
disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by other
offerors.
The Purchasing Agent may develop procedures for the use of a team to evaluate
proposals as they see fit
Professional services worth less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be
considered small purchases if they can be made with purchase order and without
contract.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-11   Informal Purchasing; Quotations; Small Purchases
When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or contractual services is less
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), but more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) the purchase shall be made in the open market, without
advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed for the award of
formal contracts in this article and shall be referred to as quotation based
purchase. All such purchases shall be awarded by the Purchasing Agent, or his/
her designee.
All quotation based purchases greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
and not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be acquired after
the solicitation of three quotations. Purchases made under this authority must
be made from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, in accordance with
the same criteria established for formal contracts.
Before authorizing purchasing by quotation be done by anyone other than the
Purchasing Agent or designee, the Purchasing Agent shall independently verify
the quotations represent a competitive solicitation in the open market. If the
Purchasing Agent becomes aware that any designee or authorized employee is
engaged in anticompetitive solicitation of quotations, the Purchasing Agent
shall deny the authorized individual the authority to purchase by quotation for
a period of no less than 24 months.
If the purchase by quotation can be done via use of a purchasing card or
purchase order, it may be delegated by the Purchasing Agent to individuals or
departments.
Purchases less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made without
formal contract or quotation so long as they are made in good faith on the open
market. These purchases shall be known as small purchases.
If the small purchase can be done via use of a purchasing card or purchase
order, it may be delegated by the purchasing agent to individuals or
departments.
General. The Purchasing Agent shall adopt operational procedures for making
small purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, services or labor in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less. Such operational
procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for
the supply, service, or construction being purchased. Purchases shall not be
artificially divided so as to constitute a purchase by quotation or general
purchase under this section.
For contracts by the municipal electric utility for the enlargement or
improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of equipment used for
such enlargement or improvement, the amount for three quotes shall be between
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and one hundred and twenty thousand dollars
($120,000.00). Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest
acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and
the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a
public record. Purchase requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to
constitute a purchase by quotation or general purchase under this section.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-12   Sole Source Procurement; Limited Source Procurement
Sole source means of such a unique nature that the contractor selected is
clearly and justifiably the only practicable source to provide the service or
personal property. Determination that the contractor selected is justifiably
the sole source is based on either the uniqueness of the service or personal
property or sole availability at the location required.
Items or services necessary to preserve, repair, maintain, extend, or expand,
the useful life and value of any asset that was purchased through an open and
competitive process may be considered for sole or limited source procurement if
due diligence shows that the proposed contractor is the sole and exclusive
provider of the service or items needed to preserve or extend the useful life
and value of any asset so long as the combined value of the necessary item(s)
or service(s) do not exceed the original purchase price of the asset or value
of the original contract or 50% of its remaining useful life prior to the
additional procurement as determined by the Purchasing Agent. This cannot be
used to expand agreements which include architect, engineering, or construction
services; or be used in violation of any other applicable state or federal law.
Sole source designation shall only be valid for ten years and must be
designated so by City Council upon recommendation of the Purchasing Agent.
After ten years, the Purchasing Agent shall resolicit bids for said item(s).
Limited source designation shall only be valid for three years and must be
designated so by City Council upon recommendation of the Purchasing Agent and
any resulting purchase must be authorized by Council. After three years, the
Purchasing Agent shall resolicit bids for said item(s).
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-13   Emergency Procurements
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the city council may as
authorized by State Statutes make or authorize the Purchasing Agent or others
to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction when
there exists a threat from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or
unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of, or serious injury or damage to life, health, welfare, safety,
endangering property, or cause disruption of public utility services; provided,
that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is
practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for
the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be
included in the contract file. A copy of the contract and department
justification of the emergency shall be provided to the Purchasing Agent within
three (3) business days after the contract approval. A copy of the
justification shall be kept with the contract in the contract file.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9831, effective 08-25-2021)
27-14   Cancellation Of Requests
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be
canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part
as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the
best interests of the City at the sole discretion of the Purchasing Agent or,
when applicable, the City Attorney. The reasons therefor shall be made part of
the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state that the
solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in
whole or in part when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the
City. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The
notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation
and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on
any resolicitation or any future procurements of a similar nature. Reasons for
rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-15   (Reserved)
27-16   (Reserved)
27-17   (Reserved)
27-18   Bid And Performance Bonds; Bid Security
Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed proposals when the
price is estimated by the Purchasing Agent or City Engineer to exceed one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or for all contracts for public works
improvements in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as set forth
below, and for any other contracts as deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent
or using department.
Bid, payment, and performance bonds or other security may be requested for
supply, service or construction contracts as the Purchasing Agent or head of a
using department deems advisable to protect the City's interests, or required
by law. The head of a using department may object to the waiver or exclusion of
security requirements and, upon said objection, Council may require the
Purchasing Agent include any requested security in the solicitation. Any such
bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid, payment, or
performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a
bidder or offeror's responsibility.
Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Nebraska, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise
supplied in a form satisfactory to the City. Nothing herein shall prevent the
requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) when the circumstances warrant.
Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least 5% of the amount of the
bid.
When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance by a bidder
requires that the bid be rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails to
comply only in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements.
If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before award as provided in City
Code, no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid security.
When a contract is awarded in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00)
for the erecting, furnishing, or repairing of any public building, bridge,
roadway, or other public structure or improvement, the following bonds or
security shall be delivered to the City and shall become binding on the parties
upon the execution of the contract:
   A.   A performance bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured
in a manner satisfactory to the City, in an amount equal to 100% of the price
specified in the contract; and/or;
   B.   A payment bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured in a
manner satisfactory to the City, for the protection of all persons supplying
labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance
of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal
to 100% of the price specified in the contract.
After ten days written notice to the Mayor and City Council, the purchasing
agent is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to
50% of the contract price for each bond when a written determination is made
that it is in the best interests of the City to do so.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City
to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or
in circumstances other than specified in this section.
Unless otherwise authorized by law, any person who has furnished labor or
material to the contractor or subcontractors for the work provided in the
contract, for which a payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has
not been paid in full within 90 days from the date on which that person
performed the last of the labor or supplied the material, shall have the right
to sue on the payment bond for any amount unpaid at the time the suit is
instituted and to prosecute the action for the amount due that person. However,
any person having a contract with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no
express or implied contract with the contractor furnishing the payment bond,
shall have a right of action upon the payment bond upon giving written notice
to the contractor within 90 days from the date on which that person performed
the last of the labor or supplied the material. That person shall state in the
notice the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was
supplied or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope
addressed to the contractor at any place the contractor maintains an office or
conducts business.
Unless otherwise authorized by law, every suit instituted upon a payment bond
shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction for the county or
district in which the construction contract was to be performed. Any person may
request and obtain from the City a certified copy of a bond upon payment of the
cost of reproduction of the bond and postage, if any. A certified copy of a
bond shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, execution, and delivery of
the original.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-19   Types Of Contracts
General Authority. The Purchasing Agent shall maintain a list of approved types
of contracts within available purchasing materials. All contracts, regardless
of kind, must promote the best interests of the City. No contract type
prohibited by law may be used. Prior to solicitation the Purchasing Agent shall
review the requested procurement to ensure that the proposed type of contract
is permissible for the proposed procurement.
Prohibited Contracts.
   A.   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contracts are prohibited.
   B.   Indefinite term contracts are prohibited.
Restricted Contracts.
   A.   Design-build contracts may be used only when expressly authorized by
law. When permitted by law, the Purchasing Agent shall undergo a cost or price
analysis prior to solicitation and no design-build contract may be awarded
which exceeds the estimated price.
   B.   Cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is
made in writing, that such contract is likely to be less costly to the City
than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service,
or construction item required except under such a contract.
   C.   Contracts with foreign companies may only be used with the approval of
the Purchasing Agent and City Attorney and may not be used when prohibited by
law.
   D.   Contracts which involve a conflict-of-interest, or which are awarded
from a solicitation in which one or more responders had a conflict of interest,
may only be used if the solicitation was conducted in such a manner as to
sufficiently avoid, disclose, and protect against, said conflict. No contract
over two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) involving an actual or potential conflict
of interest may be awarded unless it was publicly solicited and the
solicitation occurred in conformity with all applicable conflict of interest
policies, laws, rules, and regulations.
   E.   Multi-term contracts may be used only when a determination has been
made that:
      1.   The specific period of time is deemed to be in the best interests of
the City;
      2.   The term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if
any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first
fiscal period at the time of contracting;
      3.   Sufficient contract terms have been included to ensure that payment
and performance obligations, for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to
the availability and appropriation of funds for said purchase;
      4.   That estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are
reasonably firm and continuing; and
      5.   That such a contract will serve the best interests of the City by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economics in City
procurement.
      6.   Multi-term contracts must include clarity regarding cancellation due
to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. Provisions should
include clear notice that when funds are not appropriated or otherwise made
available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period,
the contract shall be canceled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the
reasonable value of any non-recurring costs incurred but not amortized in the
price of the supplies or services delivered under the contract. The cost of
cancellation may be paid from any appropriations available for such purposes.
   F.   Multiple Source Contracts. Are an award of an indefinite quantity
contract for one ormore similar supplies or services to more than one bidder or
offeror. The obligation to order the City's actual requirements is limited by
the provision of Uniform Commercial Code Section 2-306(1) and other applicable
laws, rules, and regulations. A multiple source award may be made when award to
two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is necessary for adequate
delivery, service, or product compatibility. Any multiple source award shall be
made in accordance with all other provisions of City Code as applicable.
Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the
City's needs without sacrifice of economy or service. Awards shall not be made
for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier
selection to allow for user preference unrelated to utility or economy, or
avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the
least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid requirements. If a
multiple source award is anticipated prior to issuing a solicitation, the
reservation of a right to issue such award and the criteria shall be included
in the solicitation and the purchasing agent shall note the reason for their
approval of this type of contract in the contract file. When awarded, multiple
source contracts shall include the following provisions:
      1.   All known or anticipated non-City users of the contract shall be
named in the solicitation.
      2.   A notation that additional bids may be separately taken if a
particular quantity requirement arises which exceeds the requirements set forth
in the solicitation or an amount specified in the contract.
      3.   A notation that the City reserves the right to take bids separately
if the purchasing agent approves a finding that the supply or service available
under the contract will not meet a nonrecurring special need of the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-20   Contract Clauses
Contract Clauses. All City contracts for supplies, services, and construction
shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of
the parties to the contract. The purchasing agent may issue clauses appropriate
for supply, service, or construction contracts, addressing among others the
following subjects:
   A.   The unilateral right of the City to order in writing changes in the
work within the scope of the contract;
   B.   The unilateral right of the City to order in writing temporary stopping
of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of the
contract;
   C.   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in contract
and actual quantities;
   D.   Defective pricing;
   E.   Liquidated damages;
   F.   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;
   G.   Termination of the contract for default;
   H.   Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of
the City;
   I.   Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the City; and
   J.   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or
ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not
be included in a contract:
      1.   When the contract is negotiated;
      2.   When the contractor provides the site or design; or
      3.   When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of
differing site conditions.
   K.   Clear start and end dates for the term of the contract and any
renewals. Indefinite contracts shall not be permitted.
   L.   Options for discretionary renewals.
   M.   A specific prohibition on automatic renewals or default renewals.
   N.   Price adjustment restrictions.
Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses required by
Subsection 1. of this section shall be computed in one or more of the following
ways:
   A.   By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the
pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
   B.   By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
   C.   By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such
clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon; or
   D.   In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree.
In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral determination by
the City of the costs attributable to the events or situations under such
clauses with adjustment of profit or as computed by the City or as accounted
for with reference to cost principles and subject to the provisions of City
Code.
A contractor shall be required to submit cost and/or pricing data if any
adjustment in contract price is subject to the provisions of City Code.
Standard Clauses and Their Modification. The purchasing agent may establish
standard contract clauses for use in City contracts subject to approval by the
City Attorney. Any standard clauses may be varied, provided, that any
variations are supported by a written determination that states the
circumstances justifying such variations, and provided, that notice of any such
material variation be stated in the invitation for bids or request for
proposals. In the event standard clauses are used they shall be included in any
solicitation and shall be included in the award unless the Purchasing Agent and
City Attorney authorize an award subject to an exception to the standard clause
(s) at question. Contracts for public works shall include a provision for the
maintenance of fair labor standards as required in Neb. R.R.S. 73-102, other
applicable state or federal law, and/or any requirement set forth by any non-
City funder or regulator.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-21   (Reserved)
27-22   Accounting System
Except with respect to firm fixed-price contracts, no contract type shall be
used unless it has been determined in writing by the purchasing agent that:
   A.   The proposed contractor's accounting system will permit timely
development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specific
contract type contemplated; and
   B.   The proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to allocate
costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles.
The Purchasing Agent is authorized to include in any solicitations pre-approved
accounting systems as they may deem appropriate.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-23   Right To Inspect Plant
The City may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of
business, or worksite of a contractor or subcontractor at any tier which is
pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the
City.
27-24   Right To Audit Records
Audit of Cost or Pricing Data. The City may at reasonable times and places,
audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or pricing
data pursuant to §
27-16 (Cost or Pricing Data) to the extent that such books, documents, papers,
and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives
a contract, change order, or contract modification for which cost or pricing
data is required, shall maintain such books, documents, papers, and records
that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date
of final payment under the contract.
Contract Audit. The City shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a
contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated contract or
subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such
books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance of such
contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be maintained by the
contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the
prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the
date of final payment under the subcontract.
27-25   Anticompetitive Practices
When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected
among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be
transmitted to the State Attorney General and the Hall County Attorney.
All solicitations shall include clear notice that any anticompetitive practices
may result in the disqualification of bids or proposals at the sole discretion
of the Purchasing Agent. Solicitations shall include reference to the City of
Grand Island’s conflict of interest policy and shall require compliance with
all applicable federal, state, or local laws or regulations.
The Purchasing Agent is hereby authorized to develop any detailed provisions or
policies as may be necessary to ensure a conflict-free procurement process. Any
employee engaging in anticompetitive practices may be subject to discipline up
to and including termination.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-26   City Procurement Records
Contract File. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the
solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the
City in a contract file by the purchasing agent.
Retention of Procurement Records. All procurement records shall be retained and
disposed of by the City in accordance with records retention guidelines and
schedules consistent with applicable state and federal law.
27-27   Specifications; Competition
All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the
purpose intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City's needs, and
shall not be unduly restrictive. No specifications may be used without the
approval of the Purchasing Agent who shall ensure that specifications are not
anticompetitive and do not result in preferential treatment of any known or
potential bidder or proposal. The policy enunciated in this section applies to
all specifications including but not limited to, those prepared for the City by
architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen. The Purchasing Agent shall
ensure that all proposals are evaluated in a manner that promotes overall
economy and competition in satisfying the City’s needs.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-28   Specifications; Brand Name Or Equal
Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent
determines in writing that any of the following circumstances exist:
   A.   No other design or performance specification or qualified products list
is available;
   B.   Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase
description, not including a brand name specification;
   C.   The nature of the product or the nature of the City's requirements
makes use of a brand nameor equal specification suitable for the procurement;
or
   D.   Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the City's best
interests.
   E.   The nature of the product and the brand name or equivalent
specification would otherwise meetall requirements of a limited source
procurement as set forth in City Code.
Designation of Several Brand Names. Brand name or equal specifications shall
seek todesignate three, or as many different brands as are practicable, shall
include an "or equal" referenceand shall further state that substantially
equivalent products to those designated will be consideredfor award. Efforts
will be made to use product specifications or references to existing inventory
toaid potential bidders in determining what the City will accept as
“equivalent” so as to not limit or restrict competition.
The Purchasing Agent will seek to identify sources from which these items, or
their equivalents may be obtained and will verify that the proposed sources
represent the most competitive price practicably available prior to award. If
only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made as a
sole or limited source procurement as set forth in Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-29   (Reserved)
27-30   (Reserved)
27-31   (Reserved)
27-32   (Reserved)
27-33   (Reserved)
27-34   Fiscal Responsibility
Every contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment in an
amount less than five percent (5%) of the original contract amount may be
approved by the department director and Purchasing Agent. Every contract
modification, change order, or contract price adjustment in an amount of five
percent (5%) or more than the original contract amount is subject to prior
written certification by the head of the department responsible for the project
or the contract, or other official responsible for monitoring and reporting
upon the status of the costs of the total project budget or contract budget, as
to the effect of the contract modification, change order, or adjustment in
contract price on the total project budget or the total contract budget. In the
event that the certification discloses a resulting increase in the total
project budget and/or the total contract budget, the purchasing agent shall not
execute or make such contract modification, change order, or adjustment in
contract price unless sufficient funds have been appropriated therefor, or the
scope of the project or contract is adjusted so as to permit the degree of
completion that is feasible within the total project budget and/or total
contract budget as it existed prior to the contract modification, change order,
or adjustment in contract price under consideration; provided, however, that
with respect to the validity, as to the contractor, of any executed contract
modification, change order, or adjustment in contract price which the
contractor has reasonably relied upon, it shall be presumed that there has been
compliance with the provisions of this section.
Notwithstanding the above, every contract modification, change order, or
contract price adjustment in excess of more than 5% of the contract price shall
require prior approval of the City Council unless the delay necessitated by
such prior approval would: endanger public health, welfare, or safety; endanger
property; cause or prolong disruption of public utility service, or result in
increased costs to the City. If prior council approval is not obtained, such
approval shall be requested within thirty (30) days of approval by the
department director.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9831, effective 08-25-2021)
27-35   (Reserved)
27-36   (Reserved)
27-37   (Reserved)
27-38   (Reserved)
27-39   Bid Protests
Right to Protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who
is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may
protest to the city council. Protestors are urged to seek resolution of their
complaints initially with the purchasing agent. A protest with respect to an
invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing
prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals, unless the
aggrieved person did not know or reasonably would not have known of the facts
giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing date for
proposals. The protest shall be submitted within three calendar days after such
aggrieved person knows or reasonably would have known of the facts giving rise
thereto.
Stay of Procurements During Protests. In the event of a timely protest under
this section, the purchasing agent shall not proceed further with the
solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative and judicial
remedies have been exhausted or until the city council makes a determination on
the record that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect
substantial interests of the City.
Entitlement to Costs. In addition to any other relief, when a protest is
sustained and the protesting bidder or offeror should have been awarded the
contract under the solicitation but is not, then the protesting bidder or
offeror shall be entitled to the reasonable costs incurred in connection with
the solicitation, including bid preparation costs other than attorney's fees.
27-40   Contract Claims
Decision of the Purchasing Agent. All claims by a contractor against the City
relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to
the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor may request a conference
with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims include, without limitation,
disputes arising under a contract, and those based upon breach of contract,
mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or
rescission.
Notice to the Contractor of the Purchasing Agent's Decision. The decision of
the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be
immediately mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested or otherwise
furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the
decision reached.
Finality of Purchasing Agent's Decision. The purchasing agent's decision shall
be final and conclusive unless the contractor files a timely claim under Neb.
R.R.S. 16-726.
Failure to Render Timely Decision. If the purchasing agent does not issue a
written decision regarding any contract controversy within 10 days after
written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be
agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed as if an
adverse decision had been received.
27-41   Authority To Settle Protests Or Claims
The purchasing agent is authorized to settle any protest regarding the
solicitation or award of a City contract, or any claim arising out of the
performance of a City contract, prior to an appeal to the city council or the
commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
27-42   Remedies For Violations
Prior to Bid Opening or Closing Date for Receipt of Proposals. If prior to the
bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent
determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or municipal
law, then the solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with
applicable law.
Prior to Award. If after bid opening or the closing date for receipt of
proposals, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation or a proposed
award of a contract is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then
the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled.
After Award. If, after an award, the purchasing agent determines that a
solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law, then:
   A.   If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad
faith:
      1.   The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined
that doing so is in the best interests of the City; or
      2.   The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract
shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the
contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or
   B.   If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad
faith the contract may be declared null and void or voidable, if such action is
in the best interests of the City.
Article 27-II
Ethics In Public Contracting
27-43   Criminal Penalties
27-44   Employee Conflict Of Interest
27-45   Gratuities And Kickbacks
27-46   Contingent Fees
27-47   Contemporaneous Employment
27-48   Waivers; Conflicts Of Interest
27-49   Confidential Information
27-50   Sanctions
27-51   Recovery Of Value Upon Breach
27-43   Criminal Penalties
To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in
this article constitute violations of Nebraska or federal law, they shall be
punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the
civil sanctions set forth in this part.
27-44   Employee Conflict Of Interest
It shall be unethical for any City employee to participate directly or
indirectly in a procurement contract when the City employee knows that:
   A.   The City employee or any member of the City employee's immediate family
has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract; or
   B.   Any other person, business, or organization with whom the City employee
or any member of a City employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an
arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement
contract.
A City employee or any member of a City employee's immediate family who holds a
financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a
conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that financial
interest.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Mayor, members of the
City Council, and members of appointed boards and commissions of the City,
provided the participating person:
   A.   Makes a declaration on the record of the governing body, board or
commission responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and
extent of his or her interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
   B.   Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if
the number of members of the governing body, board or commission declaring an
interest in the contract would prevent the body with all members present from
securing a quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and
   C.   Does not act for the governing body, board or commission which is party
to the contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he
or she has an interest.
If such participating person's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
City, the participating person may vote on all issues of the contract which are
generally applicable to (1) all employees or (2) all employees within a
classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for
special action.
Any contract entered into with such participating person shall be subject to
applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable to
the City.
The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of the City by a financial institution shall
not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
27-45   Gratuities And Kickbacks
Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to
give any City employee or former City employee, or for any City employee or
former City employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from
another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any
decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of
a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any
specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation,
auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application,
request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular
matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or
to any solicitation or proposal therefor.
Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of
employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to
the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated
therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order.
Contract Clause. The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in
this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and
solicitation therefor.
27-46   Contingent Fees
It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to
solicit or secure a City contract upon an agreement or understanding for a
commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of
bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for
the purpose of securing business.
27-47   Contemporaneous Employment
It shall be unethical for any City employee who is participating directly or
indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such a City
employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by
whom the employee is employed.
27-48   Waivers; Conflicts Of Interest
The city council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of interest
provision (§
27-44; Employee Conflict of Interest) or the contemporaneous employment
provision (§
27-47; Contemporaneous Employment) upon making a written determination that:
   A.   The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the City
employee has been publicly disclosed;
   B.   The City employee will be able to perform its procurement functions
without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and
   C.   The award will be in the best interests of the City.
27-49   Confidential Information
It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to use
confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the
actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person.
27-50   Sanctions
Employees. The mayor may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a
City employee for violations of the ethical standards in this article:
   A.   Oral or written warnings or reprimands;
   B.   Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time; or
   C.   Termination of employment.
Nonemployees. The city council may impose any one or more of the following
sanctions on a nonemployee for violations of the ethical standards:
   A.   Written warnings or reprimands;
   B.   Termination of contracts; or
   C.   Debarment or suspension as provided in §
27-36 (Authority to Debar).
27-51   Recovery Of Value Upon Breach
General Provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of
the ethical standards of this chapter by a City employee or a nonemployee may
be recovered from both City employee and nonemployee.
Recovery of Kickbacks by the City. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a
kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection
with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively
presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract
or order and ultimately borne by the City and will be recoverable hereunder
from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the
subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall
not preclude recovery from other offending parties.
Article 27-III
Contracts Funded With Federal Funds
27-52   Exceptions for State or Federally Funded Contracts
27-53   (Reserved)
27-54   (Reserved)
27-55   (Reserved)
27-56   (Reserved)
27-57   (Reserved)
27-58   (Reserved)
27-59   (Reserved)
27-52   Exceptions for State or Federally Funded Contracts
If state or federally funded programs mandate a different contracting
procedures or regulations, those procedures and regulations shall control.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-53   (Reserved)
27-54   (Reserved)
27-55   (Reserved)
27-56   (Reserved)
27-57   (Reserved)
27-58   (Reserved)
27-59   (Reserved)
Article 27-IV
Miscellaneous Expenditure Act
27-60   Miscellaneous Expenditures
27-61   (Reserved)
27-62   (Reserved)
27-60   Miscellaneous Expenditures
The expenditure of public funds is hereby subject, pursuant to the State of
Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, to the following:
   A.   Authorized expenses may include:
      1.   Registration costs, tuition costs, fees, or charges; and
      2.   Travel costs in conformity with the City’s travel policies and
procedures.
      3.   Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for meals of
City Council members provided while attending a public meeting of the City
Council unless such meeting is a joint meeting with one or more other governing
bodies.
   B.   Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for any expenses
incurred by a spouse of an elected or appointed official, employee, or
volunteer unless the spouse is also an elected or appointed official, employee,
or volunteer of the City.
The expenditure of public funds is hereby authorized, pursuant to the State of
Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, for the following
purposes:
   A.   Nonalcoholic beverages provided to individuals attending public
meetings of the City Council.
   B.   Nonalcoholic beverages and meals:
      1.   Provided for any individuals while performing or immediately after
performing relief, assistance, or support activities in emergency situations,
including, but not limited to, tornadoes, severe storm, fire or accident;
      2.   Provided for any volunteers during or immediately following their
participation inany activity approved by the City Council, including, but not
limited to, mowing parks, picking up litter, removing graffiti, or snow
removal;
      3.   Provided at one recognition meal each year held for elected and
appointed officials, employees. The maximum cost per person for such meal shall
not exceed the General Services Administration (GSA) dinner per diem for the
City of Grand Island. The annual recognition dinner may be held separately for
employees of each department or separately for volunteers, or any of them in
combination; and
      4.   Provided for meetings in excess of four hours such as conferences,
trainings, orother cooperative gatherings.
   C.   Plaques, certificates of achievement, or items of value awarded to
elected or appointed officials, employees, or volunteers, including persons
serving on local government boards or commissions, subject to the following
dollar limit on value:
Volunteer Service                                             Up to $50.00
Board, Commission                                             Up to $100.00
Award Ceremony/Farewell Tribute for employees who are in good Up to $150.00
standing and have completed 10 years of service
Item of Value for Employee Recognition Program
5 years of employment milestone                               Up to $75.00
10 years of employment milestone                              Up to $100.00
15 years of employment milestone                              Up to $125.00
20 years of employment milestone                              Up to $150.00
25 years of employment milestone                              Up to $175.00
30 years of employment milestone                              Up to $200.00
35 or more years of employment milestone                      Up to $225.00
 
   D.   Travel for business shall be in accordance with the City’s Procurement
and Procedures Manual and Travel Policy as may be developed and amended from
time to time by the Purchasing Agent.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,014, effective 06-7-2025)
27-61   (Reserved)
27-62   (Reserved)
Article 27-V
27-63   (Reserved)
27-63   (Reserved)
Article 27-VI   Construction Alternatives
27-64   Purpose
27-65   Definitions
27-66   Contracts authorized; City Council; resolution required
27-67   Policies; requirements
27-68   Letters of interest; requirements
27-69   Design-build contract; request for proposals; requirements
27-70   Design-build contract; evaluation of proposals; requirements;
negotiations
27-71   Construction management at risk contract; request for proposals;
requirements
27-72   Construction management at risk contract; evaluation of proposals;
requirements; negotiations
27-73   Contract proposals; evaluation; selection committee; duties
27-74   Contracts; refinements; changes authorized
27-75   Act; bonding or insurance requirements
27-76   Road, street, or highway construction projects excluded; water,
wastewater, utility, or sewer construction projects permitted
27-64   Purpose
The purpose of this article is to authorize the City of Grand Island to enter
into a design-build contract which is subject to qualification-based selection
or a construction management at risk contract for a City project if the City
adheres to the procedures set forth in the Nebraska Political Subdivisions
Construction Alternatives Act and this article.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-65   Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Construction Management at Risk Contract. A contract by which a construction
manager (a) assumes the legal responsibility to deliver a construction project
within a contracted price to the City, (b) acts as a construction consultant to
the City during the design development phase of the project when the City's
architect or engineer designs the project, and (c) is the builder during the
construction phase of the project.
Construction Manager. The legal entity which proposes to enter into a
construction management at risk contract pursuant to this article.
Design-build Contract. A contract which is subject to qualification-based
selection between the City and a design-builder to furnish (a) architectural,
engineering, and related design services for a project pursuant to this article
and (b) labor, materials, supplies, equipment, and construction services for a
project pursuant to this article.
Design-builder. The legal entity which proposes to enter into a design-build
contract which is subject to qualification-based selection pursuant to this
article.
Letter of Interest. A statement indicating interest to enter into a design-
build contract or a construction management at risk contract for a project
pursuant to this article.
Performance-criteria Developer. Any person licensed or any organization issued
a certificate of authorization to practice architecture or engineering pursuant
to the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act of the State of Nebraska who is
selected by the City to assist the City in the development of project
performance criteria, requests for proposals, evaluation of proposals,
evaluation of the construction under a design-build contract to determine
adherence to the performance criteria, and any additional services requested by
the City to represent its interest in relation to a project.
Project Performance Criteria. The performance requirements of the project
suitable to allow the design-builder to make a proposal. Performance
requirements include the following, if required by the project: capacity,
durability, standards, ingress and egress requirements, description of the
site, surveys, soil and environmental information concerning the site, interior
space requirements, material quality standards, design and construction
schedules, site development requirements, provisions for utilities, storm water
retention and disposal, parking requirements, applicable governmental code
requirements, and other criteria for the intended use of the project.
Qualification-based Selection Process. A process of selecting a design-builder
based first on the qualifications of the design-builder and then on the design-
builder's proposed approach to the design and construction of the project.
Request for Letters of Interest. The documentation or publication by which the
City solicits letters of interest.
Request for Proposals. The documentation by which the City solicits proposals.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-66   Contracts authorized; City Council; resolution required
   A.   Notwithstanding the procedures for public lettings in Neb. R.R.S. §§73-
101 to 73-106 or any other statute or City Code relating to the letting of bids
by the City, the City may solicit and execute a design-build contract or a
construction management at risk contract.
   B.   The City Council for the City shall adopt a resolution selecting the
design-build contract or construction management at risk contract delivery
system provided under this article prior to proceeding with the provisions of
this article. The resolution shall require the affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds of the City Council of the City. For a project authorized under
subsection (B) of §
27-76, the resolution shall include a statement that the City has made a
determination that the design-build contract or construction management at risk
contract delivery system is in the public interest based, at a minimum, on one
of the following criteria:
      1.   Savings in cost or time; or
      2.   Requirement of specialized or complex construction methods suitable
for the design-build contact or construction management at risk contract
delivery system.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-67   Policies; requirements
All design-build contracts or construction management at risk contracts shall
include the following:
   A.   Procedures for selecting and hiring on its behalf a performance-
criteria developer when soliciting and executing a design-build contract. The
procedures shall be consistent with the Nebraska Consultants' Competitive
Negotiation Act and shall provide that the performance-criteria developer:
      1.   Is ineligible to be included as a provider of any services in a
proposal for the project on which it has acted as a performance-criteria
developer; and
      2.   Is not employed by or does not have a financial or other interest in
a design-builder or construction manager who will submit a proposal;
   B.   Procedures for the preparation and content of requests for proposals;
   C.   Procedures and standards to be used to prequalify design-builders and
construction managers. The procedures and standards shall provide that the City
will evaluate prospective design builders and construction managers based on
the information submitted to the City in response to a request for letters of
interest and will select design-builders or construction managers who are
prequalified and consequently eligible to respond to the request for proposals;
   D.   Procedures for preparing and submitting proposals;
   E.   Procedures for evaluating proposals in accordance with §§
27-70,
27-72 and
27-73 
   F.   Procedures for negotiations between the City and the design-builders or
construction managers submitting proposals prior to the acceptance of a
proposal if any such negotiations are contemplated;
   G.   Procedures for filing and acting on formal protest relating to the
solicitation or execution of design-build contracts or construction management
at risk contracts; and
   H.   Procedures for the evaluation of construction under a design-build
contract by the performance-criteria developer to determine adherence to the
performance criteria.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-68   Letters of interest; requirements
   A.   The City shall prepare a request for letters of interest for design-
build proposals and shall prequalify design-builders in accordance with this
section. The request for letters of interest shall describe the project in
sufficient detail to permit a design-builder to submit a letter of interest.
   B.   The request for letters of interest shall be (a) published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City at least thirty (30) days
prior to the deadline for receiving letters of interest and (b) sent by first-
class mail to any design-builder upon request.
   C.   Letters of interest shall be reviewed by the City in consultation with
the performance-criteria developer. The City shall select prospective design-
builders in accordance with the procedures and standards adopted by the City in
§
27-67. The City shall select at least three (3) prospective design-builders,
except that if only two (2) design-builders have submitted letters of interest,
the City shall select at least two (2) prospective design-builders. The
selected design-builders shall then be considered prequalified and eligible to
receive requests for proposals. If only one letter of interest is received, the
City shall re-issue the request for letters of interest.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-69   Design-build contract; request for proposals; requirements
The City shall prepare a request for proposals for each design-build contract
in accordance with this section. Notice of the request for proposals shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least thirty
(30) days prior to the deadline for receiving and opening proposals. The
request for proposals shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
   A.   The identity of the City for which the project will be built and
execute the design-build contract;
   B.   Policies adopted by the City in accordance with §
27-67;
   C.   The proposed terms and conditions of the design-build contract,
including any terms and conditions which are subject to further negotiation.
The proposed general terms and conditions shall be consistent with nationally
recognized model general terms and conditions which are standard in the design
and construction industry in Nebraska. The proposed terms and conditions may
set forth an initial determination of the manner by which the design-builder
selects any subcontractor and may require that any work subcontracted be
awarded by competitive bidding;
   D.   A project statement which contains information about the scope and
nature of the project;
   E.   Project performance criteria;
   F.   Budget parameters for the project;
   G.   Any bonds and insurance required by law or as may be additionally
required by the City;
   H.   The criteria for evaluation of proposals and the relative weight of
each criterion;
   I.   A requirement that the design-builder provide a written statement of
the design-builder's proposed approach to the design and construction of the
project, which may include graphic materials illustrating the proposed approach
to design and construction but shall not include price proposals;
   J.   A requirement that the design-builder agree to the following
conditions:
      1.   An architect or engineer licensed to practice in Nebraska will
participate substantially in those aspects of the offering which involve
architectural or engineering services;
      2.   At the time of the design-build offering, the design-builder will
furnish to the governing body of the political subdivision a written statement
identifying the architect or engineer who will perform the architectural or
engineering work for the design-build project;
      3.   The architect or engineer engaged by the design-builder to perform
the architectural or engineering work with respect to the design-build project
will have direct supervision of such work and may not be removed by the design-
builder prior to the completion of the project without the written consent of
the governing body of the political subdivision;
      4.   A design-builder offering design-build services with its own
employees who are design professionals licensed to practice in Nebraska will
(a) comply with the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act by procuring a
certificate of authorization to practice architecture or engineering and (b)
submit proof of sufficient professional liability insurance; and
      5.   The rendering of architectural or engineering services by a licensed
architect or engineer employed by the design-builder will conform to the
Engineers and Architects Regulation Act and rules and regulations adopted under
the act; and
   K.   Other information which the City chooses to require.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-70   Design-build contract; evaluation of proposals; requirements;
negotiations
   A.   The City shall evaluate proposals for a design-build contract in
accordance with this section.
   B.   The request for proposals shall be sent only to the prequalified
design-builders selected pursuant to §
27-68.
   C.   Design-builders shall submit proposals as required by the request for
proposals. The City may only proceed to negotiate and enter into a design-build
contract if there are at least two (2) proposals from prequalified design-
builders.
   D.   Proposals shall be sealed and shall not be opened until expiration of
the time established for making proposals as set forth in the request for
proposals.
   E.   Proposals may be withdrawn at any time prior to acceptance. The City
shall have the right to reject any and all proposals except for the purpose of
evading the provisions and policies of the Political Subdivisions Construction
Alternatives Act and this article. The City may thereafter solicit new
proposals using the same or different project performance criteria.
   F.   The City shall rank in order of preference the design-builders pursuant
to the criteria in the request for proposals and taking into consideration the
recommendation of the selection committee pursuant to §
27-73.
   G.   The City may attempt to negotiate a design-build contract with the
highest ranked design-builder selected by the City and may enter into a design-
build contract after negotiations. The negotiations shall include a final
determination of the manner by which the design-builder selects a
subcontractor. If the City is unable to negotiate a satisfactory design-build
contract with the highest ranked design-builder, the City may terminate
negotiations with that design-builder. The City may then undertake negotiations
with the second highest ranked design-builder and may enter into a design-build
contract after negotiations. If the City is unable to negotiate a satisfactory
contract with the second highest ranked design-builder, the City may undertake
negotiations with the third highest ranked design-builder, if any and may enter
into a design-build contract after negotiations.
   H.   If the City is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contact with any of
the ranked design-builders, the City may either revise the request for
proposals and solicit new proposals or cancel the design-build process under
the Act and this article.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-71   Construction management at risk contract; request for proposals;
requirements
The City shall prepare a request for proposals for each construction management
at risk contract in accordance with this section. The notice for the request
for proposals shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City at least thirty (30) days prior to the deadline for receiving and opening
proposals. The request for proposals shall contain, at a minimum, the following
elements:
   A.   The identity of the City for which the project will be built and that
will execute the contract;
   B.   Policies adopted by the City in accordance with §
27-67;
   C.   The proposed terms and conditions of the contract, including any terms
and conditions which are subject to further negotiation. The proposed general
terms and conditions shall be consistent with nationally recognized model
general terms and conditions which are standard in the design and construction
industry in Nebraska. The proposed terms and conditions may set forth an
initial determination of the manner by which the construction manager selects
any subcontractor and may require that any work subcontracted be awarded by
competitive bidding;
   D.   Any bonds and insurance required by law or as may be additionally
required by the City;
   E.   General information about the project which will assist the City in its
selection of the construction manager, including a project statement which
contains information about the scope and nature of the project, the project
site, the schedule, and the estimated budget;
   F.   The criteria for evaluation of proposals and the relative weight of
each criterion; and
   G.   A description of any other information which the City chooses to
require.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-72   Construction management at risk contract; evaluation of proposals;
requirements; negotiations
   A.   The City shall evaluate proposals for a construction management at risk
contract in accordance with this section.
   B.   The City shall evaluate and rank each proposal on the basis of best
meeting the criteria in the request for proposals and taking into consideration
the recommendation of the selection committee pursuant to §
27-73.
   C.   The City shall attempt to negotiate a construction management at risk
contract with the highest ranked construction manager and may enter into a
construction management at risk contract after negotiations. The negotiations
shall include a final determination of the manner by which the construction
manager selects a subcontractor. If the City is unable to negotiate a
satisfactory contract with the highest ranked construction manager, the City
may terminate negotiations with the construction manager. The City may then
undertake negotiations with the second highest ranked construction manager and
may enter into a construction management at risk contract after negotiations.
If the City is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the second
highest ranked construction manager, the City may undertake negotiations with
the third highest ranked construction manager, if any, and may enter into a
construction management at risk contract after negotiations.
   D.   If the City is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with any of
the ranked construction managers, the City may either revise the request for
proposals and solicit new proposals or cancel the construction management at
risk process under the Political Subdivisions Construction Alternatives Act and
this article.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-73   Contract proposals; evaluation; selection committee; duties
   A.   In evaluating proposals in accordance with §§
27-70 and
27-72, the City shall refer the proposals for recommendation to a selection
committee. The selection committee shall be a group of at least five (5)
persons designated by the City. Members of the selection committee shall
include (a) members of the City Council, (b) members of the administration or
staff of the City, (c) the performance-criteria developer when evaluating
proposals from design-builders under §
27-70 or the City's architect or engineer when evaluating proposals from
construction managers under §
27-72, (d) any person having special expertise relevant to selection of a
design-builder or construction manager under the Political Subdivisions
Construction Alternatives Act and this article, and (e) a resident of the City
other than an individual included in subdivisions (a) through (d) of this
subsection. A member of the selection committee designated under subdivision
(d) or (e) of this subsection shall not be employed by or have a financial or
other interest in a design-builder or construction manager who has a proposal
being evaluated and shall not be employed by the City or the performance-
criteria developer.
   B.   The selection committee and the City shall evaluate proposals taking
into consideration the criteria enumerated in subdivisions (1) through (7) of
this subsection with the maximum percentage of total points for evaluation
which may be assigned to each criterion set forth following the criterion. The
following criteria shall be evaluated, when applicable:
      1.   The financial resources of the design-builder or construction
manager to complete the project, 10%;
      2.   The ability of the proposed personnel of the design-builder or
construction manager to perform, 30%;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the design-builder or construction manager, 30%;
      4.   The quality of performance on previous projects, 30%;
      5.   The ability of the design-builder or construction manager to perform
within the time specified, 30%;
      6.   The previous and existing compliance of the design-builder or
construction manager with law relating to the contract, 10%; and
      7.   Such other information as may be secured having a bearing on the
selection, 20%.
   C.   The records of the selection committee in evaluating proposals and
making recommendations shall be considered public records for purposes of Neb.
R.R.S. §84-712.01.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-74   Contracts; refinements; changes authorized
A design-build contract and a construction management at risk contract may be
conditioned upon later refinements in scope and price and may permit the City
in agreement with the design-builder or construction manager to make changes in
the project without invalidating the contract. Later refinements under this
section shall not exceed the scope of the project statement contained in the
request for proposals pursuant to §§
27-69 or
27-71.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-75   Act; bonding or insurance requirements
Nothing in the Political Subdivisions Construction Alternatives Act or this
article shall limit or reduce statutory or regulatory requirements regarding
bonding or insurance.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
27-76   Road, street, or highway construction projects excluded; water,
wastewater, utility, or sewer construction projects permitted
   A.   The City shall not use a design-build contract or construction
management at risk contract under the Political Subdivisions Construction
Alternatives Act or this article for a project, in whole or in part, for road,
street, or highway construction.
   B.   The City may use a design-build contract or construction management at
risk contract under the Political Subdivisions Construction Alternatives Act or
this article for a project, in whole or in part, for water, wastewater,
utility, or sewer construction.
   C.   Any City project using federal funding shall not use a design-build
contract or a construction management at risk contract in whole or in part.
(Added by Ord. No. 9999, effective 11-05-2024)
CHAPTER 28
RAILROADS
28-1   Warning Signals
28-2   Injuring Signal Devices
28-3   Signal Equipment Required
28-4   Trains Obstructing Streets
28-5   Boarding Train When In Motion
28-1   Warning Signals
All vehicles entering or crossing railroad crossings on which stop signs are
erected shall come to a full stop as near the right-of-way line as possible
before entering or crossing such railroad crossing, and regardless of
direction, shall give the right-of-way to trains upon the tracks to be crossed.
All vehicles entering or crossing railroad crossings on which are installed
traffic signals or traffic lights shall come to a stop as indicated by the
traffic signal or traffic light. No person shall drive any vehicle through,
around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
28-2   Injuring Signal Devices
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, mar, break, or interfere in any
manner with any gates, bars, gongs, lights, signals, or any other devices
installed at any railroad crossing for the purpose of giving warning of the
approach of an engine or cars.
28-3   Signal Equipment Required
It shall be the duty of the Union Pacific Railroad Company to erect, establish,
and continuously maintain at the crossings of its railroad at Walnut, Pine,
Oak, and Elm Streets in Grand Island, Nebraska, flashing light signals,
complete with bells and short arm gates, said gates to cover one-half of the
traveled thoroughfare, with appropriate time-out sections or circuits.
28-4   Trains Obstructing Streets
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or corporation, its agents,
servants, or employees to permit a train of cars or any car or engines to stand
or remain upon any public street of the City in such a manner as to obstruct
travel or passage of vehicles or prevent or obstruct the use of the streets or
sidewalks by pedestrians for the space of more than five minutes at any one
time.
Any officer, employee, or agent of any railroad corporation or company who
shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor; provided, that in the case of a wreck or other unforeseen or
unavoidable accident which shall cause any street to be obstructed, the mayor
may allow a reasonable time to such corporation or company to clear the same.
28-5   Boarding Train When In Motion
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or enter on to any train, engine,
or car in motion, or for any person to loiter about any train, car, depot or
depot grounds, or tracks of any railway company within the City; provided, that
nothing in this section shall be construed as to interfere with the rights of
any person holding a railroad ticket, or any person being at such place on
business and for business purposes only, or employees of any railway company.
CHAPTER 29
RESTAURANTS AND FOOD SERVICE
29-1   Nebraska Pure Food Act Enforcement
29-2   Definitions
29-3   Inconsistencies
29-4   Permit; Required
29-5   Annual Permits; Types; When Issued; Term
29-6   Temporary Permit; Types; When Issued; Term
29-7   Inspections
29-8   Fees
29-9   Proration Of Permit Fee
29-10   Fees; To Whom Paid
29-11   Delinquent Permit Fee
29-12   Penalty Fee
29-13   Reinstatement Fee
29-14   Temporary Food Sales By Nonprofit Organizations
29-15   (Reserved)
29-16   (Reserved)
29-17   Building Plans
29-18   Homestyle Equipment Prohibited
29-19   Catering Operations
29-1   Nebraska Pure Food Act Enforcement
The Central District Health Department shall enforce the Nebraska Pure Food
Act, together with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, in
the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and
revocation of permits to operate food service establishments, the collection of
fees for food service establishment permits, and the prohibiting of the sale of
unsound or mislabeled food or drink. One copy of the Nebraska Pure Food Act,
and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the
city clerk as provided by law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-2   Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Bakery. An establishment whose primary operation is the manufacture and sale of
baked goods, i.e. donuts, cakes, and breads.
Cafeteria. A self service establishment with little to no table service in an
education institution.
Caterer. A person who transports ready to eat food from a permitted food
service establishment to another location or building for service on a per
event basis for hire, and does not include a temporary food service event.
Commissary. A food establishment where food, food containers, or food supplies
are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored for use in mobile food units,
pushcarts, or vending machines.
Food Establishment. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. The term does not
include:
   A.   An establishment or vending machine operation that offers only
prepackaged soft drinks, carbonated or noncarbonated, that do not contain a
primary dairy product or dairy ingredient base or that contain less than
fifteen percent natural fruit or vegetable juice; candy; chewing gum; potato or
corn chips; pretzels; cheese puffs and curls; crackers; popped popcorn; nuts
and edible seeds; and cookies, cake, pies, and other pastries, that are not
potentially hazardous.
   B.   A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fruits and vegetables.
   C.   A food processing plant.
   D.   A salvage operation.
   E.   A private home where food is prepared or served for personal use, a
small day care in the home, or a hunting lodge, guest ranch, or other operation
where no more than ten paying guests eat meals in the home.
   F.   A private home or other area where food that is not potentially
hazardous is prepared: (a) for sale or service at a function as a religious,
charitable, or fraternal organization's bake sale or similar function; or (b)
for sale directly to the consumer at a farmers market if the consumer is
informed by a clearly visible placard at the sale location that the food was
prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation and inspection by the
regulatory authority.
   G.   The location where food prepared by a caterer is served so long as the
caterer only minimally handles the food at the serving location.
   H.   A pharmacy as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §71-425 if the pharmacy only
sells prepackaged pharmaceutical, medicinal, or health supplement foods that
are not potentially hazardous or foods described in subsection (A) of this
section.
Food Processing Plant. A commercial operation that manufactures, packages,
labels, or stores food for human consumption and does not provide food directly
to the consumer.
Licensed Beverage Establishment. An establishment that serves alcoholic
beverages and may or may not provide limited food service, e.g. frozen
prepackaged sandwiches, frozen pizza, hot dogs, popcorn. Any item not requiring
preparation on site.
Limited Food Service Establishment. An establishment that serves or otherwise
provides only snack items or commercially prepared and wrapped foods that
require little or no preparation.
Mobile Food Unit or Pushcart. A vehicle mounted food establishment designed to
be readily movable that returns to a commissary daily for clean up and service,
unless self-contained.
Nonprofit Organization. An organization holding a certificate of federal tax
exemption under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code or an organization
that conducts its major activities for charitable or community betterment
purposes.
Retail Food Store. Any store, location or place of business occupied or used
for the sale at retail to the public of groceries, fruits, vegetables,
materials for human consumption or articles ordinarily and commonly sold from a
grocery, fruit or vegetable store or stand not coming within the definition of
the term “restaurant,” the term “milk,” the term “frozen dessert,” or the term
“meat.”
Seasonal Food Service. The act of selling or offering for sale food items on a
seasonal basis, for a period of six months or less, at a concession stand, hot
dog stand, ice cream truck, etc.
Separate Facility. Additional facility types operating within the scope of a
permitted establishment.
Temporary Food Establishment. A food establishment that operates for a period
of no more than three (3) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event
or celebration.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9160, effective 4-15-2008)
29-3   Inconsistencies
If there is an inconsistency between the Nebraska Pure Food Act and this
chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall control except where pre-
empted.
29-4   Permit; Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment without
first having obtained a permit from the Central District Health Department.
More than one type of permit may be required in one establishment. Permits are
issued based on the type of operations conducted within an establishment. The
permit shall be displayed at the place of business at all times.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9046, effective 6-7-2006)
29-5   Annual Permits; Types; When Issued; Term
The following permits shall be issued on an annual basis on May 1 of each year
and shall be valid until April 30, regardless of when issued:
Bakery Permit
Cafeteria Permit
Catering Permit
Food and Drink Service Permit
Food Manufacturing/Warehouse/Storage Permit
Licensed Beverage Establishment (Drink Only) Permit
Limited Food Permit
Mobile Food Unit/Pushcart Permit
Retail Food Permit
Separate Facility Permit
Application for all permits shall be made prior to the operation of any food
establishment. Permits shall be non-transferable.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9160, effective 4-15-2008)
29-6   Temporary Permit; Types; When Issued; Term
The following permits shall be issued on a temporary basis pursuant to this
chapter and shall be issued for the day or days specified in the application
upon payment of the applicable permit fee.
Temporary Food Service Permit
Seasonal Food Permit
Applications involving three or fewer vendors require a one (1) week
application processing time.
Renewals of a temporary permit shall be permitted, however no more than three
(3) renewals will be allowed within a calendar year.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006)
29-7   Inspections
All food establishments must be inspected by an authorized representative of
the Central District Health Department, or its designated representative, prior
to obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter. Inspections of food
establishments thereafter shall be conducted periodically by the Central
District Health Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-8   Fees
Except as otherwise provided by §
29-9, any person applying for an annual permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall annually pay a permit fee established and adopted by the Board of
Health.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-9   Proration Of Permit Fee
Any applicant applying for an annual permit after November 1 of the license
year under the provisions of Section
29-5 of this chapter, shall be required to pay only one half of the applicable
annual fee.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008)
29-10   Fees; To Whom Paid
All permit fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid
to the Central District Health Department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-11   Delinquent Permit Fee
Renewal of the annual permits identified in this chapter shall be made prior to
the expiration of the current permit. Permit fees for annual renewals shall be
delinquent if the payment has not been received by the Central District Health
Department by May 15 for the permits identified in Section
29-5. Establishments shall be assessed a delinquent food permit fee established
by the Board of Health if the permits are not paid by these dates.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9160, effective 4-15-2008)
29-12   Penalty Fee
A fee established and adopted by the Board of Health will be assessed for
operating a food service establishment without a permit, and each day of
operation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-13   Reinstatement Fee
Any person whose permit shall be temporarily suspended under any provision of
this chapter shall pay a reinstatement fee established and adopted by the Board
of Health before such permit is reinstated. Reinstatement shall not be
effective until such reinstatement fee has been paid.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-14   Temporary Food Sales By Nonprofit Organizations
The following operations do not require a permit:
   A.   Bake sales not including potentially hazardous food.
   B.   Sales of manufactured, prepackaged food prepared in an approved food
preparation facility except potentially hazardous food.
   C.   Food service limited to the members and guests of the organization.
   D.   Food service by an approved catering operation.
   E.   Food service on the organization’s own premises or at a location where
a permanent food service facility is located and used by said organization.
Permanent food service shall mean a kitchen facility located at a church,
school, meeting hall, or other place of public assembly that is specifically
equipped for food service to large numbers of people.
Nonprofit organizations that sell food to the public at a location where there
is no permanent food service facility shall obtain a temporary food service
permit. Exempted operations shall not be relieved of any other obligation to
provide, store, hold, and serve food under safe and sanitary conditions.
(Adopted by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008)
29-15   (Reserved)
29-16   (Reserved)
29-17   Building Plans
A copy of all building plans for new construction and/or remodeling projects
for any food establishment covered by Chapter 29 of the Grand Island City Code
shall be submitted to the Central District Health Department prior to the
commencement of such work.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005)
29-18   Homestyle Equipment Prohibited
Commencing May 1, 1998, or in the case of existing restaurants, at the time of
a transfer of ownership, the replacement or acquisition of equipment, or the
commencement of any remodeling project requiring the permit holder or its
landlord to obtain a building permit, commercial equipment will be recommended
for use in food service establishments. It is recommended that all equipment be
designed for commercial use, and approved by the National Sanitation Foundation
(NSF), or its equivalent.
29-19   Catering Operations
All catering operations must be conducted from commercially licensed
facilities. Catering from private residences or dwelling units is prohibited
unless the catering operation is conducted in a separate and distinct location
from the normal living quarters of a residential dwelling.
CHAPTER 30
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Article 30-I   Generally
Article 30-II   Sewer And Drainage Districts
Article 30-III   Construction Of Public, Private Sewer Mains By Other Persons
Article 30-IV   Lateral Sewers
Article 30-V   Connecting To Existing Public Sewers
Article 30-VI   Private Wastewater And Septic Tank Waste Disposal
Article 30-VII   Prohibited Discharges
Article 30-VIII   Industrial Wastes And Discharge Permits
Article 30-IX   Industrial Waste Surcharge
Article 30-X   Sewer Rates And Charges
Article 30-I
Generally
30-1   Definitions
30-2   Supervision Of Sewers And Drains
30-3   Wastewater Treatment Facility
30-4   Authority To Enter Private Property
30-5   Violation Notices
30-6   Damage To Wastewater Treatment Works
30-1   Definitions
The definitions of certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall be as
follows:
Act shall mean the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 95-217), and any amendments
thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by
EPA, pursuant to the Act.
Ammonia shall mean the chemical combination of hydrogen and nitrogen occurring
in nature expressed as NH3, NH2, or any of its derivatives as contained in the
wastewater flow.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter by
weight. BOD shall be determined by standard methods as hereinafter defined.
Biodegradable Oils and Grease shall mean fats, oils, and greases of animal or
vegetable origin contained in the wastewater flow.
Building Sewer shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the lateral
sewer. The building sewer shall extend two feet outside the building wall.
Chloride shall mean the anion CL– (Negative Charge at top of CL)
City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Compatible Wastes shall mean wastes containing pollutants for which the water
pollution control plant was basically designed to treat and which are
identified in the NPDES permit that is applicable to this treatment plant.
Composite shall mean the makeup of a number of individual samples, so taken as
to represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes.
Constituents shall mean the combination of particles, chemicals, or conditions
which exist in industrial wastes.
Conductivity shall mean the measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to
carry an electric charge
Cooling Water shall mean the cleaned wastewaters discharged from any system of
heat transfer such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling, or
refrigeration.
Department shall mean the City's Department of Public Works.
Director shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or
her authorized representative.
EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
ICR shall mean industrial cost recovery.
Industrial Plant shall mean any facility which discharges industrial wastes as
defined in this ordinance.
Industrial User shall mean:
   A.   any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the City's treatment works
which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary
waste, or a volume of process waste, or combined process and sanitary waste,
equivalent to 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste and which is identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under Divisions A, B, D, E,
and I; or
   B.   any nongovernmental user of the City's treatment works which discharges
wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
Industrial Wastes shall mean the liquid wastes resulting from the processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as
distinct from domestic wastes.
Lateral Sewer shall mean the sanitary sewer that extends from the building
sewer to the public sanitary sewer system.
Major Contributing Industry shall mean an industrial user that:
   A.   has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; or
   B.   has a waste strength greater than 5 percent of the plant design
capacity; or
   C.   has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or
   D.   is found to have significant impact, either singly or in combination
with other contributing industries, on the water pollution control plant, or
upon the quality of the plant effluent.
mg/L shall mean milligrams per liter.
Natural Outlet shall mean any natural outlet extending to a water course, pond,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
Normal Strength Wastewater shall mean wastewater with pollutant strength values
not exceeding the following:
TKN                           30 mg/L
Biochemical Oxygen Demand     250 mg/L
Hydrogen Sulfide              0 mg/L
Suspended Solids              250 mg/L
Biodegradable Oils and Grease 100 mg/L
Chloride                      230 mg/L
Nitrate                       25 mg/L
Total Nitrogen                25 mg/L
 
Where the nature of the wastewater does not permit BOD determination, COD shall
be substituted according to the relation BOD = (K) (COD), where "K" is a
constant to be determined by the Department.
NPDES Permit shall mean the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Permit as established by the Act. All municipalities, industries, and
commercial enterprises that discharge to surface watercourses are required to
have NPDES permits approved by EPA and in Nebraska by the Department of
Environmental Quality.
Owner shall have the same meaning as Person defined in this section.
Planning Area shall mean the Grand Island planning area as adopted by the
Regional Planning Commission.
Person or Owner shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
developer, corporation, or group.
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
Pollution shall mean the placing of any noxious or deleterious substance in any
waters of the City in quantities which are or may be potentially harmful or
injurious to human health or welfare, animal or aquatic life, or property, or
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including
outdoor recreation.
Pretreatment shall mean the application of physical, chemical and biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the
pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharge into a sanitary sewer.
Public Sewer shall mean the sanitary and/or storm sewers owned by the people of
Grand Island and controlled and maintained by the Department of Public Works.
Residential Strength Wastewater shall mean wastewater with pollutant strength
values which average 250 mg/L of BOD and 250 mg/L of SS.
Sanitary Sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sanitary wastewater and
industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sanitary Sewerage System shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, and
transporting wastewater to the water pollution control plant.
Sanitary Wastes or Wastewater shall mean the water carried wastes discharged
from building sewers by reason of human occupancy.
Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.
Standard Methods shall mean those procedures or methods established by the
latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American
Public Health Association and the American Water Works Association.
Storm Sewer or Storm Drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm waters,
surface runoff, street wash waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary
wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
Suspended Solids (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) shall mean the sum of organic nitrogen, ammonia
(NH3), and ammonium (NH 4+)
Total Sulfides shall mean the chemical combination of dissolved hydrogen
sulfide gas (H2S); dissolved ionic sulfide in the form of HS- and S-2 and acid-
soluble metallic sulfide present in suspended matter
Toxic shall mean constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms
involved in wastewater treatment.
Unpolluted Water or Drainage shall mean water to which no pollutants have been
added, either intentionally or accidentally.
Wastewater Treatment Facility shall mean the wastewater treatment facility
owned and operated by the City for the benefit of all persons located within
the City's planning area.
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water carried domestic or industrial
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or
permitted to enter the City's treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works shall mean the sanitary sewers, pumping, and other
equipment and their appurtenances, and other facilities which are an integral
part of the wastewater collection and treatment processes and treatment residue
disposal system.
30-2   Supervision Of Sewers And Drains
The director shall control and supervise the construction, repair, and
maintenance of all sewers and drainage systems in the planning area, whether
the sewers are publicly or privately owned.
30-3   Wastewater Treatment Facility
The City may continue operating the existing water pollution control plant and
may enlarge or expand the plant from time to time. The City may also construct
other similar plants and employ other methods of treating wastewater
sufficiently to comply with all applicable federal and state regulations.
30-4   Authority To Enter Private Property
The director and other duly authorized employees of the Department bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties to which a proper easement is on record for the purpose of
surveying, inspection, maintenance, operation, repair, and reconstruction of
any portion of the sanitary and storm sewer systems under the management of the
Department subject to the terms of the easement.
30-5   Violation Notices
The Department shall have authority to serve persons discharging in violation
of this ordinance with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. No person may
continue discharging in violation of this ordinance beyond the time limit
provided in the notice.
30-6   Damage To Wastewater Treatment Works
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with, any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the wastewater treatment works. Any person violating this
provision shall be punished according to law.
Article 30-II
Sewer And Drainage Districts
30-7   Establishment
30-8   Levy Of Special Taxes Or Assessments
30-9   Sewer District Bonds
30-7   Establishment
The City may by ordinance divide the area within the planning area into
suitable districts for the purpose of establishing sewer and drainage systems.
30-8   Levy Of Special Taxes Or Assessments
The City may by ordinance levy special taxes or assessments for the purpose of
constructing or extending public sewers. The City may provide for the payment
of the construction costs by annual installments for the number of years stated
in the ordinances. The taxes or assessments levied upon the real estate located
within the sewer district in which the sewers are to be constructed shall be to
the extent such property is benefitted.
30-9   Sewer District Bonds
The City may by ordinance issue bonds designated as "District Sewer Bonds of
District No. “.The City may establish the bond repayment period and interest
rates and levy an assessment against the property owners within the district to
provide funds for the annual repayment of the bonds and interest. In the event
the levy assessment shall be insufficient to pay the bond and interest payments
for any cause, the City shall make a relevy to pay such deficiency.
Article 30-III
Construction Of Public, Private Sewer Mains By Other Persons
30-10   Connection Of New Buildings
30-11   Connection Upon Failure Of Private Sewage System
30-12   Sewers To Meet Department Standards
30-13   Plans Signed By Engineer
30-14   Cost To Review Plans
30-15   Plans Submitted To State
30-16   Construction Permit
30-17   Workmanship And Materials
30-18   Sewer Inspection And Approval
30-19   Certificate Of Inspection
30-20   Conforming Plans
30-10   Connection Of New Buildings
Any new buildings located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main shall
be required to connect to it.
30-11   Connection Upon Failure Of Private Sewage System
Any existing buildings located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main
shall be required to connect to it upon failure of the private septic disposal
system serving the building. An interceptor does not qualify as a sanitary
sewer main. An interceptor is defined as a primary transport line usually
larger than 15”.
30-12   Sewers To Meet Department Standards
The design and construction of all sanitary sewers connected, either directly
or indirectly, to the existing sanitary sewer system shall meet all standards
and specifications established by the Department.
Private sewer mains shall comply with adopted model plumbing codes and be
constructed by licensed plumbing contractors.
30-13   Plans Signed By Engineer
All sewer construction plans shall bear the signature and seal of the
registered professional engineer who has prepared them.
30-14   Cost To Review Plans
The Department may charge to review plans submitted by persons proposing to
construct sewers in the planning area. The charge shall be at a rate per hour
established and published from time to time by the Department.
30-15   Plans Submitted To State
Plans requiring the approval of the State Department of Environmental Quality
will be submitted to them by the Director following his or her approval of the
plans.
30-16   Construction Permit
The property owner, owner's agent or contractor, shall obtain a construction
permit from the director after the engineering reports, plans, and
specifications have been approved by the director, and before any sewer
construction work has started.
30-17   Workmanship And Materials
All workmanship and materials shall comply fully with the requirements of the
approved plans and specifications. If at any time within one year after the
date of the final inspection any defect should appear, which in the opinion of
the director is due to inferior materials or workmanship, the contractor shall
do whatever is necessary to remedy the defects at no cost to the City. The
Department will notify the contractor in writing of the defects and repairs to
be made. If the contractor fails to begin repairs within ten days, the
Department may cause the defects to be remedied and charge the cost and expense
involved to the contractor or contractor's surety. The contractor's surety
shall not be relieved until the defects or repairs are corrected and approved
and a written release is furnished the surety by the Department.
30-18   Sewer Inspection And Approval
The director shall investigate and approve or reject the laying of all sewers
and drains. The director shall have the right to enter property containing
sewers or drains at all reasonable hours for inspection and investigation
purposes.
30-19   Certificate Of Inspection
No architect, owner, agent, or contractor shall accept any sewer laying or
drain laying of any description prior to the issuance of a certificate of
inspection and approval by the director.
30-20   Conforming Plans
Before sewers which are constructed by others and connected to the City's
sanitary sewerage system will be accepted, plans that conform to construction
records must be presented to the Department. Data shown on the plans shall be
as specified by the Department.
Article 30-IV
Lateral Sewers
30-21   Owner Responsibilities
30-22   Lateral Sewer To Serve Each Building
30-23   Prohibited Connections
30-24   Connection Regulations
30-25   Construction Regulations
30-26   (Reserved)
30-27   On-Site Requirements
30-21   Owner Responsibilities
All costs and expense associated with the installation and connection of
lateral sewers shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from installing
lateral sewers.
Lateral sewers shall be connected, as required by
Chapter 30, Article III; to a public sewer system where available or a private
sewer system in accordance with adopted model plumbing code and State of
Nebraska regulations.
30-22   Lateral Sewer To Serve Each Building
One sewer tap shall be provided for every tract or parcel of land, except, upon
written request to the director or the administrative authority for an
exception.
30-23   Prohibited Connections
No person shall connect interior or exterior roof downspouts, interior or
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or ground water to a lateral sewer or a building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
The Public Works Director may inspect or cause to be inspected any residential,
commercial and/or industrial facility for prohibited connections at any
reasonable time.
Any cross-connection between a potable water supply and a sanitary sewer shall
be prohibited.
30-24   Connection Regulations
The connection of any lateral sewer into the public sanitary sewer system shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the director before installation.
30-25   Construction Regulations
The kind and size of materials, slope and alignment of a lateral sewer, and the
methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
30-26   (Reserved)
30-27   On-Site Requirements
All excavations for lateral sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall
be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director.
Article 30-V
Connecting To Existing Public Sewers
30-28   Connections By Licensed Plumbers
30-29   Permit Required
30-30   Applications For Permits
30-31   Connections When Property Not Assessed
30-32   Excavations In Streets
30-33   Sewer Trenches
30-34   Exposure Of Sewer Pipe To Frost
30-35   Materials And Construction Procedures
30-36   Disconnection Of Drains
30-37   Revocation Of Plumber's License
30-38   Violations Of This Article
30-28   Connections By Licensed Plumbers
No person shall make any opening in, addition to, alterations of, connections
with, or tap any public sewer or associated appurtenances unless they are a
licensed plumber and have complied with all the conditions and requirements of
the City.
30-29   Permit Required
Before connecting with, tapping, modifying, altering or repairing any public
sewer in the City a plumber shall first obtain a written permit from the
director. The permit shall be posted upon the premises at all times during the
progress of the work.
30-30   Applications For Permits
Applications for permits to connect, tap, construct, modify or make attachments
to public sewers shall be made to the director upon forms provided by the City.
Such applications shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule to cover the cost of inspection, recording, and other
expenses. The application shall show the exact location of the proposed work,
and when requested by the director, the plumber shall provide plans or
specifications of the proposed work. When required, an application shall be on
file with the director twenty-four hours before the issuance of a permit. If
work is commenced prior to application for the permit, an Unauthorized
Connections/Reconnections fee, in accordance with the current Grand Island Fee
Schedule shall be assessed. Each permit shall expire six (6) months from date
of issuance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9886, effective 08/10/2022)
30-31   Connections When Property Not Assessed
No person shall connect with or tap any sanitary or storm sewer in the City
when the property to be served has not been assessed for lateral services. In
this event, no plumber or other person shall make any connection with or tap
any sewer, nor shall the director grant a connection permit until the owner of
the property to be served or the person desiring such connection first makes
formal application to the director for permission to tap or connect with the
public sewers, and complies with the conditions and requirements of the City
which may include the payment of an equitable amount for lateral service. The
director reserves the right to refuse to grant a permit to any person who shall
desire to connect with the public sewers, where the property to be served has
not been assessed for lateral service, or, if assessed, has not made such
payment for any reason whatever.
30-32   Excavations In Streets
Excavations in streets and alleys for the purpose of constructing, repairing,
altering or tapping sewers shall be made in a manner that will impede travel as
little as possible. The director may determine and limit the time such
excavations remain open and when unnecessarily delayed, may direct that the
number of workmen be increased. Warning lights shall be maintained at all
unfinished work, from dark to daylight. All work is to be done in accordance
with OSHA rules and regulations. After the work has been completed, the streets
or alleys shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the director. Within one
year of the excavation, the director may require the excavation to be refilled
if settling has occurred.
30-33   Sewer Trenches
Sewer trenches shall be braced in accordance with industry standards and OSHA
rules and regulations.
30-34   Exposure Of Sewer Pipe To Frost
No person shall dig up or uncover any public sewer so as to expose it to frost,
except under the direction of the director.
30-35   Materials And Construction Procedures
All connections with the public sewers must be made with the kind and size of
materials approved by the director. When a connection is made to a public sewer
a saddle shall be used and the connection shall be made under the supervision
of the director.
A maximum of only one connection may be made on each length of public sewer
pipe. Additional connections may be made only after written authorization is
granted by the director. Said authorization shall be noted on the permit
required pursuant to §
30-27.
30-36   Disconnection Of Drains
The director shall have the right to disconnect any drain from the public
sewers which is found to be used contrary to the provisions of this Article.
30-37   Revocation Of Plumber's License
The city council may at any time revoke the license of any plumber found guilty
of violating this Article or refusing to cooperate with the director in
performing his or her duties.
30-38   Violations Of This Article
Any owner, architect, agent, plumber, contractor, or other persons failing,
neglecting, omitting, resisting, or refusing to comply with any of the rules or
regulations of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Article 30-VI
Private Wastewater And Septic Tank Waste Disposal
30-39   Outside Water Closets
30-40   Privies Prohibited In Dwellings
30-41   Community And Private Disposal Systems
30-42   Unlawful Connection To Public Sewers
30-43   Disposal Of Septic Tank Waste
30-44   Permits For Discharge Of Septic Wastes
30-45   Discharge Fee
30-39   Outside Water Closets
The construction of outside water closets, known as the "frost-proof" type,
shall be prohibited.
30-40   Privies Prohibited In Dwellings
Privies are prohibited within City limits.
30-41   Community And Private Disposal Systems
Community Disposal Systems. The owner of a private wastewater treatment system
(lagoon, mechanical, etc.) within City limits, providing service to multiple
buildings and operating under an NPDES (National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System) Permit issued by the NDEQ (Nebraska Department of
Environmental Quality) shall connect to a public sanitary sewer within 12
months after it becomes available. Availability is defined when the building is
located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main.
Private Disposal Systems. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available to a
building, the lateral sewer shall be connected to an individual private
wastewater disposal system complying with appropriate rules and regulations in
this ordinance and the State of Nebraska. The definition of available shall be
found in the adopted model plumbing code.
The owner shall, at owner's own expense, operate and maintain such private
wastewater disposal facility to the satisfaction of the director.
30-42   Unlawful Connection To Public Sewers
It shall be unlawful for any private residential wastewater disposal facility
to be connected to any public sewer.
30-43   Disposal Of Septic Tank Waste
No person shall discharge septic tank waste into any watercourse or storm
sewer. This type of waste may be discharged into the City’s wastewater
treatment works only at hose locations and in a manner designated by the
director.
30-44   Permits For Discharge Of Septic Wastes
Permits for discharge of septic tank waste shall be required. The permits may
be obtained by filling out an application form furnished by the director.
30-45   Discharge Fee
Any person discharging septic tank waste into the wastewater treatment works
shall pay the Department at a rate per one hundred gallons of tank capacity (or
fraction thereof) as a wastewater disposal charge, in accordance with the City
of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9886, effective 08/10/2022)
Article 30-VII
Prohibited Discharges
30-46   Storm Water And Unpolluted Drainage
30-47   Sanitary And Other Polluted Waters
30-48   Other Prohibited Discharges
30-49   Dilution
30-50   Deleterious Discharges
30-51   Wastes From Garbage Grinders
30-52   Grease, Oil, And Sand Traps
30-53   Unlawful Use Of Manholes
30-46   Storm Water And Unpolluted Drainage
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into sewers
specifically designed and designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or
indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system any surface water, ground water, roof
runoff, subsoil or sub-surface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process water. Any such connections made either before or after the
effective date of these rules and regulations shall be considered illegal and
shall be subject to immediate removal by the owner and at the owner's expense.
Should the owner of an illegal connection fail to remove it within ninety days
after being notified by the director to do so, the director may cause the
connection to be removed and the cost billed to the owner of the property
served by the illegal connection.
30-47   Sanitary And Other Polluted Waters
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet or
storm sewer any sanitary wastewater or other polluted waters. Effluent from
privately-owned individual household disposal devices shall not be discharged
to storm sewers.
30-48   Other Prohibited Discharges
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged to, any sanitary sewer,
any of the following described substances, water, or wastes unless authorized
by the Public Works Director:
   A.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65 degrees Celsius
(150 degrees Fahrenheit); or which cause the wastewater entering the wastewater
treatment facilities; (Lift Stations, Pump Stations, Force Mains, etc.) to
exceed 40º Celsius (104º Fahrenheit).
   B.   Wastes containing oil or grease of petroleum origin shall be
prohibited.
   C.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral spirits, commercial
solvent, motor oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, or
any other petroleum derivative.
   D.   Any water or wastes containing dissolved gases (such as hydrogen
sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and ammonia) in concentrations
sufficient to cause poisonous or toxic fumes or waste-water, or a malodorous or
harmful condition.
   E.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, asphaltic materials, cement or concrete, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or
distillery spent grains, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste, bulk
solids, or any other solid or viscous substances, in amounts capable of causing
obstructions to flow in sewers or interference with the proper operation of the
wastewater treatment works.
   F.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9 at any
time, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or being
a hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment
works.
   G.   Any waters or wastes containing pollutants in the form of compounds or
elements, in solution or suspension, in concentrations exceeding the following:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration in mg/L
Pollutant             Maximum Concentration in mg/L
Arsenic (AS)          0.050
Barium (BA)           1.000
Cadmium (Cd)          0.100
Chromium (Cr) (Total) 3.000
Copper (Cu)           1.000
Cyanides (CN)         2.000
Lead (Pb)             0.100
Manganese (Mn)        1.000
Mercury (Hg)          0.005
Nickel (Ni)           1.000
Selenium (Se)         0.030
Silver (Ag)           0.100
 
The maximum concentrations shown for the above metals may be used as a guide in
design and plant control, but may be altered by the director in the event of
accumulative overload on the water pollution control plant.
   H.   Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and toxic materials in
concentrations prohibited by state or federal rules, including but not limited
to:
Antimony
Beryllium
Bismuth
Boron
Cobalt
Molybdenum
Rhenium
Strontium
Tellurium
Fungicides
Herbicides
Pesticides
Uranyl ion
Unless the permit required for discharge of industrial wastes specifies
conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, and volumes.
   I.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their
inspection, maintenance, and repair.
   J.   Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring, or
artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or
subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the national
committee on radiation protection and measuring.
   K.   Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions, or other wastes
which are highly colored, or wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration
of solids, or composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or
interference with the wastewater treatment processes without proper
pretreatment and written approval of the director.
   L.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to the degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit.
   M.   Any water or wastes containing more than 2,000 mg/L total solids,
maximum of 100,000 gallons.
   N.   Any water or wastes containing more than 230 mg/L chlorides monthly
average concentration, 380 mg/L chlorides daily maximum concentration (November
1 – February 28 (29), 389 mg/L chlorides daily maximum concentration (June 1 –
October 31) and 390 mg/L daily maximum concentration (March 1 – May 31).
   O.   Any water or wastes containing Conductivity greater than 2,000 umhos/cm
monthly average (April 1 – September 30)
   P.   Wastes at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate which is
excessive over short periods of time so that there is a treatment process
overload and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9813, effective 01/27/2021)
30-49   Dilution
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes in volumes, or
with constituents, such that existing dilution conditions in the sewers or at
the treatment plant would be adversely affected, shall be subject to review and
approval of the director. Where necessary, in the opinion of the director,
pretreatment or equalizing units may be required to bring constituents or
volume of flow within an acceptable level, and to hold or equalize flows so
that no peak flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the sewer
system. The equalization or holding unit shall have a capacity suitable to
serve its intended purpose, and be equipped with acceptable outlet control
facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing
conditions in the waste flow.
30-50   Deleterious Discharges
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to
the public sewers, which contain substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in the preceding sections of this article, and which in the judgment
of the director or the local, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction,
may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the director may:
   A.   Reject the wastes;
   B.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   C.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
   D.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by sewer user charges.
In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the director
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. Any waters or wastes having a BOD
concentration greater than 250 mg/L or a SS concentration greater than 250 mg/
L or an average daily flow greater than 5 percent of the average total sewage
flow of the City shall be subject to the review of the director.
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the director, and the local, state, and federal agencies
having jurisdiction and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
resolutions, and laws. See §
30-54.
In the event of an accidental spill or unavoidable loss to the drains of any
deleterious materials, the owner shall promptly notify the director of the
nature of the spill, the quantity, and time of occurrence.
30-51   Wastes From Garbage Grinders
Food Waste Grinders installed in dwellings shall be regulated by the Plumbing
Code.
No business establishment shall install any garbage grinder or replace an
existing garbage grinder after the effective date of this ordinance, without
approval of the City Engineer in conformance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as
adopted by the City.
All garbage grinders shall shred the waste to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the public sewer.
Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert
materials, or garden refuse.
All waste is subject to Section
30-48 regarding Deleterious Discharges and the latest edition of the fee
schedule for extra strength waste.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9506, effective 11/04/2014)
30-52   Grease, Oil, And Sand Traps
Grease (animal), oil, and sand interceptors, or traps, shall be provided by the
owner when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand, or
other harmful ingredients; except that interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Interceptors will be maintained at appropriate intervals and proof of
maintenance will be maintained for at least three (3) years. Manifests showing
the material removed from the interceptors was disposed of in a proper manner
will be maintained for at least three (3) years.
30-53   Unlawful Use Of Manholes
Opening or entering manholes for any purpose whatever is strictly prohibited,
except by persons duly authorized to do so.
No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other
opening in the public sewers other than through an approved building sewer,
unless upon written application to the director and payment of the applicable
user charges and fees, and the director issues a permit for such direct
discharges.
Article 30-VIII
Industrial Wastes And Discharge Permits
30-54   Major Contributing Industries
30-55   Industrial Wastes; Requirements
30-56   Pretreatment Requirements
30-57   Discharge Permit; Application
30-58   Discharge Permit; Requirements
30-59   Discharge Permit; Term
30-60   Discharge Permit; Not Transferable
30-61   Discharge Permit; Revocation
30-62   Monitoring Facilities
30-63   Access To Owner's Property
30-64   Reliability Of Monitoring Facilities
30-65   Sampling Methods
30-66   Special Contracts Or Agreements
30-67   Excessive Pollutant Penalty
30-68   Indemnity
30-69   Charges To Major Industries
30-54   Major Contributing Industries
All major contributing industries proposing to directly or indirectly connect
to or discharge wastes into the sanitary sewers shall obtain a discharge permit
before connecting to or discharging into these sewers.
30-55   Industrial Wastes; Requirements
Persons proposing to or who actually discharge industrial wastes which contain
none of the prohibited ingredients or characteristics set forth in Article VII
of this ordinance, other than excessive concentrations of BOD, suspended solids
and grease, hydrogen sulfide, or TKN shall be required to pretreat their wastes
to meet the requirements of "Normal Strength Wastewater" with the exception
that wastes may be accepted for treatment if all the following requirements are
met:
   A.   The wastes will not cause damage to the sanitary sewer system;
   B.   The wastes will not impair the wastewater treatment process;
   C.   The discharger of the waste agrees to pay a surcharge over and above
the published sewer rates when the waste strength exceeds that of "Normal
Strength Wastewater." See Article IX.
30-56   Pretreatment Requirements
When the Director determines that any industrial waste will be harmful to the
structures, treatment processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works,
or detrimental to the water pollution control plant effluent, the person
discharging the waste shall provide, at his or her own expense, preliminary
treatment or processing facilities as may be determined by the director as
necessary to make the waste acceptable for admission to the public sanitary
sewers.
When the director determines that an industrial waste must be pretreated, the
owner shall submit plans and specifications of the proposed pretreatment
facilities, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities by an approved registered professional
engineer authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska to the to the
director for review, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until said approvals are obtained in writing. After the plans and
specifications are reviewed as submitted, or as amended by the director, the
owner shall proceed to provide pretreatment facilities. If the pretreatment
facilities are completed according to the plans and specifications, and the
owner provides a proper sewer connection permit from the plant to the sanitary
sewers, the director will issue the owner an industrial waste discharge permit
authorizing such connection and permitting the owner to discharge waste into
the sanitary sewers at the rate, quantity, quality and other conditions stated
in the permit. These pretreatment facilities shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense.
30-57   Discharge Permit; Application
Persons requiring a discharge permit shall complete and file with the
Department an application in the form prescribed by the director and
accompanied by applicable fees. Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the
director, the applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
   A.   Name, address, and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number of
applicant.
   B.   Volume of waste to be discharged.
   C.   Waste constituents and characteristics including BOD, suspended solids,
pH, biodegradable oils and grease, total sulfides, TKN, nitrates, ammonia, and
total nitrogen, and any others required by the director.
   D.   Time and duration of discharge.
   E.   Average and thirty minute peak waste flow rates, including daily,
weekly, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.
   F.   Ground plan or plat sufficient to indicate locations of building
sewers, building drains, process waste sewers, monitoring facilities and
pretreatment facilities with respect to buildings, property lines, streets,
public sewers, and industrial process facilities.
   G.   Description of plant activities, facilities, and processes, including
all types of waste which are or could be discharged.
   H.   Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production when
required to determine compliance with pretreatment standards.
   I.   Number and type of employees, and hours of work.
   J.   Any other information the director may feel is necessary to evaluate
the permit application.
The Department will evaluate the data furnished and may require additional
information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue a
discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as
confidential information.
30-58   Discharge Permit; Requirements
Discharge permits may contain any or all of the following conditions and
requirements:
   A.   The average and maximum waste pollutant concentrations permitted to be
discharged into the sanitary sewers.
   B.   The maximum daily amounts of BOD, suspended solids, pH, biodegradable
oils and grease, total sulfides, TKN, nitrates, ammonia, total nitrogen,
chlorides, conductivity and any others required by the director, permitted to
be discharged into the sanitary sewers.
   C.   Limits on rate and time of discharge and requirements on flow
regulations and equalization.
   D.   Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities.
   E.   Pretreatment requirements.
   F.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency and methods of sampling and the number, types, and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
   G.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
   H.   Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to waste discharges
as specified by the director and making the records available to the
Department.
   I.   Additional requirements as may be determined by the director.
30-59   Discharge Permit; Term
Permits shall be issued for a specified period of time but in no event shall a
permit extend beyond five (5) years from the date of issuance. Ninety days
prior to the expiration of the permit, the owner shall apply to the Department
for a renewal of the permit.
The owner shall be notified in writing of any proposed changes in the permit at
least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. The notice shall
include a specified time schedule for compliance. This time schedule shall be
based on practical delivery and construction time requirements, and shall
become part of the permit.
30-60   Discharge Permit; Not Transferable
Waste discharge permits are issued to a specific owner for a specific
operation. A waste discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or
sold to a new owner. A waste discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new
or significantly changed operation.
30-61   Discharge Permit; Revocation
Any owner who violates any of these rules and regulations, or applicable state
and/or federal regulations, or any of the following conditions which are hereby
made part of every permit, whether stated therein or not, is subject to having
owner's permit revoked:
   A.   The owner shall factually report the waste constituents and
characteristics of the discharge.
   B.   The owner shall report significant changes in operation, or in waste
constituents and characteristics.
   C.   The owner shall allow reasonable access to owner's plant or facilities
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
   D.   The owner shall comply with each and every term and condition of the
permit.
Before a permit is revoked, the owner shall be sent written notice fifteen days
in advance of the date of a hearing by the director. The owner shall have the
opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. The director shall notify the
owner in writing of the decision by no later than fifteen days after the
hearing.
30-62   Monitoring Facilities
The director may require any industrial plant owner to construct, at the
owner's expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the lateral sewer or internal drainage systems, and may also
require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated
at the owner's expense.
The monitoring facility shall be situated on the owner's property and located
so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
The personnel of the Department shall have access to the monitoring facilities
at all times for inspection and sample collection. If the facilities are
locked, special arrangements shall be made to allow access. The Department's
personnel shall also have the right to set up monitoring devices at the
facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to
allow adequate sampling and composition of samples for analysis. The monitoring
facilities, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the owner.
The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Department's requirements, standards and specifications. Unless a time
extension is otherwise granted by the director, construction shall be completed
within ninety days following the issuance of written notification by the
Department.
30-63   Access To Owner's Property
The owner of any industrial plant where waste is created or discharged shall
allow the employees of the Department ready access at all reasonable times to
all parts of the property for the purposes of inspection or sampling or for the
performance of their duties. The Department shall have the right to set up on
the owner's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or
metering operations. Where an owner has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into the facilities,
the owner shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Department
will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their
specific responsibilities. While performing the work, the Department personnel
shall observe all safety rules established by the owner and applicable to the
plant or facilities. The Department shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or facilities for waste treatment.
30-64   Reliability Of Monitoring Facilities
Approval of proposed monitoring facilities or equipment by the director does
not, in any way, guarantee that those facilities or equipment will function in
the manner prescribed by their constructor or manufacturer; nor shall they
relieve a person of the responsibility to enlarge or otherwise modify such
facilities to accomplish the intended purpose.
30-65   Sampling Methods
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of industrial
wastes shall be determined in accordance with EPA approved methods published in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published by the American Health Association and American Water
Works Association, or Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes
published by the Environmental Monitoring and Support Laboratory, Office of
Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and shall be
determined at the monitoring facilities or from samples taken at the monitoring
facilities. In the event no special monitoring facility has been installed, the
sampling shall be done at the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewers
to the point at which the building lateral sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effects of waste
constituents upon the wastewater treatment works and to determine the existence
of possible hazards to life, limb and property.
30-66   Special Contracts Or Agreements
No statement contained in these rules and regulations shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any person
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the Department for transport and/or treatment, subject to applicable fees or
payments.
30-67   Excessive Pollutant Penalty
If a person discharges amounts of permissible pollutants in excess of the
amounts permitted in the discharge permit, as stated in §
30-71, a charge for “Excessive Pollutant Penalty” in accordance with the City
of Grand Island Fee Schedule, per day of violation shall be imposed and paid by
the person discharging wastes in violation of the permit.
30-68   Indemnity
In the event a person does discharge excessive amounts of pollutants in
violation of the discharge permit, said person shall agree to indemnify and
hold the City harmless against and from any and all loss, damage, claims,
demands, actions, causes of action, penalties, judgments, costs, and expenses
of whatsoever nature which may result from injury to or death of persons
whomsoever, or from loss or destruction of or damage to property whatsoever, or
results in the City being in violation of state or federal regulatory agency
requirements, when such violation, injury, death, loss, destruction, or damage
arises in any way in connection with or incident to a person depositing amounts
of industrial waste in excess of those permitted in the discharge permit into
the City's sanitary sewers. It must be proved, on an individual case basis,
that a person's depositing of excessive amounts of pollutants, on a daily
basis, was in fact the cause of a violation, injury, death, loss, destruction,
or damage, and that the excessive discharge was not due to force majeure.
30-69   Charges To Major Industries
Each major contributing industry shall be assessed a monthly charge that
reflects the City's cost of owning, operating, and maintaining the facilities
used to serve these customers. The monthly charges shall be determined from
time to time based upon analysis of the costs of capital and operation and
maintenance costs associated with the facilities used to provide service.
Article 30-IX
Industrial Waste Surcharge
30-70   When Surcharge Is Applicable
30-71   Pollutants Subject To Surcharge
30-72   Amount Of Surcharge
30-73   Review Of Surcharge Rates
30-74   Monitoring Facilities
30-75   Surcharge For Class Groups
30-76   Contract For Reserved Capacity
30-70   When Surcharge Is Applicable
An industrial waste surcharge shall be assessed against any person discharging
industrial wastes into the City's sanitary sewer system where the contributed
waste strength exceeds that of "Normal Strength Wastewater" as defined in §30-
1. Persons subject to the industrial waste surcharge shall be subject to the
regular sewer user charges.
30-71   Pollutants Subject To Surcharge
The monthly amount of pollutants subject to the surcharge will be based on the
average loading per plant operating day, times the number of operating days in
the month the limits are exceeded. The pollutants limits that shall be subject
to a surcharge are as follows:
 
BOD                                  250 mg/L
Suspended Solids or TSS              250 mg/L
Fats, Oils, and Grease               100 mg/L
Total Nitrogen (Organic & Inorganic) 25 mg/L
Hydrogen Sulfide                     0 mg/L
pH                                   less than 6 S.U.
pH                                   greater than 9 S.U.
 
30-72   Amount Of Surcharge
The industrial waste surcharge to be assessed each month will be determined by
application of the rates then in effect.
The surcharge amount shall be determined by calculating the average number of
pollutant pounds per operating day based on the average of periodic grab or
composite samples obtained and tested as described in §
30-63.
In computing the surcharge amount, no credit will be allowed because a
pollutant strength is less than that allowed in "Normal Strength Wastewater."
30-73   Review Of Surcharge Rates
The director shall review the surcharge rates each August and adjust them, if
necessary, to reflect the actual cost to treat the pollutants subject to the
surcharge.
30-74   Monitoring Facilities
When a person discharges a waste that is subject to the industrial waste
surcharge, the director may require monitoring facilities be provided. The
installation and use of the monitoring facilities shall be in compliance with §
30-60 and §
30-63.
30-75   Surcharge For Class Groups
The director may classify certain commercial and industrial establishments
which routinely discharge BOD and suspended solids concentrations exceeding
those established for "Normal Strength Wastewater," into the following classes:
   A.   Eating Places. Includes restaurants, bars, lounges, and other
establishments which engage in the preparation of food or beverage which is
served directly to the consumer.
   B.   Food and Kindred Products Processing. Includes commercial
establishments which engage in the preparation, packaging, processing, or
distribution of food, food products, grains, or produce, and which discharge
less than 200,000 gallons of wastes per month.
   C.   Equipment Service Facilities. Includes establishments which perform
washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, machinery, or
equipment; this class to include public facilities, facilities limited to
specific companies, and attended or coin-operated establishments.
The director shall assess an industrial waste surcharge for each class based on
waste strength determinations established by averaging grab or composite
samples or both, taken from a representative number of establishments in each
class and shall apply this surcharge to the water consumption or metered
wastewater of the establishment. If the establishment is within a larger
facility for which water usage is determined from a master meter, the director
shall determine an estimated volume for the establishment on which the
surcharge is applied. The director shall then add the appropriate industrial
surcharge to billings for regular water and sanitary sewer service for each
establishment included in one of the classes.
If an establishment contains operations from more than one of the classes, and
the director determines that the surcharge for a particular class would not
adequately compensate the City for its cost of treatment, the director may
assess a surcharge based on a proportional average of the class surcharges
involved, or may require the establishment to be billed under the requirements
of §
30-70.
The owner of an establishment classified into one of the classes may elect to
have the industrial surcharge billed under §
30-70 rather than this section, by making application to the director and
paying the required sampling costs.
The director may revise the class surcharges in the future to reflect a change
in the average strength of the wastes discharged or to reflect a change in the
costs to treat these wastes.
30-76   Contract For Reserved Capacity
The director may, with the approval of the council, enter into a contract with
persons discharging industrial wastes who desire to reserve a portion of the
design capacity of the sanitary sewer system or water pollution control plant.
The contract shall contain a provision stating that an annual amount,
representing the person's proportionate share of the City's net annual capital
investment cost in the facilities reserved, shall be paid by the person signing
the contract. The contract shall also contain a provision that if the person's
average daily flow varies more than 20 percent on a yearly basis, either party
may open the contract for renegotiation of the minimum payment.
Article 30-X
Sewer Rates And Charges
30-77   Purpose Of Article
30-78   Consumer; Defined
30-79   Consumer; Classification
30-80   Rental Charge; Computation
30-81   Rental; Residential And Commercial
30-82   Rental Charge; Use Of Water Meters
30-83   Volume Charges
30-84   Service Charges
30-85   Industrial Waste Surcharge
30-86   Minimum Charges
30-87   (Reserved)
30-88   Collection
30-89   Delinquent Charges
30-90   Charges To Be A Lien
30-91   Disposition Of Funds
30-92   Accounting System
30-93   Special Rates
30-94   Water Discharged Into Storm Sewers
30-95   Charges For Septic Tank Sludge
30-96   User Charge System Review
30-97   (Reserved)
30-98   Toxic Pollutants
30-77   Purpose Of Article
The mayor and council of the city hereby find and determine: This City has
constructed and owns and operates a sewerage system and plant for the
treatment, purification, and disposal in a sanitary manner of the liquid and
solid wastes, sewage, and night soil of such community and it is necessary, in
order to protect the health of the inhabitants of the city and to comply with
the law of the state and the requirements of the department of health of the
state that the sewerage system be operated and maintained; that in order to
provide the revenues to operate and maintain the sewer system and disposal
plant and to create a reserve fund for the purpose of future maintenance, it is
necessary that the City establish just and equitable rates and charges to be
paid to the City for the use of such disposal plant and sewerage system by each
person whose premises are served thereby.
30-78   Consumer; Defined
The word "consumer" as used in this article shall include all users of the
municipal sewerage system of the City, including all persons whose premises are
served thereby and all owners and tenants of real estate and buildings
connected with such sewerage system or served thereby and all users of such
system who in any way use the same or discharge sanitary sewage, industrial
waste, water or other liquid either directly or indirectly into the sewerage
system of the City.
30-79   Consumer; Classification
Consumers shall be classified as residential or commercial. For the purposes of
this article a residential consumer is one whose property is used exclusively
for residential purposes and commercial consumers are all consumers other than
residential consumers.
30-80   Rental Charge; Computation
For the use of the city sewer system, each consumer shall pay a rental charge
which shall be computed and based on his contribution of sewage to such system;
provided, that a minimum charge for sewer rental as set forth in §
30-84 and §
30-85 shall be made for each dwelling unit which is directly or indirectly
connected to the City sanitary sewer system, unless for a complete billing
period the City water supply to such unit has been disconnected by the City, or
the private water supply disconnected to the satisfaction of the City. For the
purposes of this Article, a dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms and a
single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and
sleeping purposes, and shall include a manufactured home. If more than one
dwelling unit is served from a single water meter or single private water
source as in the case of apartments and mobile home courts, a percentage of the
minimum rate shall be charged against each unit, depending on the number of
dwelling units per water meter or private water source as follows:
 
2 to 5 dwelling units      65%
6 to 10 dwelling units     60%
11 to 20 dwelling units    55%
21 and over dwelling units 50%
 
The above charges shall be computed upon the yearly average of the number of
dwelling units occupied.
30-81   Rental; Residential And Commercial
The charges to be paid by residential consumers for use of the sewerage system
and disposal plant shall be based upon water consumption. The monthly
residential sewer charges for the twelve months following April 1st of each
year will be based on the average water consumption for that property during
the months of January, February and March. Commercial customers shall pay
according to the meter reading which precedes billing.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9524, effective 03/17/2015)
30-82   Rental Charge; Use Of Water Meters
The sewer rental charge shall be applied separately to each individual water
meter which measures water contributing to or discharging into the city
sewerage system and shall be determined by the water meter reading for water
furnished by the water works system of the city or by privately-owned water
supply which may contribute to or discharge into the sewerage system. In the
case of unmetered water supply, the quantity of water used and discharged into
the sewerage system of the City shall be determined to the satisfaction of the
council and at the expense of the owner of the unmetered water supply. If the
quantity of unmetered water discharged into the sewerage system is estimated by
the council to be in excess of one thousand cubic feet per month for any one
month, the council may require that such water supply be metered at the expense
of the owner or consumer.
Should any meter get out of order or repair and fail to register properly, such
consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption as shown by the
meter when in order for six months previous, or fraction thereof, if the same
has not been used that long.
30-83   Volume Charges
The charges for sewer service shall be paid either quarterly or monthly in
conformance with the billing for water, and each consumer shall be billed per
100 cubic feet in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
30-84   Service Charges
The monthly service charge for sewage contributions to consumers and users
shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, regardless
of the volume of sewage contributed.
30-85   Industrial Waste Surcharge
Extra Strength Surcharge. An industrial waste surcharge shall be assessed
against any person discharging industrial wastes into the City's sanitary sewer
system where the contributed wastewater strength exceeds normal strength
wastewater and shall be billed in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule.
Customer Charge. The specific costs incurred by the City associated with
monitoring and determining flow and strength.
Industrial Four Part Charge. The industrial service four-part charges will be
applied to those industrial users who certify that their sewage contributions
are less than normal strength wastewater, and such customers shall be billed in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Customer Charge. The specific costs incurred by the City associated with
monitoring and determining flow and strength and/or checking the users
certification.
30-86   Minimum Charges
The minimum charge for sewage contributions shall be the sum of applicable
service charge, volume charge and/or extra strength surcharge. For customers
billed on the industrial four part charge, the minimum charge shall be the sum
of the volume, BOD, SS, oil and grease, hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, and customer
charge.
The minimum charge for sewage contributions to consumers and users who are not
required to meter their water supply shall be in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule.
30-87   (Reserved)
30-88   Collection
The sewer rental charges prescribed by this article shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner and by the same officers as water charges are
collected by the City.
30-89   Delinquent Charges
Bills for sewer rental charges made by this Article shall be rendered as for
water service of the City and all rental charges levied by this Article which
are not paid at or before water service charges of the City are required to be
paid shall be deemed to be delinquent and the water service of such consumer
may be discontinued.
30-90   Charges To Be A Lien
All rental charges prescribed by this article shall be a lien upon the premises
and real estate for which the sewer service is supplied and used and if not
paid when due such charge shall be certified to the city treasurer and may be
recovered by the City in an action at law and such delinquent charges may be
certified to the county clerk and assessed against the real estate and premises
served and be collected and returned in the same manner as other city taxes are
certified, collected, and returned.
30-91   Disposition Of Funds
The mayor and council hereby find and determine that the rental charges
established by this article are just and equitable rates and charges to be paid
to the City for the use of its disposal plant and sewerage system by each
person whose premises are served thereby. All moneys collected for such rental
charges shall be paid into the sewer and sewer collection funds and shall be
used only for the purpose of maintenance and operation of the existing sewer
system and disposal plant, and to create a reserve fund for the purpose of
future maintenance, pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 18, Reissue Revised Statutes
of Nebraska 1943.
30-92   Accounting System
Under Ordinance No. 4131, the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, has agreed to
account for its revenues and expenditures in a specified manner. It is
considered that the requirements for user charge accounting systems can be met
by following the accounting procedures outlined in Ordinance No. 4131 and
supplemental ordinance which have been issued subsequently for additional
bonds.
30-93   Special Rates
Where, in the judgment of the council, special conditions surround the use of
city water to the extent that the application of the service charges, rates, or
rentals as specified by this Article would be inequitable and unfair to either
the City or such consumers, the council shall establish a special rate applying
to such consumers. Such special rates when adopted by ordinance by the city
council shall apply to all consumers under like circumstances.
30-94   Water Discharged Into Storm Sewers
The provisions of this Article do not apply to water discharged into the storm
sewer.
30-95   Charges For Septic Tank Sludge
Septic tank sludge may be deposited at the City's Wastewater Facility in a
location designated by the superintendent of the said plant or his
representative after payment of a fee in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule for ordinary septage, having strength up to 6,000 mg/l BOD,
and 20,000 mg/l SS.
Per 100 gallons or fraction thereof of tank capacity in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
For septage having strength of more than 6,000 mg/L BOD, and 20,000 mb/L SS,
the fee shall be charged according to the current Fee Schedule for charges of
high septic sludge.
Waste from a recreational vehicle may be deposited at the City's water
pollution control plant in a location designated by the superintendent of said
plant. Fees for such discharge of recreational waste shall be on a voluntary
basis.
30-96   User Charge System Review
The City will review the user charge system at least every two years and revise
user charge rates as necessary to insure that the system generates adequate
revenues to pay the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement,
and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance, including replacement expenses among users and user
classes.
30-97   (Reserved)
30-98   Toxic Pollutants
Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City's treatment works, or
any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with
other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation and
maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such
increased cost.
CHAPTER 31
SIGNS
Article 31-I   Signs - Generally
Article 31-II   Signs In AC-Arterial Commercial Zone 
Article 31-III   Off-Premise Outdoor Advertising Signs
Article 31-I
Signs - Generally
31-1   Definitions
31-2   Sign Permit; License; Requirements
31-3   Sign Hanger Contractor
31-4   Sign Hanger's License; Revocation
31-5   Permit To Erect, Move, Or Remove Sign
31-6   Inspections
31-7   Removal By City
31-8   Sign Maintenance
31-9   Wind Pressure Specifications
31-10   Clearance; High Voltage Power Lines
31-11   Projecting Across Windows, Doors, Etc.
31-12   Sign Elevation
31-13   Signs In Public Right-Of-Way
31-14   Affixing Sign To Another Sign
31-15   Electric Signs
31-16   Projecting Horizontal And Vertical Signs
31-17   Unlawful Signs
31-18   Business Signs In Public Right-Of-Way
31-19   Unauthorized Signs On Public Property
31-20   Signs In Residential Districts
31-21   Signs On Poles, Trees, Etc.
31-22   (Reserved)
31-23   Cloth Signs
31-24   Flat Signs
31-25   Ground Signs
31-26   Roof Signs
31-27   Swinging Signs And Rotating Signs
31-28   Transparent Signs
31-29   Wall Signs
31-30   Nonconforming Signs
31-31   Free Standing Ground Signs Prohibited
31-32   Mobile Signs
31-33   Free Standing Yard Signs
31-34   Public Signs
31-1   Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
Back-to-Back Sign. An off-premise sign consisting of two sign facings oriented
in opposite directions with not more than two faces per sign facing.
Cloth Sign. Any sign executed upon or composed of any flexible fabric.
Development Sign. A ground sign whose purpose is to identify business located
within a retail subdivision or commercial development.
Directional Sign. A sign erected for the convenience of the public, such as for
directing traffic movement, parking, or identifying restrooms, public
telephones, walkways and other similar features or facilities, and bearing no
advertising message.
Double Faced Sign. An off-premise sign with two adjacent faces oriented in the
same direction and not more than ten (10) feet apart at the nearest point
between the two faces.
Facing. That portion of an off-premise sign upon which advertising is affixed
or painted and visible in one direction at one time.
Flat Sign. Any sign so attached to a building or other structure that it
projects beyond the building line, but extends parallel or substantially
parallel thereto.
Free Standing Yard Sign. Any sign 15 square feet or less that shall have as its
supports, wood or steel columns, pipe, angle iron framing, or any other
combination of these materials, other than ground signs as defined herein.
Ground Sign. Any sign which is supported by uprights or braces placed upon or
extending into the ground.
Mobile Sign. Any sign structure designed and constructed to be moved by means
of wheels or skids which proposes any announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, or illustration used to advertise or promote the interests of any
person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. This
shall not include signs anchored or attached to vehicles or trailers parked and
used primarily as a static advertising display, visible from the public right-
of-way.
Multi-faced Sign. An off-premise sign comprised of sections which rotate to
display a series of advertisements, each advertisement being displayed for at
least six (6) seconds continuously without movement; the duration of movement
of sections between advertisements not exceeding two (2) seconds.
Official Sign. A sign erected by a governmental agency or its designee, setting
forth information pursuant to law.
Off-Premise Outdoor Advertising Sign. A sign, including the supporting sign
structure, which is visible from a street or highway and advertises goods or
services not usually located on the premises and/or property upon which the
sign is located; also called "billboard." The following shall not be considered
an off-premise sign for the purposes of this Chapter: (1) directional or
official signs authorized by law; (2) real estate signs; (3) on-premise signs.
On-Premise Sign. A sign which advertises the primary goods or services or
taking place upon the premises on which the sign is located.
Projecting Sign. Any sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending beyond the building line either perpendicularly or at any angle other
than parallel thereto.
Roof Sign. Any sign which is supported by uprights or braces placed upon or
extending into the roof of any building or other structure.
Sign. Any device composed of one or more letters, words, pictures, figures,
characters, symbols or emblems, or any combination or grouping thereof which
prefigures, typifies, or represents one or more ideas.
Transparent Sign. Any sign illuminated from within and made of glass or similar
material containing opaque lettering upon a translucent letter upon an opaque
ground.
V-Type Sign. Any off-premise sign structure which consists of multiple sign
facings placed at angles of each other, oriented in different directions and
not exceeding twenty (20) feet apart at the nearest point to each other.
Wall Sign. Any sign which is painted or otherwise directly depicted upon a
wall. (Amended by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8978, effective 06-08-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9316, effective 09-13-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-
2013)
31-2   Sign Permit; License; Requirements
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, move, remove, or
materially alter any sign within the City's zoning jurisdiction without first
obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection (C) below, it is unlawful for any
person other than a licensed sign hanger to erect, re-erect, move, remove, or
materially alter any sign within the City's zoning jurisdiction.
   C.   A property owner or tenant may erect, re-erect, move, remove, or
materially alter signs upon his, her, or its own property when such signs do
not exceed any of the following limitations:
      1.   For flat, nonprojecting or ground mount signs:
         a.   maximum of twelve (12) feet above the adjacent surface;
         b.   maximum of forty (40) square feet of surface area (per side);
      2.   For projecting signs:
         a.   maximum of twelve (12) feet above the adjacent surface;
         b.   maximum of two (2) feet projecting from building;
         c.   maximum of four (4) square feet of surface area (per side);
      3.   For all signs:
         a.   must comply with all other provisions of this chapter;
         b.   all electrical wiring must be installed by a licensed electrician
and comply with all City Code provisions pertaining thereto.
31-3   Sign Hanger Contractor
   A.   No person shall engage in the business of sign hanging in the City of
Grand Island without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration as a sign
hanger contractor.
   B.   The fee for a sign hanger's license shall be in accordance with the
City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   C.   Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance
policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:
      1.   Comprehensive General Liability insurance covering the operations of
the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage;
      2.   A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured
for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon
occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed
operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction;
      3.   The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building
Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance
coverage.
      4.   Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy
herein required to expire or lapse.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010)
31-4   Sign Hanger's License; Revocation
Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the
city council upon recommendation of the City building department for the
following reasons:
   A.   Failure to comply with this article or any rules issued by the City
building department;
   B.   Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or
fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;
   C.   Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when same are
required by this article.
31-5   Permit To Erect, Move, Or Remove Sign
   A.   A permit shall be obtained from the building department for each sign
to be erected, re-erected, moved, or removed in the City, prior to the work
being performed;
   B.   Before issuing a permit for erecting any sign, a drawing shall be
submitted to the chief building official showing height, width, elevations, and
electrical details of such signs;
   C.   Upon the granting of a permit for sign erection or moving, the
applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule;
   D.   When any construction, alteration, or repair of a sign shall have been
started before a permit has been issued, an investigation fee of double the
amount provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be charged.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-6   Inspections
It shall be the duty of the holder of a permit pursuant to this chapter to
notify the chief building official when the sign for which such permit was
issued will be ready for inspection.
31-7   Removal By City
It shall be the duty of the chief building official to cause to be removed all
signs erected in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, whether
such signs are on private or public property.
31-8   Sign Maintenance
It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign to keep the same in good repair.
Any sign found to be structurally unsound, unsafe or in a state of disrepair
shall be made safe by the owner of the sign within a reasonable time not to
exceed ten (10) days as determined by the chief building official or his
designated representative; and all signs shall be repaired accordingly or
removed by the owner of the sign within thirty days after written notification
from the chief building official or his designated representative. If the owner
of the sign is not the owner of the building or property on which such sign is
erected, such property owner shall also be notified in writing of the condition
of such sign.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign or the owner of the property to
remove, within ninety (90) days, any sign not utilized for advertising or
identification of an operating business at that location. This requirement
shall apply to properties located within the area specified §
13-13(2) of this code.
In the event of the failure of the owner or person having control of any sign,
or the owner of the property on which any sign is located in the City, to bring
such sign into compliance with this section, or to remove or repair such sign
within the time stated in such notice, the sign shall be declared a public
nuisance and may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner or person
having control of such sign, or the owner of the property upon which the sign
is located. The cost of removing any sign shall be levied against the property
upon which the sign was located, in the manner provided by law for assessment
and levy of other special assessments.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-9   Wind Pressure Specifications
All signs installed in the City of Grand Island shall meet the design
specifications and wind pressure requirements of the Building Code as adopted
by the Grand Island City Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-10   Clearance; High Voltage Power Lines
It shall be the responsibility of the sign installer to contact the City
Utility to determine the required clearances from high voltage lines.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-11   Projecting Across Windows, Doors, Etc.
No sign of any description shall cover or project across any window, door,
exit, or other opening in the walls of a building, or any part of any such
window, door, exit, or opening.
31-12   Sign Elevation
The lowest part of any sign, including any embellishment thereon, projecting
over a sidewalk, drive, or parking lot shall maintain at least eight feet of
clearance above such sidewalk or driving surface.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-13   Signs In Public Right-Of-Way
   A.   No sign shall project into the public right-of-way of any street,
alley, or sidewalk, including the air space above such right-of-way, except as
provided in this section.
   B.   Signs may project into the public right-of-way, including the air space
right-of-way only within that business district of the City which is within the
following described area:
Beginning at a point of beginning, being the intersection of the centerline of
Clark Street and the centerline of the alley located one-half block North of
Fourth Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of said alley to the
West right-of-way line of Cherry Street, now vacated; thence southwesterly
along said right-of-way line extended to the centerline of the alley located
one-half block south of First Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline
of said alley to the centerline of Sycamore Street; thence southerly along the
centerline of Sycamore Street to a point located on the easterly extension of
the south lot line of Lot 3 of Westervelt Subdivision; thence westerly along
said lot line and extension to the centerline of Pine Street; thence southerly
along the centerline of Pine Street to the centerline of Koenig Street; thence
westerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Koenig Street to the
centerline of Cedar Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Cedar
Street to the centerline of the alley one-half block south of First Street;
thence southwesterly along the centerline of said alley to the centerline of
Clark Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Clark Street to the
point of beginning.
   C.   Any sign which projects into the public right-of-way in said business
district must:
      1.   Be a projecting sign attached to a building, building canopy or
awning;
      2.   Extend not more than ten (10) feet from such building;
      3.   Not extend beyond a perpendicular line three (3) feet back of any
street curb line or alley line.
      4.   Maintain at least 8’-0” clearance above the sidewalk surface.
   D.   All signs which extend into or over the public right-of-way are
maintained solely at the sufferance of the City. The City reserves the right
and power to require the removal of any such sign at its sole discretion.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-14   Affixing Sign To Another Sign
No sign shall be affixed to or suspended from any other sign.
31-15   Electric Signs
Unless a person engaged in the business of hanging, maintaining, or removing
signs is a bonded, licensed contracting electrician, such person shall not
under any circumstances wire or connect any electric sign installed within the
scope of this chapter.
31-16   Projecting Horizontal And Vertical Signs
Signs permitted under the classification of projecting signs are limited to 30%
of the building façade on which they are attached.
Every projecting sign shall be hung and its weight entirely supported
independent of the side guys or sway bracing, and no supports, side guys or
sway braces shall be attached to any fire escape nor extend across or in any
way interfere with free use of any fire escape or any exit from a building.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-17   Unlawful Signs
It shall be unlawful to display any sign which contains anything which is
misleading, fraudulent, obscene, immoral, or objectionable.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign upon any fire escape.
It shall be unlawful to have a sign anchored, painted or attached to vehicles
or trailers parked and used solely or primarily as a static advertising
display, visible from the public right-of-way.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to erect,
maintain, or continue any sign, when all or any portion of the supports
therefor are located upon any portion of any sidewalk, street, alley, or public
place, or within the limits thereof, except as may be required or provided for
by laws of the State of Nebraska, without express consent by resolution of the
city council of the City of Grand Island. The continued maintenance of any such
sign shall also be subject to the limitations of §
31-8 of the Grand Island City Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-18   Business Signs In Public Right-Of-Way
All existing signs placed in the public right-of-way, and any new signs placed
in the right-of-way shall be subject to the following requirements:
   A.   The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit
that occupies public right-of-way shall apply for and obtain a License
Agreement pursuant to this code prior to erecting or placing said sign.
   B.   The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit
that occupies public right-of-way shall hold the City harmless for any lawsuit,
costs or expenses occasioned by any injury, damages or casualty happening to
person or property, as a result of problems with the sign.
   C.   The City shall have unencumbered access to the space above the right-
of-way, occupied by the sign.
   D.   The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit
that occupies public right-of-way shall accept and agree that the sign is
placed at the owner's sole risk and expense.
   E.   Any sign erected, maintained, or existing in violation of the Grand
Island City Code may be seized, removed and disposed of by the Building
Department Director or his/her designee pursuant to §
31-19 of the Grand Island City Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-19   Unauthorized Signs On Public Property
31-19.1   Public Property; Authorized Signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or keep on any public
property, including sidewalk spaces, any moveable or temporary signs, including
placards and pennants, or any sign not specifically authorized and approved.
The City of Grand Island is hereby authorized to seize such unauthorized signs
and dispose of the same without notice.
31-19.1   Public Property; Authorized Signs
The city council may authorize the construction and placement of signs or other
structures upon public property within the city which exceed the height, width,
area, and setback requirements of this chapter, provided:
   A.   A public hearing shall be held before the city council to consider the
proposed project;
   B.   Notice of said hearing shall be published one time at least ten days
prior to the hearing;
   C.   The owners of all property located within 150 feet of the proposed
project shall be mailed a copy of said notice of hearing at least ten days
prior to the hearing;
   D.   The proposed sign or structure shall not unduly interfere with the full
use and enjoyment of the public property or private property in close proximity
thereto;
   E.   The design, size and placement of the proposed sign or structure shall
be aesthetically appropriate and proportional to the use and size of the public
land upon which it is to be placed;
   F.   The proposed sign or structure shall be determined by the city council
to be in furtherance of a public purpose and its construction and placement to
be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants.
31-20   Signs In Residential Districts
Except as otherwise provided in §
31-20 and §
31-34, no signs of any nature whatsoever shall be permitted in districts zoned
AG, TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R4, RD, and RO under
Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the use of identification signs not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in the
districts mentioned above. The maximum allowable size of such identification
signs may be increased by one (1) square foot for each one and one-half (1.5)
feet of setback from any adjacent property line up to a maximum of thirty-two
(32) square feet.
In AG or TA zoning districts, tracts of land exceeding 10 acres, and in R-
4 zoning districts on tract of land exceeding 5 acres, in which a conditional
use permit has been issued for a permitted conditional use, the following
restrictions shall apply:
   A.   The maximum square footage of all signage shall not exceed one hundred
fifty (150) square feet.
   B.   Ground signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet, shall be
limited to twelve (12) feet in height, be set back from the front property line
a minimum of ten (10) feet, be set back from the side property line a distance
of one third of the total frontage or a minimum of ten (10) feet, and be
separated from other ground signs a distance of one hundred (100) feet.
   C.   Flat or projecting wall signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square
feet and shall comply with all other restrictions of the city code.
In RO zoning districts, and RD districts on tracts of land exceeding 10 acres,
the following restrictions shall apply;
   A.   Ground signs shall be allowed with the area limited to two square feet
of signage for every one foot of street frontage with no single sign face
exceeding four hundred square feet.
   B.   The maximum height of any ground sign shall not exceed thirty feet in
height measured from the nearest street top of curb elevation.
   C.   All ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the
property line to the leading edge of the signage.
   D.   Wall signs or projecting signs shall be allowable at a maximum square
footage not to exceed 15% of the building façade. A minimum of 8’ of clearance
shall be maintained above any adjacent walking or driving surface.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9573, effective 03-15-2016)
31-21   Signs On Poles, Trees, Etc.
No person shall post, print, nail, or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign,
poster, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be
done, on any curbing, or any portion or part of any sidewalk, or street, or
upon any tree, electrolier, telegraph pole, telephone pole, electric pole,
hydrant, bridge, pier, or upon any structure within the limits of any street in
the City, except as may be otherwise permitted by the provisions of this Code,
City authorized pole attachment agreement, or other ordinances of the City.
No person shall post, print, nail, or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign,
poster, or advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done,
upon any private wall, window, door, gate, fence, advertising board or
signboard, or upon any other private structure or building unless he or she is
the owner thereof, without the consent in writing of the owner of such wall,
window, door, fence, gate, advertising board, signboard, or other private
building or structure.
Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the posting of legal notices
by public officers in the performance of their official duty, in the manner and
in the places prescribed by law.
Signs placed on City-owned poles which are placed subject to the terms and
conditions of a City authorized pole attachment agreement shall not require a
separate sign permit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9972, effective 04-09-2024)
31-22   (Reserved)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-23   Cloth Signs
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any cloth sign over any street or
other public thoroughfare within the City, except as provided by this section.
For special advertising purposes, the chief building official may at his
discretion issue a permit for the erection of temporary signs made of cloth, or
of compressed fiber not more than one-quarter of an inch thick, to be attached
to the face of a building, or to the face of a flat or projecting sign. Such
sign shall be erected in a manner ordered and approved by the chief building
official, but shall not be permitted to remain in place for a period exceeding
thirty days.
The mayor shall have the right to authorize the temporary hanging of display
banner or other cloth decorations for special occasions such as religious,
civic or festival occurrences, or for Christmas decorations, or in celebration
of some event of religious, national, state or civic significance, or in honor
of a visit from a person of note. It is especially provided, however, that
advertising of a commercial nature shall not be made a part of such
decorations. No such temporary signs, decorations, or displays shall be
displayed for more than sixty days. The permission for such displays shall be
issued without charge for any fee.
Within the fire limits, all cloth signs or other signs made of flammable
material shall be treated with a fire-retarding solution subject to the
approval of the chief of the fire department before being erected.
31-24   Flat Signs
No flat sign shall extend beyond any building line more than fifteen inches;
provided, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the erection of a flat
sign on the outer edge of a marquee, provided the same is securely fastened and
is not higher than the base of windows to the rear thereof.
Flat signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the wall surface on which
they are placed.
Flat signs or signs enclosed in cases used for building directories or theater
advertisements, not extending beyond the building line more than three inches,
shall be permitted at any height. Flat signs denoting places of entrance and
exit, and those used for public safety shall also be permitted at any height.
The area of flat signs shall not exceed thirty percent of the building facade
upon which it is placed.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-25   Ground Signs
31-25.1   Development Signs
   A.   Dimension Limitation. All ground signs shall be subject to the
following:
      1.   For each foot of height over thirty (30) feet, there shall be a
corresponding one foot of setback from the property line;
      2.   Lighting reflectors attached to the top of a sign may project above
the top and beyond the face of such sign, and shall be excluded from all
measurement requirements established by this subsection.
   B.   Height Limitation. Ground signs which exceed fifty (50) feet in height,
measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the top of the sign,
shall be subject to the following:
      1.   No permit shall be issued by the chief building official until such
issuance has been authorized by the mayor and city council.
      2.   The applicant for the permit shall submit the following to the chief
building official for review and consideration by the mayor and city council:
         a.   A drawing showing the height, width, elevations, and electrical
details of such sign;
         b.   Clear and convincing evidence that if the sign does not exceed
fifty (50) feet in height the owner will suffer undue hardship and that said
hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the area;
         c.   Clear and convincing evidence that the proposed sign will not be
a substantial detriment to adjacent properties and the character of the
surrounding area will not be changed by the erection of the proposed sign.
      3.   Ground signs exceeding fifty (50) feet in height shall be erected
only on tracts of real estate adjacent to state and federal highways and
occupied by the business premises advertised by the sign.
      4.   No permit shall be issued for any sign exceeding one hundred (100)
feet in height, measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the
top of the sign.
      5.   In lieu of the permit fee set forth in this chapter, upon the
granting of a permit for erection or moving of a sign exceeding fifty (50) feet
in height, the applicant shall pay a fee of $250.00 to the City.
      6.   All other provisions of the Grand Island City Code pertaining to
signs which are not inconsistent with this section shall apply to ground signs
exceeding fifty (50) feet in height.
   C.   Number Limitations. There may be only one ground sign allowed for each
one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of street frontage for any
one lot or tract. Notwithstanding this limit, any lot that fronts on more than
one street may have at least one sign on each street. Streets vacated after
January 1, 1990 may be included as frontage for number limitations.
   D.   Location Limitations.
      1.   No signs may be placed in city right-of-way.
      2.   At street intersections, no signs may be placed within the triangle
formed by the intersections of maintained roadway, whether paved or graveled,
of two intersecting streets and the line extended joining points measured
thirty feet on each property line from the point of said property lines
intersection, unless:
         a.   said signs are on posts with a width or diameter not greater than
18 inches; and
         b.   the bottom of said signs are not less than eight feet from the
ground or the tops are no higher than twenty-four (24) inches from the ground.
   E.   The formula for determining the allowable area for ground signs shall
be as follows: Four square feet of sign for each one foot of frontage on the
lot where the sign is to be placed. In any event, the maximum square footage of
any ground sign shall not exceed 800 square feet per side, regardless of
frontage feet.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-25.1   Development Signs
Development signs shall be allowed under the following conditions:
   A.   Only allowed on subdivisions of twenty (20) acres or more that front on
at least one side on a street classified as a major arterial or higher.
   B.   Limited to one per street frontage of the development.
   C.   Limited to thirty (30) feet in height or the height specified in the
zoning classification, whichever is the most restrictive.
   D.   Limited to no more than four hundred and fifty (450) square feet in
area. Double faced signs shall be calculated on the largest side only.
   E.   Development signs shall be separated a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
all other signs, and shall be at least five (5) feet from all property lines.
   F.   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the sign face shall identify the
development with the remaining square footage advertising tenants within the
development and within five hundred (500) feet of the sign.
   G.   Development signs as defined in this chapter shall not be classified as
billboards or off-premise signs for the purpose of spacing of off-premise
signage on other properties, provided they meet the provisions specified.
   H.   No signs defined as billboards shall be allowed within the subdivision
if the provision of development signs is utilized.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8978, effective 06-08-2005)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9917 on 3/15/2023
31-26   Roof Signs
No roof sign shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent the free passage
from one part of the roof upon which such sign is erected to any other part
thereof. Neither shall such sign be so placed as to interfere or block any
openings in such roof.
No part of a roof sign shall project beyond the wall lines of the building
whereon it is placed.
All roof signs shall be set back so that there shall be a space of at least
four feet between the face of the sign and the face of any wall of the building
whereon it is erected; provided, that ends of signs set diagonally may extend
to, but not beyond wall lines.
All roof signs shall be constructed so that there shall be a minimum clear
space of not less than six feet between the roof level and the lowest part of
the sign structure, and there shall be a minimum clearance of not less than
five feet between the vertical supports and braces thereof.
Structural elements of every roof sign erected shall be entirely of metal,
including the uprights, supports and braces; provided, that subject to the
approval of the chief building official, battens behind the metal facing,
molding and decorative lattice work may be of wood construction, treated with a
fire resistant compound.
Any roof sign erected upon any frame building shall be supported only upon load
bearing walls or columns of the building. Any person desiring to erect a roof
sign shall submit to the chief building official a diagram or sketch showing
the general character of the proposed sign and placement, and a written
statement from a licensed architect or engineer certifying as to the safety of
the proposed sign and placement.
The maximum height of a roof sign shall be twenty feet above the roof line, the
measurement shall be from the base of the roof to the top of the sign.
One roof sign shall be allowed for each street frontage of the building upon
which the sign is placed. The maximum area in square feet for roof signs shall
be computed by allowing four square feet of sign space for each front foot of
the lot on which the building is constructed; provided, that no roof sign shall
exceed 800 square feet for one side only.
31-27   Swinging Signs And Rotating Signs
Swinging signs of all types are prohibited and rotating or revolving signs
shall not exceed eight revolutions per minute.
31-28   Transparent Signs
Signs designated as transparent signs are hereby authorized. Regulations
pertaining to roof signs and ground signs shall govern the construction,
erection, and maintenance of transparent signs.
31-29   Wall Signs
Any sign directly painted or otherwise directly depicted upon a wall is hereby
authorized, provided, that the fee requirements of §
31-5 of the Grand Island City Code are complied with. In addition, the area in
square feet of any wall sign shall not exceed thirty percent of the building
facade upon which it is painted or depicted.
31-30   Nonconforming Signs
Any lawful sign existing on or before May 15, 1974, although such sign does not
conform with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued as a
nonconforming sign, except as provided herein, but if any such sign is changed,
altered, modified, or its use discontinued, any further use of said sign must
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, all
nonconforming signs existing on or before May 15, 1974, shall be made to
conform with the provisions of this chapter within ten years of the effective
date of this section or be removed at the owner's expense. All nonconforming
signs are subject to the provisions of §
31-5 which requires a permit to erect, re-erect, remove, or maintain signs
within the City; and the provisions of §
31-8 which requires all signs to be kept in good repair and a safe condition.
31-31   Free Standing Ground Signs Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed upon
premises any free standing ground sign. For the purposes of this section, "free
standing ground sign" shall mean any ground sign which is not permanently
attached or fixed to the ground in excess of 15 square feet; provided, however,
this section shall in no way prohibit the placement of mobile signs as defined
by §
31-32.
31-32   Mobile Signs
   A.   General. The placement of mobile signs shall be in accordance with all
requirements of the Grand Island City Code. Furthermore, no mobile sign shall
be placed or used at any location except as allowed in this section, and only
after obtaining a permit therefor from the City building department.
   B.   Permit, Types, Duration; Fee; Application.
      1.   45 Day Permit . A permit to allow one mobile sign per business to be
located at a specific property location for no more than forty-five (45) days
from the date of issuance, during any calendar year. No sign authorized by a 45
Day Permit shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet of any other
sign allowed by a 45 Day Permit. Properties with less than one hundred (100)
feet of street frontage shall be entitled to one 45 Day Permit per calendar
year. The fee for a 45 Day Permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
      2.   Special Event Permit . A permit to allow any number of mobile signs
at any one property location for a period not to exceed four (4) days. The fee
for a Special Event Permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island
Fee Schedule. Special Event Permits shall only be issued in the spirit of the
following examples of truly special events: a grand opening sale, a special
holiday or seasonal sale, anniversary sale, going out of business sale. There
shall be a minimum of one day between special events.
      3.   Application Contents . The application shall describe in detail all
positions where the sign will be placed on the location, the dimensions of the
sign, and the type of permit being sought.
   C.   Design. Mobile signs may be constructed of any material meeting the
requirements of this Code and shall be so designed that the structural frame
will resist wind loads of twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot when anchored
to the ground. The measured height of the face of a mobile sign shall not
exceed six feet (6'). Mobile signs shall be so designed that the sign when
placed upon the ground shall not rest upon any wheels. The wheels shall only be
utilized in moving the mobile sign from site to site. Mobile signs shall be
anchored to the ground or ground-surfacing material in a manner approved by the
building official.
   D.   Electrical. Mobile signs utilizing electrical equipment in connection
with illuminating the mobile sign shall have all such equipment installed in
accordance with the Grand Island Electrical Code. All electrical connections to
mobile signs shall be made with a type S or SO or STO flexible 12-3 cord and
plugged into an approved 120 volt grounded electrical outlet protected with a
FGCI receptacle or breaker with a capacity of not less than 15 amperes nor more
than 20 amperes. The distance between the electrical outlet receptacle and the
mobile sign shall not exceed 50 feet and the cord shall not be placed upon any
ground or ground-surfacing that is specifically designed to accommodate
pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic of any sort.
   E.   Anchoring Requirements. All mobile signs must be weighted with ballast
or anchored in the following manner:
      1.   Such weight or ballast must be a minimum of five pounds of weight
for each square foot of sign face. Mobile signs shall be weighted in a manner
approved by a building department official.
      2.   Anchored at each position used by a minimum of four anchors which
meet the following specifications:
         a.   If anchored in concrete, the anchors shall extend to a depth of
at least four inches (4") and shall be at least one half inch (1/2") diameter;
or
         b.   If anchored in asphalt, the anchors shall extend to a depth of at
least three feet (3') and shall be at least one half inch (1/2") diameter; or
         c.   If anchored in dirt, the anchors shall extend to a depth of at
least three feet (3') and shall be either metal spikes with a diameter of at
least one half inch (1/2") or wooden spikes with dimensions of at least two
inches by two inches (2"x2").
         d.   The anchoring of any mobile sign must be approved by a building
department official.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-33   Free Standing Yard Signs
   A.   Free Standing Yard signs shall be free standing and shall not be in
excess of fifteen (15) square feet in size.
   B.   Free Standing Yard signs shall be exempt from Section
31-5 Permits.
   C.   Free Standing Yard signs shall not be allowed on any public property or
right-of-way.
   D.   Free Standing Yard signs at street intersections shall not be placed
within the triangle formed by the adjacent property lines of the two
intersecting streets and the line joining points thirty (30) feet distant along
property lines from their point of intersection.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to erect free standing yard signs at any time in
violation of the Grand Island City Code.
   F.   The Chief Building Official, or his/her designee, shall be authorized
to seize and remove all signs in violation of this section, and dispose of the
same without notice.
   G.   The city clerk shall provide copies of this section of the Grand Island
City Code to the Hall County Election Commissioner for distribution to all
candidates for political office and persons using political free standing yard
signs within zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island, or other
interested persons.
   H.   Free Standing Yard signs utilized to advertise an event shall be
removed no later than five (5) days after the event.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011)
31-34   Public Signs
A sign which is owned and erected by or for the City of Grand Island, Hall
County, or any public or private nonprofit school may be placed in any zoning
district, provided:
   A.   The sign is for public identification purposes only and shall not
advertise a product, service, or business activity;
   B.   The maximum size of such sign shall be 150 square feet.
   C.   Any public entity described above may be allowed the maximum signage on
any of two street frontages provided the signs are separated by a distance of
one hundred fifty (150.0) lineal feet measured adjacent to the street right-of-
way.
   D.   Wall signs are allowable limited to one per building elevation and not
to exceed three hundred (300.0) square feet per sign with a total of six
hundred (600.0) square feet per tract of land.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8834, eff. 8-27-2003)
Article 31-II
Signs In AC-Arterial Commercial Zone
31-35   Authorized Signs In AC-Arterial Commercial Zone
31-35   Authorized Signs In AC-Arterial Commercial Zone
All signs placed in the AC-Arterial Commercial Zone shall be subject to the
following requirements:
   A.   Signs Allowed. Ground signs, monument signs, roof signs, wall signs
(flat or projecting), and freestanding ground signs. (Monument signs shall be
those ground signs in which the base width is fifty percent (50%) or more of
the width of the sign.)
   B.   Size.
      1.   Total ground signage allowed per tract of land shall be one square
foot of sign for each one lineal foot of street frontage for the first one
hundred fifty feet and .75 foot of signage for each lineal foot thereafter. The
total ground signage on the property shall not exceed three hundred square
feet. (The area of a double-faced sign is calculated on the largest face only).
      2.   No single ground sign shall exceed two hundred square feet.
      3.   For tracts of land with three hundred (300) lineal feet or more of
street frontage the total allowable square footage of ground signage shall be
one square foot of sign for each one foot of street frontage for the first one
hundred and fifty (150) feet and one point one eight (1.18) square foot of
signage for each lineal foot thereafter. No single sign shall exceed three
hundred and fifty (350) square feet. This section applies within the AC Zone
from Fonner Park Road to Stolley Park Road.
   C.   Location.
      1.   All signs shall be set back from the front property line a minimum
of five feet, and a minimum of ten feet from all other property lines.
EXCEPTIONS: the side property line adjacent to a public street shall have a
minimum setback of five feet. Monument signs shall be set back from the front
property line a minimum of twelve feet, and ten feet from all other property
lines.
      2.   All ground and monument signs shall be set back from the side
property line a distance equal to or greater than 25% of the lot frontage.
EXCEPTIONS: the side lot line adjacent to a public street or City owned
property and directional signs not exceeding four square feet with a maximum of
forty inches (3'-4") in height.
      3.   Ground signs on the same tract of land shall be separated by a
minimum of fifty lineal feet. The one exception shall be directional signs not
exceeding four square feet in size.
   D.   Height.
      1.   The maximum height of ground signs shall be thirty feet.
      2.   Signs shall maintain twelve feet of clearance above all adjacent
walking or driving surfaces.
      3.   Signs may project over a sidewalk or drive on private property, but
shall not extend beyond such surface.
   E.   All other provisions of the city code shall apply; the most restrictive
requirement shall be enforced.
   F.   Billboards.
      1.   The maximum size of any billboard shall be three hundred square
feet. (The area of double-faced, or back-to-back signs will be calculated on
the largest face only).
      2.   The maximum height of any billboard shall be thirty feet.
      3.   Billboards shall not be located in the required front yard and shall
maintain a ten foot setback from all other property lines.
      4.   Billboards shall maintain a 1,000 foot separation between other
billboards located along the same side of the Locust Street right-of-way and
shall be a minimum of fifty feet from any ground sign.
      5.   Billboards shall not be calculated in the maximum allowable on-site
signage.
      6.   There currently exist five signs defined as billboards in the AC-
Arterial Commercial Zone from Stolley Park Road south to U.S. Highway 34. Those
signs shall be legal non-conforming signs and allowed to remain with the
provisions as stated in Section
31-42.
      7.   No billboards shall be allowed within the AC-Arterial Commercial
Zone within the area bounded by Stolley Park Road on the south and Fonner Park
Road on the north.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8787, eff. 12-18-2002) (Amended by Ord. No. 9177, eff. 07-
22-2008) (Amended by Ord. No. 9259, eff. 05-10-2010) (Amended by Ord. No. 9573,
eff. 03-15-2016)
Article 31-III
Off-Premise Outdoor Advertising Signs
31-40   Statement Of Purpose
31-41   Permitted Zones
31-42   Legal Nonconforming Signs
31-43   General Provisions
31-44   Size Of Signs
31-45   Height Of An Off-Premise Sign
31-46   Spacing For Off-Premise Signs
31-47   Setback Requirements
31-48   Lighting
31-49   Sign Permits
31-40   Statement Of Purpose
This Article establishes the regulations for the continuing use of off-premise
outdoor advertising in order to encourage an attractive environment for
businesses, inform and direct the general public, protect and enhance the
physical appearance of the community, ensure public safety along streets and
highways, and provide businesses with a format for advertising the goods and
services made available by the business community.
Outdoor advertising is a traditional advertising medium involving the use of
private property.
Outdoor advertising should be regulated to provide for safe structures, to be
properly located so as to meet uniform standards for construction and
maintenance, and to be maintained to conform to a neat and pleasant community
appearance.
In support of the previous statements and in order to assure the compatibility
of billboards with surrounding land usage, to protect the public interest in
streets and highways, to promote and maintain the safety and general welfare of
persons and their property in the vicinity of outdoor advertising structures,
to allow orderly and effective display of outdoor advertising, it is deemed to
be in the public interest to enact this ordinance.
The regulations in this Article shall be known as the Outdoor Advertising
Ordinance of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
(Added by Ord. No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-41   Permitted Zones
Off-Premise signs shall be permitted as principal, accessory or conditional
uses in the following zones:
   A.   Business Zones.
B2 – General Business Zone
AC – Arterial Commercial Zone
B3 – Heavy Business Zone
TD – Travel Development Zone
   B.   Manufacturing Zones.
M1 – Light Manufacturing Zone
M2 – Heavy Manufacturing Zone
M3 – Central City Manufacturing Zone
Note: Off-premise signs located within B2/AC zones shall comply with the most
restrictive requirements of Section
31-35 or Article III of this Chapter.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-42   Legal Nonconforming Signs
Any off-premise sign lawfully erected and in existence on the effective date of
this ordinance which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance may be
maintained as a matter of right as a legal nonconforming sign. The sign may be
maintained and repaired provided the degree of nonconformity is not increased.
If for any reason the sign is damaged to the extent that the repairs are equal
to or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the physical components of the sign it may
not be repaired or replaced unless it will comply with all requirements of this
Article.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8978, effective 06-08-2005)
31-43   General Provisions
   A.   No off-premise sign shall be constructed which resembles any official
marker erected by a governmental entity, or which by reason of position, shape,
or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any official traffic
control device.
   B.   Off-premise signs shall be constructed in accordance with local and
state building and electrical codes. Stamped structural engineering plans shall
accompany sign permit applications and shall be subject to wind speed
requirements as set forth in the latest edition of the adopted Building Code.
   C.   Off-premise signs shall be regularly maintained in good and safe
structural condition.
   D.   No off-premise sign shall be located on a property without the consent
of the property's owner or legal representative.
   E.   The general area in the vicinity of any freestanding sign on
undeveloped property shall be kept free and clear of sign materials, debris,
trash and refuse.
   F.   Signs located on the property as the principal use require that
landscaping regulations are provided as part of the permit to erect the sign.
   G.   Sign applications must include a copy of a lease sufficient to provide
a description of the tract of land and the location of the sign on the land.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-44   Size Of Signs
   A.   The maximum sign area for any one facing of an off-premise sign shall
not exceed three hundred seventy eight (378) square feet, excluding the base or
apron, trim supports, and other structural elements. Temporary embellishments
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the maximum sign area allowed and
limited to one hundred eighty (180) days within a calendar year.
   B.   Signs may be back-to-back, double-faced, V-type, and multiple-faced
with not more than two (2) faces to each facing and such structure shall be
considered as one off-premise sign.
   C.   The total of all faces shall not exceed 756 square feet with no single
face greater than 378 square feet.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9461, effective 12-24-2013)
31-45   Height Of An Off-Premise Sign
   A.   An off-premise sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet
measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the bottom of the
sign face.
   B.   An off-premise sign shall have a maximum height not to exceed fifty
(50) feet above grade level of the roadway to the top of the sign face, as
measured from the centerline of the roadway to which the sign is oriented.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-46   Spacing For Off-Premise Signs
   A.   No off-premise sign may be established within an eight hundred (800)
foot radius of any other off-premise sign along a state or federal highway.
Signs along arterial and collector streets may be located no closer than a five
hundred (500) foot radius from all other off premise signs.
   B.   Spacing from Directional and Official signs, On-Premises signs, or any
other sign which does not constitute an off-premise sign shall not be counted
nor shall measurements be made from such signs for the purpose of determining
compliance with these spacing requirements.
   C.   The minimum distance between off-premise signs shall be measured along
the nearest edge of the signs along either side of the highway, roadway, or
street.
   D.   All off-premise signs shall maintain a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
on-premise signs located upon the same property.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-47   Setback Requirements
   A.   Front. A minimum front yard setback equal to that required in the
zoning classification is required from the front lot line for any off-premise
sign, but in no event shall the setback be less than ten (10) feet.
   B.   Side. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet is required from side lot
lines for any off-premise sign, regardless of zone.
   C.   Rear. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet is required from the rear lot
line for any off-premise sign, regardless of zone.
   D.   In no case shall any portion of an off-premise sign overhang into or be
placed upon the public right-of-way, or any easement unless allowed by the
public entity.
   E.   All off-premise signs in excess of thirty (30) feet in height shall
provide an additional one (1) foot of setback for each foot in height over
thirty (30) feet in addition to those setbacks required above. The setback
distance shall be measured from the leading edge of the sign to the property
line. No sign shall exceed fifty (50) feet in total height.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-48   Lighting
Off-premise signs may be illuminated subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Signs which contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing,
intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited if such signs interfere
with traffic safety. Reflective surfaces or devices on sign faces, and
multiple-faced signs, with illumination, are permitted, provided such signs do
not interfere with traffic safety and comply with subsections (C) and (D) of
this section.
   B.   Electronic variable message signs giving public information such as,
but not limited to time, date, temperature, weather, or other similar
information, and commercial electric variable-message signs which function in
the same manner as multiple-faced signs are permitted, provided such signs do
not interfere with traffic safety and do not resemble or simulate traffic
control or safety devices or signs.
   C.   Signs must be effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays from being
directed toward any portion of the traveled ways, and must not be of such
intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of
any motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor
vehicle.
   D.   No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the
effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device or signal.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
31-49   Sign Permits
No off-premise sign shall be erected without submitting an application,
securing a permit and paying the permit fees required by the City of Grand
Island. Before any such permit is issued, an inspection shall determine that
the off-premise sign complies with the provisions of this Article. When any
construction, alteration, or repair of off-premise signs shall have begun
before a permit therefore has been issued, an investigation fee in addition to
the sign permit fee shall be collected. The permit fee and the investigation
fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
(Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003)
CHAPTER 32
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article 32-I   Obstructions And Excavations 
Article 32-II   Paving Districts
Article 32-III   Numbering Buildings
Article 32-IV   Street Vendors And Solicitors 
Article 32-V   Sidewalks, Curbs And Driveways 
Article 32-VI   Wells Beneath Sidewalks
Article 32-VII   Occupancy Of Public Right-Of-Way 
Article 32-VIII   Snow Removal
Article 32-IX   Controlled Access Streets 
Article 32-X   Sidewalk Assistance Program
Article 32-I
Obstructions And Excavations 
32-1   Obstructions Generally; Impeding Traffic
32-2   Trees And Shrubs Projecting Into Street
32-3   Obstructions; Clearance Above Alley
32-4   Obstructions; Duty To Remove
32-5   Obstructions; Notice
32-6   Obstructions; Removal By City
32-7   Obstructions At Intersections
32-8   Obstructions; Mailboxes
32-9   Mailbox; Defined
32-10   Guy Wires
32-11   Injuring Streets
32-12   Excavations; Barricades
32-13   Excavations While Ground Is Frozen
32-1   Obstructions Generally; Impeding Traffic
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person
to obstruct any of the streets, sidewalks, street right-of-way, or alleys in
the City, or in any manner impede the passage of traffic thereon by sitting,
standing, lying, walking, or running on the streets, sidewalks, street right-
of-way, or alleys with the intent to obstruct or impede, or to allow to permit
the same to be done by any building, vehicle, or other thing under such
person's charge or control.
32-2   Trees And Shrubs Projecting Into Street
It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant
of any property to permit the limbs, branches or foliage of any tree or shrub
upon such property to project into or extend over any street, lane, or sidewalk
in such manner that there shall be a clearance of less than fourteen feet
between the surface of such street, lane, or less than eight feet between the
sidewalk and such limbs, branches, or foliage.
It is also declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant
of any property to plant, grow, keep or maintain, or cause to be planted,
grown, kept, or maintained, any hedge, bush or shrubbery of any kind or nature,
within the public right-of-way to be continuous of five feet (5’) or more and
of a height over three feet (3’) above the roadway surface measured from the
nearest top of the roadway surface or the centerline grade of the roadway,
whichever is higher.
32-3   Obstructions; Clearance Above Alley
It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant
of any property to permit the limbs, branches or foliage of any tree or shrub
upon such property to project into or extend over any alley in such manner that
there shall be a clearance of less than fourteen feet between the surface of
the alley and such limbs, branches or foliage.
32-4   Obstructions; Duty To Remove
It shall be the duty of any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any
property to remove all obstructions as defined in §
32-2 and §
32-3 of the Grand Island City Code originating from that part of street right-
of-way lying between the curb and the adjacent property line of said property
owner or lessee or occupant, or where no curb exists, that part of the street
right-of-way between the lateral line of the right-of-way improved for vehicle
use and the adjacent property line of said property owner or lessee or
occupant.
32-5   Obstructions; Notice
It shall be the duty of the public works director to notify in writing the
owner, the agent of the owner, or the lessee, or the occupant of the property
whereon is located any illegally maintained tree or shrub as defined herein to
remove such tree or shrub or portion of such tree or shrub within ten days from
the date of such notice. If at the expiration of the date set forth in such
notice such illegally maintained portion of such tree or shrub has not been
removed and no extension of time has been granted, the public works director
shall report such refusal or neglect to the city attorney, who shall file
charges against such owner, agent or the lessee or occupant of such premises
for violation of this chapter.
32-6   Obstructions; Removal By City
The public works director shall have the right to cut down and to remove any
tree, tree limb or shrub which may be permitted to remain in violation of the
provisions of this chapter after service of notice to remove the same. The
public works director shall report to the mayor and city council the cost of
removing such tree, tree limbs or shrubs, and the cost thereof shall, by
ordinance, be assessed against the property on which such tree, tree limbs or
shrubs was removed, and the amount thereof shall be a lien on such premises and
shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of such
levy until paid. The same shall be collected and enforced as in the case of
special assessments.
32-7   Obstructions At Intersections
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to plant, grow, keep or maintain,
or cause to be planted, grown, kept, or maintained, any hedge, bush or
shrubbery of any kind or nature more than three feet in height above the
roadway within the triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two
intersecting streets and the line joining points distant thirty feet on each
side line from their point of intersection. For the purpose of this section,
"side line" of street shall mean the property line.
32-8   Obstructions; Mailboxes
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, or maintain a mailbox on or
over a sidewalk, or that overhangs the street paving, curb, or interferes with
the use of the public right-of-way or presents a hazard to those using it.
32-9   Mailbox; Defined
For the purposes of this chapter, mailbox shall mean an individual box used for
the collection or delivery of mail to a dwelling unit or business, and shall
include a number or group of mailboxes for the collection or delivery of mail
to a number of dwelling units or businesses.
32-10   Guy Wires
Every person owning or maintaining guy wires in such close proximity to city
streets, alleys, and sidewalks as to endanger pedestrians or vehicles shall
protect each of such guy wires by attaching thereto at the ground a board not
less than six feet in length and three inches in width, or by enclosing such
guy wires in a substantial and conspicuous wood or metal guard not less than
six feet in length and three inches in diameter or width. Such board or guard
shall be painted white or galvanized and shall be securely attached to such guy
wires.
32-11   Injuring Streets
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person
to injure or obstruct any public street or alley by placing upon or across the
same anything whatever that will injure the same or retard the public travel
thereon, or by encroaching upon the same, by any fence, or by plowing or
digging any ditch or opening thereon, or by taking any earth therefrom;
provided, that this section shall not apply to the City in the making of such
improvements and repairs as it deems necessary on its streets and alleys, or
any work that may be done thereon by the authority of the City.
32-12   Excavations; Barricades
No person shall leave any excavation made in any street or highway open at any
time without retroreflectorized barricades at such excavations. The name of the
company responsible for the excavation shall be clearly visible on the
barricades.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-13   Excavations While Ground Is Frozen
No person shall make any excavation in any street or highway in the City while
the ground is frozen except under the direction of the city council or the
public works director.
Article 32-II
Paving Districts
32-14   Service Pipes In New Paving Districts
32-15   Utility Lines In New Paving Districts
32-16   Notice
32-17   When Work To Be Done
32-18   City To Perform Work; Assessments
32-19   Disturbing Pavement
32-20   Pavement Or Sidewalk Cut; Defined
32-21   Applicability Of Section
32-20 To Section
32-32 
32-22   Permit To Make Pavement Cut
32-23   Permits; To Whom Issued
32-24   Permits; Application
32-25   Permit; Fee
32-26   Responsibility Of Permittee
32-27   Charges For Pavement Cuts
32-28   Call-Out Charge
32-29   Removal Of Sidewalk Or Pavement
32-30   Material And Workmanship Standards
32-31   Temporary Traffic Control
32-32   Backfilling
32-33   Public Works Director; Duties
32-34   Violations Of Article
32-14   Service Pipes In New Paving Districts
All property owners within a newly created paving district who derive their
water and sewer service from mains laid in the streets proposed to be paved
within such paving district are hereby required to lay service pipes and sewers
from the street to the curb line and connect same with the water and sewer main
in such street before the surface of such street is paved and within the time
provided by this article.
32-15   Utility Lines In New Paving Districts
All public service and utility companies having mains within the streets in a
newly created paving district are hereby required, after notice given as
provided by this article, to lay service pipes from their mains in such street
to the curb line for the use of all abutting property owners wishing to connect
up with the same in the future before the surface of such street is paved.
32-16   Notice
The city clerk is hereby instructed, after the organization of a paving
district is completed, to publish a notice, in a legal newspaper published in
the city, and directed to the property owners within such district, and to
public service and utility companies having mains within such streets or
wishing to lay mains in such streets for future use, advising such property
owners and public service and utility companies of the provisions of this
article.
32-17   When Work To Be Done
Service pipes and sewers shall be laid and connections made with the mains and
sewers in any street within a newly created paving district within thirty days
after the last publication of the notice provided by §
32-16.
32-18   City To Perform Work; Assessments
In the event any property owner within a newly created paving district shall
fail or neglect, within the time provided by this article, to lay service pipes
or connect with the water and sewer mains in any street before such street is
paved, the City is hereby authorized and required, after due notice given as
required by law, to lay such service pipes and connect the same with the water
and sewer mains in such street, and the cost of such extension, connection, and
improvement is hereby made assessable as a special tax against the property
contained in such district and benefit thereby.
32-19   Disturbing Pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the surface of any paved street
or alley for the purpose of laying service pipes or sewers after failing to
comply with §
32-14 to §
32-18.
32-20   Pavement Or Sidewalk Cut; Defined
A pavement or sidewalk cut for the purpose of §
32-21 to §
32-33 shall be defined as any cut or opening made in any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public ground and shall include all types of street and
alley surfaces and the curb and gutter.
32-21   Applicability Of Section
32-20 To Section
32-32
Work on pavement or sidewalk cuts or openings made either as a result of
obtaining a permit for the same or as a result of entering into a contract with
the City for some other type of construction shall be subject to the provisions
of §
32-20 to §
32-32, except that contracts with the City for the complete repaving or
resurfacing of an existing paved street or alley shall be exempt from this
provision.
32-22   Permit To Make Pavement Cut
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public ground cut or opening without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the City public works department.
32-23   Permits; To Whom Issued
The following parties shall be eligible to secure permits to cut or open
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public grounds:
   A.   Public Utility Corporations. Any public utility corporation having a
franchise to operate in any street, alley, or other public grounds in the City.
   B.   Licensed Plumbers. Licensed plumbers bonded by the City.
   C.   City-owned Utility Departments. The water and light departments owned
and operated by the City under the direction of the utility director.
   D.   Others Performing Services. Others performing services under contract
for the City with approved surety bonds on file.
   E.   Persons Requesting Lowered Curbs. Any person requesting a lowered curb
for a driveway entrance or parking area in back of a curb.
32-24   Permits; Application
The application for a permit to make a pavement or sidewalk cut shall be made
to the City Public Works Department and shall show the name of the party
seeking the permit, the location of the duty or opening to be made, the purpose
for which the same is to be made and any other pertinent information the City
may require. No permit or fee is required for the lowering (milling) of a curb
for ADA compliant handicap sidewalk ramps.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-25   Permit; Fee
The party applying for a permit to make a pavement or sidewalk cut shall pay to
the City at the time such permit is issued a fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule, which amount shall be credited to the general fund
of the City. No fee shall be charged for those performing services under
contract for the City, but a permit shall be required. A single (blanket)
permit may be issued with no fee to a contractor working in multiple locations
throughout the City as directed by the City. If work is commenced prior to
application for the permit, an investigation fee, in accordance with the
current Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be assessed. Each permit shall expire
six months from date of issuance.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09) (Amended by Ord. No. 9826,
effective 06/09/21)
32-26   Responsibility Of Permittee
   A.   Public utility corporations operating in the City under a franchise,
licensed plumbers, city owned utility departments, parties lowering curbs for a
driveway entrance, parties performing services under contract for the City, and
other permittees, shall at their own expense make such cuts or openings in
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds according to specifications
hereinafter provided. If the surface of any such cut or opening made in any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public grounds should thereafter become defective
within two years by reason of settling, faulty workmanship, or materials, the
same shall upon notice from the public works director be immediately repaired
and restored to the satisfaction of said director at no expense to the City. If
such party fails to repair or replace such faulty work within a reasonable
time, the City shall proceed to make such necessary repairs and restore the
surface of such cut or opening, and the expense incurred by the City shall
immediately be paid by the one to whom the permit to make such cut or opening
was issued.
   B.   Public utility corporations operating in the City under a franchise,
licensed plumbers, city owned utility departments, parties lowering curbs for a
driveway entrance, parties performing services under contract for the City and
other permittees, shall after receiving a permit to have a cut or opening made
in any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground, if such cut or opening
is to be made by the City, give at least forty-eight (48) hours notice before
such pavement or sidewalk cut shall be made by the City for them, provided,
that when such notice is given to the City on Friday or the day before any
legal holiday, the time period shall extend to at least 1 p.m. of the second
regular City workday. When desiring to have the replacement of any cut or
opening made, the same time limit shall apply as when making application for a
permit. The removal of the material from the area cut, the excavation
thereunder and the backfill to subgrade, shall be the responsibility of the
applicant and shall be performed according to the provisions of the Grand
Island City Code, as amended.
   C.   Parties performing services under contract for the City shall, after
making application for a permit to make such cuts or openings in streets,
alleys, sidewalk, and public grounds, proceed according to specifications as
provided in their contracts.
   D.   All integral curbs to be removed for driveway entrances (if not milled
by the City) shall be sawed and removed as per standard plans on file in the
office of the city engineer. When the curb to be removed is part of the curb
and gutter, the entire curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest
contraction joints beyond the width of the opening required.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-27   Charges For Pavement Cuts
The City will, after the person or corporation receives the permit, do pavement
cuts at the charges set out in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, except in
the case of public utility corporations or city owned utility departments.
The money collected for the above charges shall be credited to the General
Fund.
In lieu of the City performing any of the above services, a permittee may
perform such work on City right-of-way abutting permittee's property only, or
may employ an independent contractor, as approved by the public works director.
Such permittee shall not commence work until providing City proof of insurance
coverage with limits not less than hereinafter set out, namely:
   A.   Worker's Compensation Insurance in compliance with the laws of the
State of Nebraska, and Employees Liability Insurance.
   B.   Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance covering with limits as
follows:
      1.   Where work is to be performed in Light Business (B1) Zone, General
Business (B2) Zone, Heavy Business (B3) Zone, Light Manufacturing (M1) Zone,
Heavy Manufacturing (M2) Zone, Commercial Development (CD) Zone, or Industrial
Development (ID) Zone, with limits of not less than $25,000 for each person;
$50,000 for more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury and
death; and property damage limits of not less than $10,000; and
      2.   Where work is to be performed in Transitional Agriculture (TA) Zone,
Suburban Residential (R1) Zone, Low Density Residential (R2) Zone, Medium
Density Residential (R3) Zone, High Density Residential (R4) Zone, Residential-
Office (RO) Zone, or Residential Development (RD) Zone, with limits of not less
than $5,000 each person; $10,000 for more than one person for each occurrence
for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than
$5,000; and, in any instance, in such additional amounts as specified and
required by the public works director when authorizing the work.
   C.   Automobile liability insurance with limits of $10,000 each person, and
$20,000 each accident for bodily injury or death; and $5,000 each accident for
property damage, or such additional amounts as specified by the public works
director when authorizing the work.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-28   Call-Out Charge
In addition to the charges for pavement cuts, each person or corporation
receiving a permit as required by §
32-22 and requiring City personnel for performance of the work required
thereunder, shall pay a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule for concrete sawing and for concrete milling.
The aforesaid fee shall be credited to the General Fund. (Amended by Ord. No.
9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-29   Removal Of Sidewalk Or Pavement
All pavement and sidewalk openings for trenching purposes shall be removed in
complete sections regardless of age. The minimum width of all openings shall be
no wider at the bottom than at the top of such trench. Undercutting of openings
is hereby prohibited.
When bad expansion joints are sawed out for replacement, the sawcut shall be at
least 36 inches on either side of the bad expansion joint. Each repair will be
reviewed to ensure that a small area of old pavement is not left before the
next expansion joint is encountered.
When an underground main, pipe, conduit, cable, or other public utility, or any
appurtenance thereto, is involved with any sidewalk, the public works director
shall determine whether the entire sidewalk, a panel or panels, or a segment or
segments less than a panel or panels, shall be removed.
Any deviation of this section must first be approved by the director of public
works.
32-30   Material And Workmanship Standards
All material and workmanship on the following shall conform with specifications
on file in the public works department:
   A.   All brick pavement that has been opened shall be replaced with a six-
inch concrete base and a sand cushion, then replace the brick surface course
and seal the joints with emulsified asphaltic compound.
   B.   All brick pavement with an asphaltic surface course that has been
opened shall be replaced with six-inch concrete base and three inches of
asphaltic concrete; provided, when there is not an asphaltic plant operating in
or near the City, the opening may be replaced with nine inches of concrete upon
receiving permission from the public works director.
   C.   Concrete pavement that has been opened shall be replaced with concrete
of the same thickness as that removed, but in no case shall it be less than six
inches in thickness.
   D.   Bituminous surfaced pavement with a concrete base that has been opened
shall be replaced with a six-inch concrete base and surfaced with at least two
inches of asphaltic concrete. When there is not an asphaltic plant operating in
or near the City, the opening may be replaced with eight inches of concrete by
receiving permission from the city engineer.
   E.   Bituminous surfaced pavement without a concrete base that has been
opened shall be replaced with six inches of asphaltic concrete or six inches of
concrete upon receiving permission from the public works director.
32-31   Temporary Traffic Control
Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD is the national
standard for work zone traffic control. The current version shall be followed.
Any contractor utility company or any other person firm or corporation
performing work within the right of way of any public street public way or
alley in the City of Grand Island shall install and maintain Temporary Traffic
Control TTC in accordance with the standards of the MUTCD.
Approval of permits to work within public right of way may be contingent upon
evidence of capability to provide, install and maintain TTC devices in
accordance with the MUTCD and these provisions.
The Director of Public Works or their representative shall have the authority
to direct corrective actions for TTC not in compliance with the MUTCD and these
provisions. These actions include suspending operations and requiring removal
of all equipment and materials from the right of way.
If the TTC is left in place longer than 4 hours and no personnel are on the
site, the individual responsible for installing the TTC shall provide telephone
numbers of personnel who will be available on 24 hours per day, seven days per
week basis to the Director of Public Works. These people shall be responsible
for repair, correction, replacement and maintenance of the traffic control
devices. These people shall perform inspections of the TTC at the site twice
during the day and once during the night every 24 hours until the work is
completed and the right of way is cleared.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9205, effective 2/25/2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9289, effective 2/23/2011)
32-32   Backfilling
All excavations, where a sidewalk, curb, gutter, or paved street has been cut
or where new paving (concrete or asphalt) will be placed shall be backfilled
using nonshrinkable backfill. The backfill shall be filled to the subgrade of
the undisturbed sidewalk, curb, gutter, paving, or earth surface.
The nonshrinkable backfill shall be a mixture of sand, gravel, Portland cement,
and water which flows easily around the utility being covered and develops a 28
day compressive strength of from 30 to 200 psi. No nonshrinkable backfill mix
designs shall be used without the approval of the Director of Public Works. Fly
ash may be approved in the mix if test data are submitted to indicate the above
characteristics are met.
The Director may allow placement of excavated fill in six (6) inch lifts at 95%
of maximum density where the opening is very large and the cost of
nonshrinkable fill would be prohibitive. In those cases the permit holder will
be required to hire an independent soil testing laboratory to test separately
each six (6) inch lift for density and certify that each and every lift was
compacted to 95% of maximum density.
Graveled streets shall be backfilled with dampened excavated or similar
material in successive horizontal layers or lifts not exceeding six (6) inches
in thickness and mechanically compacted equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
that of the adjacent undisturbed soil. In unimproved areas such as easements
and alleys the trench or opening may be backfilled with sand which shall be
flushed into place with water; provided, the top twelve inches (12") of
backfill shall be made of the excavated top soil.
All surplus excavated material shall be removed from the location by the
person, firm, or corporation making an excavation in any street, alley, or
public ground in the City. Any person, firm, or corporation having made an
excavation in any street, alley or public ground shall maintain all trenches or
ditches in a safe condition for the public until the excavated material has
reached final settlement.
32-33   Public Works Director; Duties
It shall be the duty of the public works director to make inspections of all
pavement and sidewalk cuts and the openings made in streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or other public grounds, and the closing and restoration of the surface thereof
and to enforce the provisions of this article.
32-34   Violations Of Article
Any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or violate any of
the requirements or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and if such person shall be a licensed drain layer or plumber,
such license may be declared forfeited.
Article 32-III
Numbering Buildings
32-35   System Generally
32-36   East-West Streets, West Of Broadwell
32-37   Numbers Assigned
32-38   Owner's Duty To Install
32-39   Size And Color
32-40   Place For Number
32-41   Enforcement
32-42   Definitions
32-35   System Generally
Except as otherwise provided by this section, First Street shall be the
dividing line for the numbering of lots, houses, and buildings upon the north
and south streets; that is to say, lots, houses, and buildings on the north and
south streets between First Street and Second Street shall constitute the one
hundred block, from Second Street to Third Street, the two hundred block, from
Third Street to Fourth Street shall constitute the three hundred block, from
Fourth Street to Fifth Street the four hundred block, etc., north; from First
Street to Division Street shall constitute the one hundred block, from Division
Street to Koenig Street, the two hundred block, from Koenig Street to Charles
Street, the three hundred block, etc., south.
Except as otherwise provided by this section, the numbers shall increase by two
for each twenty-two feet. The even numbers shall be on the west side of the
street and the odd numbers on the east side of the street, that is to say, the
first twenty-two feet north of First Street on the east side of the street
shall be number 101 and on the west side of the street, 102, and the second
twenty-two feet north shall be number 103 on the east side and number 104 on
the west side, etc.
In that section of the city lying west of Broadwell Avenue and north of the
right of way of the Union Pacific Railroad Company, the road now known as the
Lincoln Highway shall constitute a dividing line. From the Lincoln Highway to
George Street shall constitute the one hundred block north, and from George
Street to North Front Street the two hundred block, and from North Front Street
to Fourth Street the three hundred block, one number as aforesaid for each
twenty-two feet on each side of the street.
In that section of the city lying south of the road now known as the Lincoln
Highway and north of the right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad Company,
from the Lincoln Highway to Thorn Street shall constitute the one hundred block
south, and from Thorn Street to the right-of-way the two hundred block south,
numbered as aforesaid.
In that section of the City lying south of East Division Street and east of the
Belt Line, the following shall constitute the numbering: From East Division
Street to Sutherland Street shall constitute the two hundred block, from
Sutherland Street to Groff Street shall constitute the three hundred block
south, from Groff Street to Ashton Avenue as projected in Joehnck's
Subdivision, shall constitute the four hundred block south, numbered as
aforesaid.
On South Oak Street, South Vine Street, and South Plum Street, from East
Division Street to East Koenig Street shall constitute the two hundred block
south, and from East Koenig Street to Ashton Avenue the three hundred block
south; on the three such streets between East Division Street and East Koenig
Street there shall be one number for each forty-four feet instead of each
twenty-two feet as in the rest of the City. In construing the terms of this
section, Court Street shall constitute a part of Division Street.
In that part of the City lying north of East Ninth Street and east of the
right-of-way of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Company between Ninth
Street and Tenth Street and east of the St. Paul Road, from Ninth Street north
to the north line of Lots Five, Six, and Seven, Pleasant Hill Addition, shall
constitute the nine hundred block. From such point to Loan Street, the one
thousand block; from Loan Street to Edgar Street, the one thousand one hundred
block; from Edgar Street to Stanley Street, the one thousand two hundred block,
etc., north.
32-36   East-West Streets, West Of Broadwell
The numbers of houses on all streets running in easterly and westerly
directions west of Broadwell Avenue shall commence with 1800, the first block
west of Broadwell Avenue constituting the one thousand eight hundred block; the
second block west of Broadwell Avenue constituting the one thousand nine
hundred block, etc.
32-37   Numbers Assigned
It shall be the duty of the public works director to prepare a plan for the
numbering of principal buildings in accordance with the provisions of this
article so that the owner of any principal building may, by applying therefor,
receive a certificate of the correct number to be placed on such principal
building.
32-38   Owner's Duty To Install
It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of any
principal building in the City to place or cause to be installed and maintained
on such building a proper house number as herein designated.
32-39   Size And Color
For any installation or replacement of address numbers on or after October 1,
2008, the figures of each number shall be not less than four inches in height.
Each figure shall be plain, legible, and of contrasting color with its
background. The numbers shall be maintained in such condition at all times.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9182, effective 10-1-2008)
32-40   Place For Number
The house number shall be placed on the principal building in a conspicuous
place as near as may be to the main entrance thereto so that it may be easily
seen from the street extending in front of said building. The requirement for
house numbers as specified in this article shall be the minimum requirement.
The owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of any principal building may place such
other correct house numbers on such building as deemed necessary so long as the
minimum requirements of this article are met.
32-41   Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the public works director to enforce the provisions of
this chapter concerning the duty of the owners, agents, lessees, or occupants
to number buildings, and any person refusing to number a building as herein
required, or who shall fail to do so within a period of thirty days after being
notified in writing by the public works director to do so, shall upon the
conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
32-42   Definitions
The following words when used in this article shall have the following
meanings:
Street. Every way or place open to the use of the public as a matter of right
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
Principal Building. The main building on any lot, tract, or subdivision of
either. This definition includes business, commercial, and industrial buildings
as well as dwellings.
Public Works Director. The public works director of the City of Grand Island or
his or her delegated representative.
Article 32-IV
Street Vendors And Solicitors
32-43   Definitions
32-44   Food Vendor Permit; General Rules
32-45   Solicitors; General Rules
32-46   Street Vendors; General Rules
32-47   Rules Applicable To All
32-48   Downtown Business District Streets
32-49   Use Of Sirens, Loudspeakers, Bells, Etc.
32-50   When Concessions Granted To Others
32-51   Violations
32-43   Definitions
Food Vendor. shall mean any person, firm or corporation who engages in the sale
of food or drink in which such food or drink is prepared, packaged, served and/
or sold by such person, firm or corporation from a temporary or mobile
facility, and is sold or offered for sale on the streets, alleys, easements, or
other public or private property in the City of Grand Island. The sale or offer
of sale of freshly grown whole produce shall be exempt from this definition.
Solicitor. shall mean any person that travels from house to house taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise,
subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever. An exception shall
be granted to residents of Grand Island giving, selling or offering for sale
goods, wares or merchandise who qualify as bona fide nonprofit organizations
and operate exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or
civic purposes or where persons selling or offering for sale goods, wares or
merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale of the same do so in an event held
exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or civic
purposes.
Street Vendor. shall mean any person, firm or corporation who engages in the
sale of merchandise or commercially prepared, pre-packaged, non-potentially
hazardous food or drink on the streets, alleys, easements, or other public
property in the City of Grand Island.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-44   Food Vendor Permit; General Rules
   A.   All food vendors shall make application, pay a permit fee and obtain a
permit from the Central District Health Department prior to the sale of food or
drinks on any street, alley, easement, or other public or private property in
the City of Grand Island.
   B.   The amount of the permit fee shall be established and approved by the
Health Board.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-45   Solicitors; General Rules
   A.   All solicitors shall make application to the Grand Island Police
Department prior to the commencement of any house-to-house sale of goods, wares
or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever.
   B.   Each person shall show proof of identity with a photo identification
card, and shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to the Grand Island Police
Department in accordance with the Grand Island Fee Schedule at the time of
making such application.
   C.   Processing of such application shall be completed within three working
days (Monday-Friday), and shall include a background check of the person
submitting such application. Applicants having a felony conviction will be
denied a Solicitor's Permit.
   D.   Solicitor's Permits shall remain in effect for 30 consecutive days from
the date of issuance.
   E.   Solicitors may conduct business, door-to-door, only between 8:00 a.m.
and sunset. This regulation does not apply where the solicitor is on the
property by the express, prior invitation of the person residing on the
premises.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-46   Street Vendors; General Rules
   A.   All street vendors shall make application to the Grand Island Police
Department, pay a permit fee and obtain a permit prior to using the streets,
alleys, easements or other public property in the City of Grand Island to sell
merchandise or commercially prepared, pre-packaged food or drinks.
   B.   The owner of each company making application for a street vendor permit
shall show proof of identity with a photo identification card, and shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee to the Grand Island Police Department in
accordance with the Grand Island Fee Schedule at the time of making such
application.
   C.   Processing of such application shall be completed within three working
days (Monday-Friday), and shall include a background check of the owner of the
company submitting such application. Applicants having a felony conviction will
be denied a Street Vendor Permit.
   D.   Street Vendor Permits shall be in effect for 30, 90 or 365 consecutive
days from the date of issuance as requested by the vendor and upon payment of
the applicable permit fee.
   E.   Street vendors may conduct business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. This section shall not apply if the street vendor holds a validly
issued liquor license which permits vending under a Special Party Bus License,
Pedal Pub License, or any other validly issued liquor license which permits
vending from a vehicle.
   F.   A person shall vend only when the vendor's truck is lawfully parked or
stopped. This section shall not apply if the vendor holds a validly issued
liquor license which permits vending of alcohol from a moving vehicle.
   G.   A person shall vend only from the side of the vendor's truck away from
moving traffic and at the curb or edge of the roadway.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,050,
effective 11-4-2025)
32-47   Rules Applicable To All
The following rules shall apply to all persons conducting business in
accordance with this Article:
   A.   A valid permit shall, at all times, be in the possession of the person
authorized to operate such business, and shall be subject to inspection upon
request.
   B.   Except as provided in §
32-48, every person authorized by the Grand Island Police Department or the
Central District Health Department to engage in any business allowed by this
Article may use any of the streets in the City except those streets which have
been designated as highways or arterial streets.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-48   Downtown Business District Streets
It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to do business under this
Article to conduct such business on any street listed in §
13-17 Congested Parking Area of this code. Vendors may do business under this
article only if all operations can be contained to a single standard parking
spot and they operate for no more than one-hour in the same location. Holders
of liquor licenses which permit vending from a moving vehicle may do so in
conformity with their properly granted license within the Congested Parking
Area from South Front Street to 3rd Street and from Eddy to Sycamore, including
connecting streets and alleys.
(Amended by Ord. No. 10,050, effective 11-4-2025)
32-49   Use Of Sirens, Loudspeakers, Bells, Etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any business pursuant to this
article while traveling about the City by motor vehicle or other conveyance, to
use sirens or loudspeakers for the purpose of advertising such business.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-50   When Concessions Granted To Others
   A.   No person shall engage in sales of food or drink at any City park or
recreational facility without first obtaining written permission from the Parks
and Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have authority
to limit the number of street vendors or food vendors doing business at any
City park or recreation facility and the manner and time that such sales are
conducted.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to do business under
this article to carry on such business at any City park or recreation facility,
baseball or football game, or any athletic contest where an exclusive
concession to carry on a similar business has been granted by the Parks and
Recreation Director.
   C.   Any person that has been refused permission to engage in sales of food
or drink at any City park or recreational facility by the Parks and Recreation
Director may request a hearing before the Mayor and City Council on the issue
of whether the refusal was arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
32-51   Violations
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to enforce the
provisions of this Article against any person found to be violating the same.
Any violation of the provisions of this Article may result in the immediate
seizure of such permit by the Grand Island Police Department, and may result in
prosecution.
(Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004)
Article 32-V
Sidewalks, Curbs And Driveways
32-52   Prerequisites Generally
32-53   Duties Of Public Works Director
32-54   Material; Location; Curb Length
32-55   Sidewalks
32-56   Specifications
32-57   Costs At And Within Intersections
32-58   Sidewalks; Assessments; Bonds
32-59   Civil Liability And Cleaning Assessments
32-52   Prerequisites Generally
Any person who intends or desires to alter, break, construct, reconstruct, or
remove any curb, gutter, public sidewalk, or hardsurfaced driveway, or any
combination of them within the area of any street right-of-way lying within the
limits of the City, or within its zoning jurisdiction, shall notify the public
works director of such intent or desire and obtain a permit therefor. No
construction or reconstruction work in connection therewith shall be started
until the public works director has furnished specifications for such work. A
permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be
charged for each permit, and each permit shall expire six months from date of
issuance. The City Council may, by resolution, waive the permit fee.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8808, eff. 5/7/2003) (Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective
02/25/09)
32-53   Duties Of Public Works Director
The public works director shall furnish specifications for all approved
projects described by §
32-52, and shall cause the work to be inspected at proper times to see that
such work is done in accordance with such specifications. No additional fee
shall be collected for the inspection service, nor for the original engineering
service.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-54   Material; Location; Curb Length
All curbs and gutters, public sidewalks and hard-surfaced driveways constructed
or reconstructed within the area of any street right-of-way shall be of
Portland cement concrete construction (driveways may also be constructed of
hot-mix asphalt), unless the city council, upon proper showing that the public
will be adequately protected, shall permit other material to be used in a
particular location.
Curbs and gutters shall be located so as to provide the proper width for future
street paving; shall be constructed to the grade established by ordinance; and
shall not be constructed in length of less than the full distance between
street intersections at any one time.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-55   Sidewalks
Sidewalks built within one foot or less of property lines shall be known as
"conventional" sidewalks. Conventional sidewalks shall be at least four feet
wide. Only conventional sidewalks may be constructed on arterial, collector,
and other protected streets, except as hereinafter provided.
Sidewalks constructed immediately adjacent to any curb and gutter shall be
known as "curb" sidewalks. Curb sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. No
curb sidewalk may be constructed unless curb and gutter is constructed
immediately prior to or is in place at the time of the sidewalk construction.
No curb sidewalks may be constructed unless there is constructed a continuous
curb sidewalk between successive streets or between a street and an alley. The
intent of this section is to provide for uniform sidewalk construction between
successive streets or streets and alleys. In some instances, intersections or
alleys are not in existence in newly platted areas, or blocks in earlier
platted areas are excessive in length, in which case curb sidewalk may be
constructed only if it will be continuous for approximately one block and there
remains a continuous distance of the same length for construction of
conventional sidewalk. For the purpose of this section, one block is defined as
300 feet, more or less. The purpose of this requirement is to provide for
continuous sidewalk, either curb or conventional, for a reasonable distance
without change. No conventional sidewalk may be replaced with curb sidewalk
without special permission from the Public Works Director.
Where buildings, improved parking lots, or other improvements extend to the
property line, the sidewalk must be at least five feet in width and extend to
the property line.
In areas classified as rural routes by the U.S. Postal Service, properties will
be allowed curb sidewalk only if the following conditions exist:
   A.   If curb exists or is being constructed immediately prior to
installation of the sidewalk; and
   B.   If all property owners installing curb sidewalk agree to neighborhood
box units which are approved and installed by the U.S. Postal Service; and
   C.   If the section of sidewalk will be consistent between successive
streets or from a street to an alley.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9227, effective 07/29/09)
32-56   Specifications
The public works director shall determine and provide specifications for the
surfaced driveways as nearly uniform as possible throughout the City, and, in
determining such specifications, shall consider the mixture of materials,
forming, thickness, handling, finishing, expansion joints, foundations,
compaction, and any other items or phases for the highest durability of the
completed structure, and for safety, convenience, and general utility. Special
consideration shall be given to design for vehicle crossings and driveways.
32-57   Costs At And Within Intersections
The owners of corner lots at the intersections of streets shall be responsible
for the cost of construction of the extensions of public sidewalks to the
adjacent curb lines, and, in case of curb sidewalk construction, shall be
responsible for the cost of all such sidewalks laid within the street
intersection area.
32-58   Sidewalks; Assessments; Bonds
   A.   Petition Method of Sidewalk Construction. Upon the petition of any
freeholder who desires to build such a permanent sidewalk, the council may by
ordinance order the same to be built, and that the cost of the same until paid
shall be a perpetual lien upon the real estate along which the freeholder
desires such sidewalk to be constructed, and the City may assess and levy the
costs of same against such real estate in the manner provided by law. The total
cost of the building of the permanent sidewalk shall be levied at one time upon
the property along which such permanent sidewalk is to be built, and become
delinquent as herein provided: One-seventh of the total cost shall become
delinquent in ten days after such levy; one-seventh in one year; one-seventh in
two years; one-seventh in three years; one-seventh in four years; one-seventh
in five years; one-seventh in six years. Each of such installments, except the
first, shall draw interest at the rate of not exceeding seven percent per annum
from the time of the levy aforesaid until the same shall become delinquent; and
after the same shall become delinquent interest at the rate of three-fourths of
one percent per month shall be paid thereon as in the case of other special
taxes. The council shall pay for the building of such permanent sidewalk out of
the general fund.
   B.   Sidewalks; Failure to Improve.
      1.   Whenever it shall be determined by a three-fourths vote of the city
council that public sidewalks are not in place contiguous to the street side
boundary lines of any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city, or that
any sidewalks then in place are of insufficient width for usual and convenient
use by the public, or that any sidewalks are not laid upon property grade and
line, or are of defective construction, or are in a state of disrepair, or are
obstructed so as to make such sidewalks unsafe, dangerous or hazardous for
public use, then the Public Works Department shall send notice to the property
owner giving 15 days to obtain a permit and an additional 15 days to construct
or repair the sidewalk as required. Notice will be sent by regular United
States mail to the owner’s last known address.
      2.   In case the owner or owners of any lot, lots or lands abutting on
any street or avenue, or part thereof, shall fail to construct or repair any
sidewalk in front of his, her or their lot, lots or lands within the time and
in the manner as directed and required by the mayor and council, after having
received due notice to do so, they shall be liable for all damages or injury
occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk;
and the mayor and council shall have power to cause such sidewalk to be
constructed or repaired and assess the cost thereof against such property in
the manner provide by law for the levying and collection of special
assessments.
      3.   In addition to the foregoing, the Council by a three-fourths vote of
all members may, by ordinance, create a sidewalk district pursuant to §19-2417,
R.R.S. Neb., and cause such sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed, or
repaired as the case may be and shall contract thereof. The council shall levy
assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to the
sidewalk improvements especially benefited thereby in such district in
proportion to the benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement. All
assessments shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of
the levy until paid. The assessment of the special tax, for the sidewalk
improvement, shall be levied at one time and shall become delinquent as
follows: One-seventh of the total assessment shall become delinquent in ten
days after such levy; one-seventh in one year; one-seventh in two years; one-
seventh in three years; one-seventh in four years; one-seventh in five years;
and one-seventh in six years. Each of such installments, except the first,
shall draw interest at the rate of not exceeding seven percent per annum from
the time of the levy until the same shall become delinquent; and after the same
shall become delinquent, interest at the rate of fourteen percent per annum
shall be paid thereon as in the case of other special taxes. All such
assessments shall be made and collected in accordance with the procedure
established for paving assessments. The power to establish a sidewalk district
shall be cumulative to the general authority of the City to regulate sidewalks.
   C.   Bonds, Warrants, Payments. For the purpose of paying the cost of
sidewalk improvements in any sidewalk district, the council may, by ordinance,
cause to be issued bonds of the City, to be called Sidewalk Bonds of District
No., payable in not exceeding six years from date, and to bear interest
annually or semi-annually at not exceeding six percent per annum, with interest
coupons attached. Such bonds shall be general obligations of the City with
principal and interest payable from a fund made up of the special assessments
collected and supplemented by transfers from the general fund to make up any
deficiency in the collection of the special assessments. For the purpose of
making partial payments as the work progresses, warrants may be issued by the
council, upon certificate of the engineer in charge showing the amount of the
work completed, in a sum not exceeding eighty percent of the cost thereof,
which warrants shall be redeemed and paid upon the sale of the bonds issued and
sold as aforesaid.
   D.   Waiver of Sidewalk Requirements. This section shall be of no force or
effect with respect to any property subject to a waiver of sidewalk
requirements granted by the city council as provided by this Code.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-59   Civil Liability And Cleaning Assessments
It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of lots or lands to keep the
adjacent sidewalks clean and free from obstructions and accumulations of snow,
ice, mud, and slush. If such owner or occupant shall fail in this duty after
notice, the City may by contract or through its own employees, clean such
sidewalks and free them from obstructions and accumulations of snow, ice, mud,
and slush. The cost of such service shall constitute an assessment and tax upon
the real estate adjacent to the sidewalks involved and shall remain a lien on
the real estate which may be foreclosed by the City in the manner provided by
law for other liens or assessments, with the priority of other taxes.
Any person who is injured by the failure or neglect of the owner and occupant
of real estate to comply with this provision may have a cause of action for
damages against such owner and occupant.
Article 32-VI
Wells Beneath Sidewalks
32-60   Construction; Conditions
32-61   Application And Permit
32-62   Cost Of Supervision And Inspection
32-63   Bond
32-64   Wells In Traveled Portion Of Street
32-65   Disposing Of Discharge From Well
32-66   Interconnection With City Water
32-67   Occupation Tax
32-68   Registration Of Existing Wells
32-60   Construction; Conditions
Authority is hereby granted to persons conducting a business within the City to
construct privately owned wells on that portion of the street of the City which
is beneath the public sidewalk; provided, that the same has been approved by
the City; and provided, further, that the same is constructed in a manner
approved by the City.
32-61   Application And Permit
Before any well is installed pursuant to this article, the party desiring to
construct the same shall first make an application to the public works
director, which application shall show the location and size of such well and
the purpose for which the same is to be used. If the construction of such well
is approved by the City a permit to install the same shall be granted.
32-62   Cost Of Supervision And Inspection
The party desiring to construct a well pursuant to this article shall pay to
the City an amount in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for
the cost of supervision and inspection, which sum shall be deposited to the
credit of the public works department.
32-63   Bond
Any person constructing or repairing any privately-owned well on city-owned
property shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the sum of ten thousand
dollars to be approved by the city council, which bond shall contain the
condition that the applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify
the City from all liability, claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of
every nature and description caused by or growing out of the making of any
excavation, hole, or trench in any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare,
including the pavement, sidewalk, and sidewalk space in the City, the opening
or removal of any pavement or any sidewalk surface, the placing of any
obstruction, barricade, material, equipment, or apparatus of any nature in the
street, highway, alley or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk
space, the failure to properly protect any excavation, hole, or trench in any
street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk or sidewalk
space, the installation of any stop box in any street, highway, alley, or
thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space, and any and all
negligence on the part of such person or his agents, servants or employees, in
the use and occupancy of any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including
the sidewalk and sidewalk space, in any manner or nature whatsoever while
engaged in the construction or repair of such wells; provided, that any person
who shall have undertaken to indemnify the City as a licensed plumber shall not
be required to furnish any additional indemnity bond.
32-64   Wells In Traveled Portion Of Street
No well shall be constructed pursuant to this article in any portion of the
alley or in any portion of the street used for vehicular travel.
32-65   Disposing Of Discharge From Well
It shall be unlawful to empty the discharge from any well constructed pursuant
to the provisions of this article into the sanitary sewer system of the City or
upon any street, avenue, or alley of the City, or upon any lot, tract, parcel
of land, or any part thereof which will tend to create a nuisance or interfere
with the use or enjoyment by any person of such land or adjacent land. The
discharge from such well shall be conveyed in pipes or conduits placed beneath
the public sidewalk or in the alleys or public streets which shall be connected
with and served by storm sewers. The construction of such pipe lines or
conduits beneath such public sidewalk or in any street or alley shall be
constructed and laid in such places and in a manner to be approved by the
public works director and all excavations or openings made for such pipe lines
and conduits shall be promptly covered, closed and backfilled as directed by
the public works director, and whenever it shall become necessary to break any
sidewalk, paving, or curb and gutter, or any building wall, to provide
passageway for such conduit or pipe, the same shall be replaced by the party
constructing such well in the manner and when ordered so to do by the public
works director.
32-66   Interconnection With City Water
It shall be unlawful for any party constructing any well pursuant to this
article to cause any interconnection with the city water supply system.
32-67   Occupation Tax
Any person constructing a well pursuant to this article shall pay annually to
the City an occupation tax for the use of the area beneath the public sidewalk
in an amount and at a time as provided by the City Council.
32-68   Registration Of Existing Wells
The owner or operator of any privately-owned well now in existence and being
used for air conditioning or commercial purposes shall register the same with
the City public works department in order that the same may be periodically
inspected so that the City may ascertain whether or not such well has been
wrongfully connected with the water system of the City. There shall be no fee
required for the registration of existing wells.
Article 32-VII
Occupancy Of Public Right-Of-Way
32-69   General
32-70   Occupancy At Pleasure Of City
32-71   Indemnification Required
32-72   Railroad Company Platforms
32-69   General
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in §
1-2 of this code, to use, occupy or obstruct any portion of any street, alley,
sidewalk, easement or other public right-of-way or real estate owned by or
under the control of the City of Grand Island without first applying for,
securing and executing a License Agreement and paying the processing fee in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which fee shall not be
refundable. The procedure for application and review of a license agreement
shall be as follows:
      1.   An applicant or their agent shall file an application and a
processing fee shall be paid in the Public Works Department on forms to be
provided by the City.
      2.   The Public Works Department shall review the information provided on
the application and shall distribute copies of said application to such
departments and agencies within the City as may have an interest in or be
affected by the proposed use set out in the application for review, comment
and/or recommendations.
      3.   The application for license agreement shall be approved, unless a
department or agency of the City finds that the proposed use violates a
federal, state or local statute, regulation, ordinance, code, rule, regulation
or policy or impedes, impairs, diminishes the use of the public land by the
City, the public or other person which has a lawful right to use and/or occupy
said lands.
   B.   The Public Works Director or his/her designee, upon receipt of comments
and/or recommendations from the aforementioned departments and agencies, may
approve, or disapprove, in whole or in part an application for license
agreement. The director or his/her designee may specify such conditions and
terms to be included in the requested license agreement as are necessary and
prudent to protect the interests of the City, public, or any person which has a
lawful right to use and/or occupy said lands. The director shall inform the
applicant or their agent in writing of any decision disapproving in whole or in
part the application for license agreement, said decision to be sent to the
address shown on the application.
   C.   In the event an application submitted under (A) above is disapproved in
whole or in part, the applicant, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision by the Public Works Director or his/her designee, may request that the
application be placed on the agenda at a regular meeting of the Mayor and City
Council for review and final decision. A request for review shall be made in
writing and filed in the Public Works Department, along with the appeal fee set
out in the Grand Island Fee Schedule.
   D.   This section shall not apply to;
      1.   personal property which is not affixed or attached to the real
estate except movable buildings or structures; and
      2.   underground lawn irrigation systems encroaching into the public
Right-of-Way except when license agreements are required to obtain Federal or
State Transportation Funds for an improvement project.
   E.   Underground vault space under public sidewalk on buildings constructed
prior to 1972 in the Downtown Improvement Parking District, as defined in
Section
13-1 of the Grand Island City Code, are maintained solely at the sufferance of
the City. The City reserves the authority to require structural upgrades or
removal if in the interest of public safety.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9372, effective 04/03/2012) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9391, effective 08/14/2012) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9683, effective 05/01/
2018)
32-70   Occupancy At Pleasure Of City
Any occupancy of the public right-of-way granted under this article shall be at
the pleasure of the City and shall be limited to the uses or occupancies set
forth in the license agreement created pursuant to this article.
32-71   Indemnification Required
32-72.1   Use Of Public Right-Of-Way
All license agreements created pursuant to this article shall provide:
   A.   That such use or occupancy is at the licensee's sole risk;
   B.   The licensee shall waive any claim for damages against the City, its
officers, employees, agents, and contractors for any damage or injury that may
result to the Licensee's property within the area occupied pursuant to said
license agreement;
   C.   The licensee shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from and
against any and all loss or damage, and any and all claims, demands, suits,
liabilities, and payments in contract or tort, penal or otherwise, resulting
from or in connection with the use or occupancy of the public right-of-way
pursuant to said license agreement;
   D.   That such use or occupancy is at the pleasure of the City and may be
revoked at any time;
   E.   Such other conditions that the City deems necessary to protect the
interests of the City and the general public's use of the public right-of-way.
32-72.1   Use Of Public Right-Of-Way
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in this Code to use and
obstruct for building, construction, demolition or razing purposes any street,
alley, or sidewalk, or part thereof, without first securing a permit from the
director of public works, pay the fee in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule, and giving bond/proof of insurance, provided:
      1.   No permit shall authorize occupancy of any street or sidewalk space,
part thereof, other than immediately in front of, or any alley space
immediately behind the lot or lots upon which any building or structure is in
process of demolition, razing, erection, or other construction is to be done,
and in relation to which such permit is issued, unless consented to in writing
by the abutting property owner or owners.
      2.   During progress of any such operations a sidewalk not less than four
feet in width shall be at all times kept open, and protected for the purpose of
passage in front of each lot or lots and within the space permitted for
occupancy.
      3.   Such sidewalk shall be protected by a tight board fence at least
four feet in height, and when deemed necessary and required in the permit by
the director of public works, by a tight board fence of such additional height
and an adequate tight board roof.
      4.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of
necessary driveways and gates for the delivery or removal of material across
such sidewalks to or from the building, construction, demolition or razing
site, provided, a watchman is stationed at the sidewalk to warn and protect the
public.
   B.   No permit, as provided above, shall be required for any roll off box
owned and provided by a collector licensed pursuant to
Chapter 17, Article II of the City Code. All other provisions of Chapter 32,
Article VII, relating to use of public right-of-way shall apply to any roll off
box which is used upon and obstructs any street, alley or sidewalk or part
thereof.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9890, effective 08/10/2022)
32-72   Railroad Company Platforms
*32-72.1   Use Of Public Right-Of-Way
32-72.2   Material Stored In Street
32-72.3   Earth Or Rubbish Storage
32-72.4   Derrick On Street Or Sidewalk
32-72.5   Abutting Owners; Consent And Waiver
32-72.6   When Occupancy Terminates
32-72.7   Barricades
32-72.8   Permit - Issuance, Fee, And Insurance
32-72.9   Penalty For Violation
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any platforms that have been
erected, or may hereafter be erected, in the streets, alleys or sidewalks
conveyed to the City by the Union Pacific Railroad Company in which deed of
conveyance such company has reserved for itself and its assigns the right to
erect such platforms in such streets.
*32-72.1   Use Of Public Right-Of-Way
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in this Code to use and
obstruct for building, construction, demolition or razing purposes any street,
alley, or sidewalk, or part thereof, without first securing a permit from the
director of public works, pay the fee therefor, and giving bond/proof of
insurance, provided:
      1.   No permit shall authorize occupancy of any street or sidewalk space,
part thereof, other than immediately in front of, or any alley space
immediately behind the lot or lots upon which any building or structure is in
process of demolition, razing, erection, or other construction is to be done,
and in relation to which such permit is issued, unless consented to in writing
by the abutting property owner or owners.
      2.   During progress of any such operations a sidewalk not less than four
feet in width shall be at all times kept open, and protected for the purpose of
passage in front of each lot or lots and within the space permitted for
occupancy.
      3.   Such sidewalk shall be protected by a tight board fence at least
four feet in height, and when deemed necessary and required in the permit by
the director of public works, by a tight board fence of such additional height
and an adequate tight board roof.
      4.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of
necessary driveways and gates for the delivery or removal of material across
such sidewalks to or from the building, construction, demolition or razing
site, provided, a watchman is stationed at the sidewalk to warn and protect the
public.
   B.   No permit, as provided above, shall be required for any roll off box
owned and provided by a collector licensed pursuant to
Chapter 17, Article II of the City Code. All other provisions of Chapter 32,
Article VII, relating to use of public right-of-way shall apply to any roll off
box which is used upon and obstructs any street, alley or sidewalk or part
thereof.
32-72.2   Material Stored In Street
It shall be unlawful to store building materials or occupy a street, or
temporary sidewalk, in front of any one building, in excess of one-third of the
width of the same, or to erect any enclosure or store or place any material
within eight feet of any street or railway tracks.
32-72.3   Earth Or Rubbish Storage
It shall be unlawful to store either upon sidewalks or roadways or streets or
alleys, earth or a material other than sand used in the construction of the
building, taken from excavations, and rubbish taken from buildings, or to fail
and neglect to remove the same therefrom from day to day as rapidly as
produced, or when dry rubbish apt to produce dust is being handled, to fail and
neglect to keep the same wetted down so as to prevent its blowing about by the
wind.
32-72.4   Derrick On Street Or Sidewalk
It shall be unlawful to use any derrick, or place the same upon any sidewalk or
street unless approved by the director of public works.
32-72.5   Abutting Owners; Consent And Waiver
If the written consent and a waiver of claims for damages against the City or
the owners of property abutting upon the side of any proposed building or
construction is first obtained and filed with the director of public works, the
permission to occupy a street, alley, and sidewalk space may be extended beyond
limitations of such building in front of the property for which the consent of
the owner or lessee thereof has been secured upon the same terms and conditions
as those fixed for the occupancy of sidewalk, street, and alley abutting upon a
building site.
32-72.6   When Occupancy Terminates
Streets, alleys, and sidewalks may be occupied only in connection with the
actual erection, repair, alteration, or removal of buildings, and permission
for such occupancy shall terminate with the completion of such operation. It
shall be unlawful to occupy any sidewalk or street after the completion of such
operation for which a permit has been issued by the director of public works.
It shall also be unlawful to occupy a sidewalk or street, under authority of
such permit, for the storage of materials not intended for immediate use for
operations for which such permit has been issued.
32-72.7   Barricades
   A.   Retroreflectorized barricades shall be maintained at each end of every
pile of material in every street or alley, and at each end of every excavation.
   B.   Any roll off box using and obstructing a street, alley or sidewalk or
part thereof must be equipped with reflective material not less than two (2)
square feet in area on both the front and back ends.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-72.8   Permit - Issuance, Fee, And Insurance
   A.   Permits for obstructions of streets, sidewalks, and alleys shall be
issued by the director of public works. The fee for a permit shall be in
accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, and shall be paid when
the permit is obtained. If work is commenced prior to application for the
permit, an investigation fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee
Schedule in addition to the permit fee shall be assessed. Each permit shall
expire six months from date of issuance.
   B.   No permit shall be issued until the applicant therefore shall have
executed and delivered to the director of public works, proof of insurance to
be approved by the city attorney and filed with the city clerk, as follows:
      1.   Worker's Compensation Insurance in compliance with the laws of the
State of Nebraska, and Employees Liability Insurance.
      2.   Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance covering with limits
as follows:
         a.   Where work is to be performed in Light Business (B1) Zone,
General Business (B2) Zone, Heavy Business (B3) Zone, Light Manufacturing (M1)
Zone, Heavy Manufacturing (M2) Zone, Commercial Development (CD) Zone, or
Industrial Development (ID) Zone, with limits of not less than $25,000 for each
person; $50,000 for more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury
and death; and property damage limits of not less than $10,000; and
         b.   Where work is to be performed in Transitional Agriculture (TA)
Zone, Suburban Residential (R1) Zone, Low Density Residential (R2) Zone, Medium
Density Residential (R3) Zone, High Density Residential (R4) Zone, Residential-
Office (RO) Zone, or Residential Development (RD) Zone, with limits of not less
than $5,000 each person; $10,000 for more than one person for each occurrence
for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than
$5,000; and, in any instance, in such additional amounts as specified and
required by the public works director when authorizing the work.
      3.   Automobile liability insurance with limits of $10,000 each person,
and $20,000 each accident for bodily injury or death; and $5,000 each accident
for property damage, or such additional amounts as specified by the public
works director when authorizing the work.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9890, effective 08/10/2022)
32-72.9   Penalty For Violation
Any person violating the provisions of §§
32-72.1,
32-72.2,
32-72.3,
32-72.4,
32-72.5,
32-72.6, 32-76.7,
32-72.8, and
32-72.9 of this Code shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Article 32-VIII
Snow Removal
32-73   Snow And Ice Removal From Sidewalks
32-74   Shoveling, Plowing Or Blowing Snow Onto The Street Or City Property
32-75   Removal From Sidewalks By City
32-76   Removal From Private Property
32-77   Closing Streets
32-78   Curb Sidewalk Areas; Private Driveways
32-79   Sidewalk Cleaning Equipment; License
32-80   License; Application
32-81   License; Conditions For Issuance
32-82   License; Fee; Term; Transferability
32-83   Bond; Liability Insurance
32-84   License; Suspension; Revocation
32-73   Snow And Ice Removal From Sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of
real estate within the City to fail to clear or have cleared the sidewalks
contiguous thereto of all snow and ice within twenty-four hours after the
cessation of any storm or snow fall; provided, that if such lot, tract, or
parcel of real estate is located within the Central Business District of the
City of Grand Island, then it shall be unlawful for the occupant owner of such
lot, tract, or parcel of real estate to fail to clear the sidewalks contiguous
thereto of all snow and ice within six hours after the cessation of any storm
or snow fall, or by 12:00 Noon should the cessation of any storm or snow fall
occur during night-time hours.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of
real estate within the City to fail to clear or have cleared the sidewalks
contiguous thereto of all ice accumulated from natural or artificial drainage
of water within twenty-four hours after the commencement of accumulation;
provided, that if such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate is located within
the Central Business District of the City of Grand Island, then it shall be
unlawful for the occupant or owner of such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate
to fail to clear the sidewalks contiguous of all ice accumulated from natural
or artificial drainage of water within six hours after the commencement of
accumulation, or by 12:00 noon should the accumulation of ice occur during
night-time hours.
The violation of this section shall give rise to a cause of action for damages
in favor of any person who is injured by the failure or neglect of the owner or
occupant of the real estate to comply with the provisions of this section.
32-74   Shoveling, Plowing Or Blowing Snow Onto The Street Or City Property
32-74.1   Objects In The Right-Of-Way 
32-74.2   Mailboxes
It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant
of any property or contractor to shovel, plow or blow any snow from sidewalks,
driveways or private property onto any city street or other city property. The
only exception is in the Central Business District where snow from sidewalks
only may be placed in the street in such a manner as to cause the least
interference to traffic upon such street.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09) (Amended by Ord. No. 9227,
effective 07/29/09)
32-74.1   Objects In The Right-Of-Way
The City will assume no responsibility for damage to underground lawn
sprinkling systems or landscaping installed in the City owned right-of-way.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09)
32-74.2   Mailboxes
A. Where mailboxes are placed adjacent to the street it shall be the policy of
the City that snow shall be plowed as close as practicable to the curb to allow
for passage of traffic and mail delivery. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to keep piled snow away from mailboxes so mail can be delivered.
The City will not assume responsibility for clearing mailboxes for mail
delivery.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9227, effective 07/29/09)
32-75   Removal From Sidewalks By City
If any sidewalk contiguous to any lot, tract or parcel of real estate within
the City is not cleared of snow and ice within the time specified in §
32-73, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause such sidewalk to be
cleared forthwith, and to immediately report the cost and expense thereof, and
the legal description and the name of the record owner of the property to the
city council. Thereupon the city council shall, by resolution, direct the city
clerk to file with the county clerk a certified copy of such report and
resolution, directing that the cost and expense shown in such report be placed
upon the assessment rolls and tax books of the county to constitute a lien
against such property and be collected in the manner provided by law.
32-76   Removal From Private Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any snow
or ice from privately-owned property within the City and place or cause to be
placed such snow or ice upon any street or alley within the City.
32-77   Closing Streets
Whenever it shall appear necessary to close any street to facilitate snow
removal, the public works director is hereby authorized to close any such
street in the City; provided, that the closing of such streets shall be clearly
indicated by proper signs, signals, lights or barricades.
32-78   Curb Sidewalk Areas; Private Driveways
It is hereby specifically provided that in areas where curb sidewalks exist, if
and when it becomes necessary to plow snow from the street on to such curb
sidewalks, it shall immediately become the abutting property owner's
responsibility to have such snow removed as provided by law. It is also hereby
provided that when snow from the streets is plowed into private driveways, it
shall not be the responsibility of the City to remove such snow therefrom.
32-79   Sidewalk Cleaning Equipment; License
No person shall operate for commercial purposes, on any sidewalk space within
the City, any motor powered snow removal or sidewalk cleaning equipment without
first obtaining a license from the city treasurer.
The provisions of §
32-79 through §
32-84 shall not apply to two-wheeled, motor powered snow removal equipment.
The term "sidewalk space" as defined in §
22-1 of the Grand Island City Code shall apply to this article.
32-80   License; Application
Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon forms prepared
and made available by the public works director.
32-81   License; Conditions For Issuance
The city treasurer shall issue a license hereunder only after receiving a
certificate of approval from the public works director that:
   A.   Such equipment does not exceed seventy-five horsepower;
   B.   The equipment is in a safe condition;
   C.   The bond and insurance policy, as required by this chapter, has been
approved;
   D.   The gross load weight of such equipment shall not exceed seven thousand
five hundred pounds;
   E.   The axle weight of such equipment with two wheels mounted on said axle
shall not exceed four thousand five hundred pounds, and further, that the
weight for an axle with a single wheel shall not exceed two thousand five
hundred pounds;
   F.   The distributed load through the equipment's wheels to the sidewalk
surface shall not exceed one hundred fifty pounds per square inch, and further,
the distributed load through said wheels shall not exceed two thousand pounds
per square foot to the subgrade of the sidewalk.
32-82   License; Fee; Term; Transferability
A license shall be issued to a successful applicant hereunder after payment to
the city treasurer of an annual license fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule. All licenses shall expire on September 30 following
date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked; and no license shall be
assignable or transferable either as to permittee or equipment.
32-83   Bond; Liability Insurance
Every applicant for a license hereunder shall accompany the application with a
bond approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding company or
surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, in the sum
of ten thousand dollars, conditioned that the licensee shall save and keep the
city free and harmless from any and all loss or damages arising from or out of
the use of said license, and upon the payment by the licensee of any and all
liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses for injuries to persons or damages
to property arising out of the operation or maintenance of such motor powered
snow removal or sidewalk cleaning equipment. The foregoing condition shall
include payment to the city as necessary to restore the sidewalk to such
condition as will meet with the approval of the public works director if by
operation of the equipment there is damage to said sidewalk. A liability
insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Nebraska, conforming with the requirements of this section, may be
submitted in lieu of a bond or insurance policy if submitted in lieu of a bond
or insurance policy if submitted in lieu thereof.
In addition to the bond, every applicant for such license shall also file with
the application required, a public liability insurance policy which such
applicant has taken out and agrees to maintain in full force and effect at all
times covered by such license, at its expense, which insurance shall include
the City of Grand Island as a named insured with personal injury coverage in a
sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars for the injury or death of any one
person, three hundred thousand dollars for the injury or death of any number of
persons in any one accident, and with a coverage in a sum of at least fifty
thousand dollars for property damage in any one accident. The policy of
insurance shall further provide that it cannot be canceled until ten days'
written notice of such cancellation shall have been filed with the city clerk.
32-84   License; Suspension; Revocation
The public works director shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a
license issued hereunder upon finding that such licensee is conducting business
in a reckless or careless manner, or if the licensee is shown to be no longer
qualified, or fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
Article 32-IX
Controlled Access Streets
32-85   Fonner Park Road
32-85   Fonner Park Road
That part of Fonner Park Road between the west line of Sycamore Street and the
east line of Pleasant View Drive is declared to be a controlled access road,
and no real estate lying north of and abutting thereon, except street
intersections, shall be permitted access, ingress, or egress to that part of
Fonner Park Road.
Article 32-X
Sidewalk Assistance Program
32-86   Purpose
32-87   Eligible Properties
32-88   Reimbursement Rate
32-89   Reimbursement Fund
32-90   Homestead Exemptions
32-91   Reimbursement Request
32-92   Prioritization Of Work
32-86   Purpose
The Sidewalk Assistance Program is established to repair displaced, broken,
and/or ADA deficient sidewalks in the public right of way and to construct
segments of sidewalks to fill in the network along streets within the City of
Grand Island. The City shall be responsible for installation and repair of ADA-
compliant corner ramps.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-87   Eligible Properties
Eligible properties for assistance are limited to existing owner-occupied
single family dwellings. Sites located upon or adjacent to new developments
and/or new construction shall not be eligible for this program.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-88   Reimbursement Rate
Owners of eligible properties may be eligible for reimbursement funds at a rate
equal to fifty percent (50%) of the amount the City would pay for the same or
similar work based upon recent bids obtained by the City. The rate will be
published yearly by the City Public Works Director.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-89   Reimbursement Fund
The yearly funding for the Sidewalk Assistance Program shall be set by the
Grand Island City Council as part of the yearly budget. Reimbursement for
eligible properties shall only be available up to the amount budgeted for the
fiscal year. No reimbursements will be made after the budgeted amount has been
expended for the fiscal year.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-90   Homestead Exemptions
Properties with a valid Homestead Exemption approved by the Nebraska Department
of Revenue may be eligible for up to one hundred percent (100%) reimbursement.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-91   Reimbursement Request
Property owners shall request reimbursement under this program prior to any
work being done. Requests shall be made to the Public Works Department for the
City of Grand Island on a form provided by the City.
After submittal of the request, the Public Works Director, or designee, will
inspect the site and determine what work is needed. Only work deemed needed by
the City will be eligible for reimbursement. The Public Works Director, or
designee, will inspect the work as it progresses and assess the work upon
completion. Only work completed and approved by the Public Works Director shall
be eligible for reimbursement.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
32-92   Prioritization Of Work
The Public Works Director shall have sole discretion for prioritization of work
under this program so as to optimize the effectiveness of this program. Work
shall be handled in the order it is identified except that the Public Works
Director may give higher priority to sidewalks based upon condition and/or
pedestrian traffic volume or character.
(Added Ord. No. 9764, effective 04/08/2020)
CHAPTER 33
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Article 33-I   In General
Article 33-II   Procedure, Plans And Data
Article 33-III   Subdivision Agreement
Article 33-IV   Minimum Design Standards
Article 33-V   Minimum Improvements
Article 33-VI   Miscellaneous
ADDENDUM "B"   DRAWING STANDARDS AND SAMPLE PLATS
Article 33-I
In General
33-1   Definitions
33-2   Application Of This Chapter
33-3   Exemption
33-4   Division Of Platted Lots
33-5   Approval Necessary
33-6   Building And Utility Permits; Prohibition
33-1   Definitions
Applicant shall mean the titleholder of record, his agent, or a person holding
a notarized letter authorizing the person to represent the legal owner of the
property, or an appropriate purchase agreement.
Alley shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet
or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service
access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street
and to provide access to utility services located therein. Buildings facing an
alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this code
related to frontage on a dedicated street.
Block shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public
streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, unplatted land, City-County boundaries,
or adjoining property lines.
Bond shall mean any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond,
or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council
which meets the intent of such security required by this chapter.
Boundary Adjustment shall mean the transfer of property by deed to a respective
owner or owners of contiguous property for the purpose of adjusting a boundary
line and not for the purpose of creating an additional lot or parcel.
Building Line shall mean a line parallel, or nearly parallel, to the street
line at a specified distance from the street line which marks the minimum
setback distance a building may be erected. In the case of a cul-de-sac, the
building line shall be measured around the curvature of the street line and
shall be located at the required front yard setback where the lot width shall
meet the minimum lot width required in the zoning district.
Chief Building Official(s) shall mean the individual(s) appointed and/or
employed by the City to enforce the prescribed and adopted building codes for
the City.
City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. Also, City Council or
governing body.
City Council shall mean the governing body for the City of Grand Island,
Nebraska.
City Engineer shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Grand Island utilized
for the recommendation, advice, and implementation of engineering work as
requested by the City or such other engineer as the City may assign in the
particular matter.
Clerk shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Comprehensive Development Plan shall mean the master plan for the improvement
and development of Grand Island, Nebraska, as adopted by the Hall County
Regional Planning Commission and the City in accordance with the laws of the
State of Nebraska and the ordinances of Grand Island.
County Control Point shall mean any point identified as such within the Grand
Island/Hall County Geographic Information System (GIS) by the GIS Committee.
County control points may include but are not limited to township corners,
section corners, quarter section corners, subdivision corners, and block
corners.
Cul-de-Sac shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
Dead End Street shall mean a public way that has only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and does not terminate in a vehicular turn-around.
Dedication shall mean the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to
some public use.
Developer see "Subdivider".
Easement shall mean a right to use a parcel of land, granted to the general
public, utility, corporation or person(s) for a specific purpose or purposes.
Flood Plain shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see also definition of "flooding" in §
36-128).
Floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Frontage Road shall mean minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial
streets and highways, which reduce the number of access points to the arterial
street or highway for the purpose of increased traffic safety.
Grading Plan shall mean a drawing of a proposed subdivision with plans and
specifications for grading which is intended to represent the layout which will
be approved for construction by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
Hall County Regional Planning Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional
Planning Commission of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Improvements shall mean street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and
gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and
lines, water meters, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities,
culverts, bridges, public utilities, or other such installation as designated
by the City Council or its specific approving authority.
Landscaped shall mean landscaping improvements which include but are not
limited to screen plantings, lawn area, pools, trees, shrubs, fences, and
walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips, etc., shall not substitute for lawn
area. Landscaping shall be provided within two years of issuance of occupancy
permit for the principal structure on each lot, and thereafter be properly
maintained.
Lot shall mean a parcel, tract or area of land created in conformance with this
chapter that may be separately owned, used, developed or built upon.
Lot Consolidation shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments
which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
Lot, Corner shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If
the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall
be considered an "interior lot".
Lot, Depth of shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines. Corner lots shall provide at least one dimension equal to the
required lot depth prescribed in the affected zoning district.
Lot, Double Frontage shall mean a lot having a frontage of two non-intersecting
streets.
Lot, Flag shall mean a lot with frontage and access provided to the bulk of the
lot by means of a narrow corridor. The measurement of the actual lot frontage
shall be made along the widest portion of the lot along the line parallel to
the street.
Lot, Frontage shall mean that portion of a lot abutting a street. For purposes
of determining yard requirements of corner lots and through lots, all sides of
a lot abutting a street shall be considered frontage.
Lot, Interior shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line shall mean the boundary line of a lot.
Lot Minimum Area shall mean the minimum square footage of land area within the
boundaries of the platted lot lines, as applicable to designated zoning
districts.
Lot, Nonconforming shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that
required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created
prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements
were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the
office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road
or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created.
Lot, Platted shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision of the plat of
which, or the appropriate permit for which, has been legally approved by the
City and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Hall County.
Lot of Record shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the
records of the Hall County Register of deeds at the time of the passage of a
regulation or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
Lot Split shall mean a subdivision involving the division of one or more lots
with the end result not be greater than the two lots.
Lot, Through shall mean a lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets, not
including a corner lot.
Lot, Width of shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot
line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.
Master Plan see "Comprehensive Development Plan".
Monument shall mean an identification marker established by certified land
survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle
point, block corner, street centerline, or other point.
Outlot shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting,
which is intended as open space or other use, for which no building permit
shall be issued for any private structure. Typically uses are limited within
the subdivision agreement and/or plat.
Owner shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate, or corporation
having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to
commence and maintain such proceedings.
Pedestrian Way shall mean a tract of land dedicated to public use, which cuts
across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets or
properties.
Person shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or
combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Grand Island,
Nebraska.
Planned Unit Development shall mean a development designed to provide for an
unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses
in accordance with an approved development plan.
Plat shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description
of individual properties, including street rights-of-way, public utility
easements, etc.
Plat, Administrative shall provide for lot combinations and boundary
adjustments which result in reconfigured lots with new lot boundaries.
Plat, Final shall mean the final plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication of
land prepared for filing or recording in conformance with this chapter.
Substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a
registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor in accordance
with this chapter is required.
Plat, Preliminary shall mean the preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or
dedication prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
Plat, Revised Preliminary shall mean a revised plat or map of a previously
approved preliminary plat, including supporting data, indicating a proposed
subdivision development, prepared in accordance with this chapter.
Preliminary Study shall mean a drawing of a proposed subdivision to be approved
by the Planning Commission and City Council before proceeding with a final
plat.
Property Line Adjustment shall mean the relocation of a single common property
line between two abutting lots, parcels or other units of land where an
additional lot, parcel or unit of land is not created and the existing lot,
parcel or unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment must comply with the
applicable zoning requirements. A property line adjustment does not alter the
location of utility services and hook-ups. Property line adjustments are
accomplished through an administrative plat.
Sidewalk or Walkway shall mean that portion of a dedicated right-of-way or
easement improved and intended for pedestrian use only.
Replat shall mean the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a
recorded subdivision to achieve a reconfiguration of an existing subdivision or
to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
Street shall include public streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways,
roads, lanes, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public easements and
right-of-way. Where explicitly authorized by the City Council, private streets
may be authorized with the subdivision agreement.
Street, Arterial shall mean a street of considerable continuity connecting
various sections of the City, designated as an arterial street on the official
street plan of the City.
Street, Collector shall mean a street or highway that is intended to carry
traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the
principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for
circulation within the development as designated in the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
Street, Frontage Access shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major
street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily
for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major
street by a dividing strip.
Street, Local shall mean a street which is used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
Street, Major shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high
volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial
streets as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
Street, Minor shall mean a street intended primarily to provide pedestrian and
vehicular access to the abutting properties.
Subdivider shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other
entity, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a subdivision.
Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two
(2) or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, provided
that the smallest lot created by the division is less than ten (10) aces in
size.
Subdivision, Administrative shall mean the re-subdivision of existing
subdivided lots and blocks, involving the adjustment of existing lot boundaries
or the consolidation of lots, in a manner consistent with zoning regulations
concerning minimum area and dimensions of lots; but not creating additional
lots nor necessitating the dedication of additional public right-of-way or
easements.
Subdivision Agreement shall mean an agreement between the City of Grand Island
and a subdivider whereby the subdivider agrees to construct any required public
street, drainage, and other improvements, for a subdivision and to provide
security for completion of the subdivision improvements and in situations
involving public financing, the relative cost be borne by the subdivider and by
the public entity. Conditions involving lot frontage, use, annexation,
landscaping, sidewalks, flood plain, utilities and similar concerns specific to
the development of the property may also be addressed.
Water Course, Drainage Way, Channel or Stream shall mean a current of water
usually flowing in a definite channel, having a bed and side or banks, and
discharging itself into some other stream or body of water.
Zoning District shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform
use regulations are specified.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8921, effective 07-28-2004) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9031, effective 03-01-2006)
33-2   Application Of This Chapter
Any plat hereafter made, or any subdivision, or any part thereof lying within
the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island or in the unincorporated
territory within an area extending for two miles beyond the city limits of the
City of Grand Island, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as
herein prescribed. Any plat of land contiguous to the corporate limits of the
City shall be treated as an addition to the City as provided in Section 19-916,
R.R.S. 1943. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivider of
a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more parts for the purpose of sale,
transfer of ownership, including the resubdivision or replatting of land or
lots. The regulations contained herein shall also apply to all persons or
entities engaging in any aspect of real estate development, whether immediate
or future. This provision shall not be construed to limit the acceptance of
deeds, right-of-way, or other land by the city council when such acceptance is
in the public interest and not for the purpose of circumventing these
regulations.
In order to clarify, ratify, and include within this code the policy of the
City of Grand Island, the minimum improvements required pursuant to this
chapter shall be installed in all subdivisions in which development commenced
after January 1, 1997, irrespective of when the subdivision was created and the
plat or dedication legally filed of record.
33-3   Exemption
The subdivision of land into parcels which are more than ten acres in size and
not involving the dedication of any street, easement, or other public use shall
be exempt from the requirements of these regulations.
For proposed developments that provide for the dedication of any street,
easement or other public use and contains lots that are all more than ten acres
in size, the provisions of these regulations shall apply except Article V.
Minimum Improvements . The improvements for this type of subdivision shall be
determined by agreement. The Public Works Director, Utilities Director, and
Planning Director shall provide recommendations to the Planning Commission and
City Council for minimum improvements to be included in the Subdivision
Agreement.
33-4   Division Of Platted Lots
For subdivisions or resubdivisions having one or more of the following
characteristics, the public works director and the director of planning shall
have the power to waive any or all portions of the preliminary study
requirements and procedure:
   A.   Where the subdivision involves the creation of not more than two new
building lots and does not involve the dedication of a full width street or is
not part of a larger tract intended for future development;
   B.   Where the subdivision involves the creation of not more than one new
building lot which exceeds 20,000 square feet in size and has access to a
public road;
   C.   Where the subdivision involves the replatting of existing lots and
results in the creation of additional building lots, or involves an
administrative subdivision.
33-5   Approval Necessary
No plat, subdivision, or administrative subdivision shall be recorded in the
Register of Deeds Office, Hall County, Nebraska, until all provisions and
approvals set forth in these regulations have been met.
33-6   Building And Utility Permits; Prohibition
No officer, employee, or agent of the City of Grand Island shall issue any
building permit, make any water or sewer connection, or issue any permit for
any water or sewer connection for any building or buildings constructed or
proposed to be constructed on land subdivided contrary to the provisions of
these regulations. No officer, agent, or employee of the City of Grand Island
shall perform or caused to be performed any construction or maintenance upon
any street or public way purported to be dedicated as a public street or public
way by virtue of being shown on a plat, unless such plat shall have been
approved as provided by these regulations. The above prohibitions shall not
apply to any plat or dedication legally filed of record prior to April 22,
1968.
Article 33-II
Procedure, Plans And Data
33-7   Preliminary Study And Data
33-8   Final Plat
33-7   Preliminary Study And Data
   A.   The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Planning Commission
twenty-five (25) copies of the proposed preliminary study and required data at
least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the next regular Planning
Commission meeting at which approval of the preliminary study is requested for
standard preliminary plat requests. Twenty-five (25) copies of preliminary
study or plat approval requests for planned developments including: Commercial
Development Zone, Residential Development Zone, Travel Development Zone,
Gateway Corridor (Overlay) District, and Mobile Home Residential Zone; shall be
submitted at least forty (40) days prior to the next regular Planning
Commission meeting at which approval of the preliminary study is requested.
   B.   The director of Planning shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting, transmit a copy of the proposed preliminary study
to the Board of Education of the school district or districts involved, the
public works director, director of utilities operations, and any other
department or agency that may be affected by the plat and as the commission may
designate. Such department or agency except said Board of Education shall have
five days to review the referred preliminary study and report back to the
director of Planning any requirements or recommendation pertinent to approval
of the study. The director of Planning shall examine the preliminary study as
to compliance with laws and ordinances of the approved master plan, other
official plans and good planning principles; analyze the recommendations
submitted by other departments and agencies; coordinate these recommendations
and submit his recommendations to the Planning Commission at the next regular
meeting.
   C.   The Planning Commission shall consider all evidence presented by the
subdivider, the director of Planning, and others, and shall approve or
disapprove the preliminary study, and shall transmit its recommendation along
with all supporting papers to the City Council. A copy of the recommendation
shall be sent to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained in the
permanent files of the Planning Commission.
   D.   The city council shall consider and act upon the Planning Commission's
recommendation, and shall approve or disapprove the preliminary study. In the
event of disapproval, the council shall notify the Planning Commission and
state specific reasons for disapproval, a copy of which shall be transmitted to
the subdivider. Approval by the council shall be effective for a period of
twelve months, after which if a final plat has not been submitted to the
Planning Commission for approval, reapproval of the preliminary study by the
Planning Commission and council shall be required.
   E.   The preliminary study shall be made from an accurate survey made by a
licensed land surveyor in the State of Nebraska. The acceptable scale shall be
between 10 and 100 feet to the inch. Scales of more than 100 fet per inch may
be permitted by the Director of Planning for very large projects. All
preliminary studies shall provide the following information:
      1.   Proposed name and acreage of the subdivision.
      2.   Name and address of owner, subdivider, and engineer or land
surveyor.
      3.   A legal description sufficient to define the location and boundaries
of the subdivision and evidence of ownership of the property proposed to be
subdivided.
      4.   A map indicating plans for the development of the entire area if the
proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development. Preliminary engineering plans for all improvements for the entire
holding shall be a part of the requirement. Positive drainage from easements
shall be included in the drainage plan.
      5.   Location, width, and name (if any) of all highways, streets,
easements, right-of-way or railroad, whether public or private, parks, or other
open spaces within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Tentative grades
and direction of flow in streets and easements shall be shown.
      6.   Location, grade, and size of existing and proposed storm drainage
facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric, CATV, telephone, and gas
mains within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
      7.   Contours at intervals of six inches.
      8.   If any portion of the land within the boundary of the proposed
subdivision is subject to flood or storm water overflow, that fact and location
shall clearly be shown. Areas covered by water and trees shall also be shown.
      9.   Layout, approximate dimensions, proposed use, number of each lot,
and number of each block shall be indicated.
      10.   Location and outline to scale of each existing building or
structure.
      11.   Date, north point, and scale shall be shown.
      12.   All areas not a part of the proposed plat due to other ownership
shall be clearly shown and marked "Not a Part."
      13.   If the lots within the proposed subdivision are to be served by
individual water supply and sanitary sewage systems, then the general location
of such facilities on each lot shall be shown.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9081,
effective 10-25-2006)
33-8   Final Plat
33-8.1   Final Plat-Administrative Subdivision
   A.   The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Planning Commission
twenty-five (25) copies of the proposed final plat at least twenty (20) days
prior to the date of the next regular Planning Commission meeting at which
approval of the final plat is requested for standard final plats. Twenty-five
(25) copies of final plat approval requests for planned developments including:
Commercial Development Zone, Residential Development Zone, Travel Development
Zone, Gateway Corridor (Overlay) District, and Mobile Home Residential Zone;
shall be submitted at least forty (40) days prior to the next regular Planning
Commission meeting at which approval of the final plat is requested.
   B.   At the time of filing of the final plat with the Planning Commission
the subdivider shall pay to the city treasurer a filing fee, as provided by a
fee schedule approved by the City Council, which shall not be refundable unless
such final plat is withdrawn by the subdivider prior to consideration by the
Planning Commission.
   C.   The director of Planning shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting, transmit a copy of the proposed final plat to the
Board of Education of the school district or districts involved, the public
works director, the director of utilities operations, and any other department
or agency that may be affected by the plat and as the Commission may designate.
Such department or agency except said Board of Education shall have five days
to review the referred final plat and report back to the director of Planning
any requirements or recommendations pertinent to approval of the final plat.
The director of Planning shall examine the final plat as to compliance with
laws and ordinances of the master plan; other official plans and good planning
principles and compliance with the approved preliminary study if submitted;
analyze the recommendations submitted by other departments and agencies;
coordinate these recommendations and submit his recommendation to the Planning
Commission at the next regular meeting.
   D.   The Planning Commission shall review the recommendation of the director
of Planning and either approve or disapprove the final plat. If the Planning
Commission finds that the final plat has been prepared in compliance with these
regulations and in substantial conformance with the approval preliminary study,
such plat shall be approved. In the event of disapproval, specific points of
variance with aforesaid requirements shall be a part of the Planning
Commission's recommendation. The Planning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation, along with a copy of the final plat, to the city council. A
copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the subdivider, and one copy shall
be retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.
   E.   The city council shall consider and act upon the Planning Commission's
recommendation and shall approve or disapprove the final plat. If it finds that
the final plat has been prepared in compliance with these regulations and in
substantial conformance with the approved preliminary study, such plat shall be
approved. In the event of disapproval, specific points of variance with
aforesaid requirements shall be a part of the official record. Upon approval of
the final plat, the subdivider shall, within twelve months, furnish the
following departments the data as shown or such approval shall become null and
void:
      1.   Register of Deeds
         a.   Approved final plat
         b.   Protective covenants, restrictions and conditions, if any.
         c.   Approved drainage plan.
      2.   City Clerk
         a.   Print of approved plat.
         b.   Approved subdivision agreement.
         c.   Print of approved drainage plan.
      3.   Public Works Director
         a.   Reproducible of approved final plat.
         b.   Reproducible of approved drainage plan.
         c.   Copy of approved erosion control plan unless the subdivision
contains less than five acres in size.
   F.   The final plat shall be in permanent black lettering and lines on high
grade linen or mylar which is reproducible with dimensions of 18 inches by 24
inches. The acceptable scale shall be between 10 and 100 feet to the inch. In
the event that the entire plat cannot be one sheet, it shall be submitted in
two or more sheets of the same dimensions along with an index sheet showing the
entire development at a smaller scale. All final plats shall portray the
following information.
      1.   Name of subdivision, north arrow, scale, date, and names of
subdivider, owner, and land surveyor.
      2.   Legal description of the property, including location of boundary
lines in relation to section, township, range, county, and state. The perimeter
of the subdivision shall be clearly and distinctly indicated.
      3.   The lines of all streets and alleys and other lands to be dedicated
with their widths and names.
      4.   All lot lines and dimensions and numbering of lots and blocks
according to a uniform system.
      5.   Location, use, and width of all easements for public use, drainage,
services, and utilities.
      6.   All dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, both linear and
angular, interior angles, length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, with all
other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground.
      7.   The perimeter and blocks of the plat shall have a closure to an
allowable unadjusted error of 1 to 7500. Latitudes and departure computations
shall be submitted.
      8.   The location and description of all permanent monuments in the
subdivision.
      9.   The description, location, and elevation of all benchmarks.
      10.   Names in dotted lettering of adjacent plats with the location and
widths of adjoining streets shown by dashed lines.
      11.   Certificate, seal, and signature of land surveyor.
      12.   Notarized certificate and signature of all parties having title
interest in the land being subdivided consenting to dedication and recording of
the final plat as submitted.
      13.   Certificates to be signed by the chairman of the Planning
Commission, mayor, and city clerk.
      14.   All areas not a part of the plat due to other ownerships shall be
clearly shown as "Not a Part."
      15.   Electronic subdivision requirements as provided in Addendum "A" of
this chapter. The plat shall meet the drawing standards as identified in
Addendum “B” of this chapter. Certificates shall be written in a format
consistent with those shown on Addendum “B” of this chapter.
      16.   References to a minimum of three established points, such as
section corners, section quarter corners, block or subdivision corners, at
least one of which shall be a County Control Point.
      17.   A closure sheet shall be included with all submitted final plats.
Said closure sheet shall include northing and easting coordinates for each
point on the Subdivision Boundary and bearing and distance between points.
      18.   The following supplementary engineering data and plans shall be
submitted following approval of the final plate:
         a.   Paving design, including alignment, grades, and a typical cross-
section.
         b.   Public sidewalks design and location.
         c.   Location of telephone, electric, and CATV facilities, if
underground.
         d.   Location, grade, and size of existing and proposed storm drainage
facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, and gas mains within the proposed
subdivision.
         e.   Location and outline to scale of each existing building or
structure which is not to be removed in the final development.
         f.   Final approved drainage plan including the location, grade, and
direction of flow of easements, and showing the proposed general locations of
individual water supply and sanitary sewer systems on each lot, if applicable.
         g.   An approved erosion control plan to prevent wind and water
erosion during any activity that will remove natural surface cover from within
the subdivision boundary. This plan shall not be required for any subdivision
containing less than one acre in size.
         h.   Final approved drainage plans shall be required with the
submission of all final plats. A drainage plan may be submitted with the paving
and storm water plans, but the paving plan will not be signed off until the
drainage plan is approved by the Director of Public Works and proof of its
filing at the Register of Deeds office is submitted to the Director of Public
Works.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004) (Amended by Ord. No. 9081,
effective 10-25-2006)
33-8.1   Final Plat-Administrative Subdivision
   A.   The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Director of the Planning
Commission, three (3) copies of the proposed administrative subdivision final
plat.
   B.   At the time of filing of the administrative subdivision final plat with
the Planning Director, the subdivider shall pay to the city treasurer, a
nominal filing fee as provided by a fee schedule approved by the Regional
Planning Commission and City Council. Such fee shall not be refundable, unless
the administrative subdivision final plat is withdrawn by the subdivider prior
to consideration by the Planning Director.
   C.   The administrative subdivision final plat shall be prepared in
accordance with final plat requirements specified and set forth in Section
33-8(F), excepting subsections (m) and (o). A place of certification to be
signed by the Planning Director shall also be provided.
   D.   The Planning Director shall examine the administrative subdivision
final plat as to its compliance with the Zoning ordinance, Subdivision
ordinance and Building Code of the City. If the Planning Director finds that
the administrative subdivision final plat has been prepared and submitted in
compliance with the aforementioned ordinances, the Planning Director shall
approve such plat. If the Planning Director finds that the proposed plat does
not qualify for approval as an administrative subdivision final plat, the
Planning Director shall return the proposed plat to the subdivider, without an
approval.
   E.   Upon approval of the administrative subdivision final plat, the
subdivider shall, within twelve (12) months, furnish the following departments
the data as shown below or such approval shall become null and void:
      1.   Register of Deeds
         a.   Approved administrative subdivision final plat
         b.   Protective covenants, restrictions and conditions, if any.
      2.   City Clerk
         a.   Print of approved administrative subdivision final plat.
      3.   Public Works Director
         a.   Reproducible of administrative subdivision final plat.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006)
Article 33-III
Subdivision Agreement
33-9   Procedure
33-10   Engineering Data
33-9   Procedure
No approved final plat shall be released by the planning director until a
subdivision agreement shall have been entered into between the subdivider and
the City. Approval of an administrative subdivision shall not be contingent
upon the requirement of a subdivision agreement between the subdivider and the
City. The city attorney shall prepare such agreement with assistance of the
director of Planning, the public works director, and the director of utilities
operations. The agreement shall provide for the needs of the subdivision,
including but not limited to pavement, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, sidewalks, grading, waste treatment, and open space requirements.
Security may be required to assure performance under the agreement.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004)
33-10   Engineering Data
The subdivision agreement shall require that all final engineering plans and
specifications for public improvements bear the signature and seal of a
registered professional engineer and shall be furnished by the subdivider to
the Department of Public Works for approval prior to contracting for
construction of any improvements.
Article 33-IV
Minimum Design Standards
33-11   General
33-12   Streets And Alleys
33-13   Blocks
33-14   Lots
33-15   Easements
33-16   Pedestrian Ways
33-17   Reserve Strips Of Land
33-18   School, Park, Or Open Space Sites
33-11   General
Land within the proposed subdivision which the Planning Commission finds to be
unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding or bad drainage or other topographic
features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, or general health of the
future residents of the proposed subdivision shall not be subdivided until the
objectionable features have been eliminated or until adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided.
33-12   Streets And Alleys
   A.   The arrangement of streets shall conform as nearly as possible to the
street plan of the General Development Plan with provisions for the extension
of arterial and collector streets. Streets in the subdivision, normally shall
connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions,
and provisions may be required for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided
tracts.
   B.   Local streets should be so planned as to discourage through traffic.
Cul-de-sacs should normally not be longer than five hundred feet and shall
terminate with right-of-way turn-around having a diameter of not less than one
hundred feet, and an outside curb diameter of not less than eighty feet for
residential areas. Cul-de-sacs within industrial or commercial areas shall have
a right-of-way diameter of not less than 120 feet and an outside curb diameter
of not less than 100 feet.
   C.   Collector and Arterial streets should be planned with minimal local
street and driveway accesses. Residential subdivisions should be designed with
street patterns that provide driveway access from local streets.
   D.   Whenever a proposed subdivision is adjacent to or contains a portion of
an existing or proposed federal or state highway, provision in such subdivision
shall be made for one of the following methods of development:
      1.   If the highway is either a non-access or controlled access
thoroughfare, one of the following two methods of development shall be
required:
         a.   A frontage street adjacent and parallel to such thoroughfare
shall be provided; or
         b.   Lots shall back or side to such thoroughfare and have access to
another street. Lots in commercial or industrial zoning districts shall have a
landscaped area averaging thirty feet in width, or other approved landscaping,
adjacent to such thoroughfare, and outside storage of unassembled or unfinished
materials or products and inoperable equipment or motor vehicles shall be
suitably screened by a sight-obscuring fence, foliage, or other screening
material. Lots in residential zoning districts shall have a sight-obscuring
fence, foliage, or other screening material adjacent to such thoroughfare. The
sight-obscuring fence shall not be metal strips or slats in a chain link fence.
      2.   If the highway is not a non-access or controlled access
thoroughfare, one of the following methods of development shall be required:
         a.   Either method required for a non-access or controlled access
thoroughfare may be applied; or
         b.   Lots may have frontage directly on such thoroughfare, provided,
that the minimum setback for any new building in any zoning district shall be
thirty feet, and shall be landscaped except for approved driveways.
   E.   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, or where it is found to be practicable to
require the dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided.
   F.   Under normal conditions streets shall be laid out as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions
justify variations. More than four approaches to any intersection shall be
prohibited. Street jogs at intersections with centerline offsets of less than
75 feet should be avoided.
   G.   Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts. Alleys
shall be avoided in residential districts except to extend existing alleys to a
street.
   H.   The right-of-way widths, improvements, and grades for streets and
alleys included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum right-of-
way and outside curb dimensions or less than the minimum grade for each
classification as shown on the Street Width Matrix attached.
Medians .
Location. Medians may be located within streets to be dedicated to the public.
Lane width. A minimum unobstructed lane width of twenty (20.0) feet (improved
21' back of curb to back of curb) is required between the median curb and the
street curb.
Landscaping. Medians within the public right-of-way may be landscaped,
maintenance of landscaped medians shall be the responsibility of a property
owners association created at or before filing the final plat. The city will
maintain concrete medians or bricked medians within the public right-of-way.
All streets shall be designed and graded to the full right-of-way widths
stated.
   I.   Drives, streets, or roadways within condominium, townhouse, or planned
unit developments shall have a minimum right-of-way, improvement, and grade as
determined by agreement between the subdivider, public works director, director
of Planning, and approved by the city council.
   J.   The horizontal alignment on all streets except in unusual cases shall
be as follows:
Radii of Horizontal Curves (Center Line)
Arterial Streets   700' minimum
Collector Streets   300' minimum
Local Streets   100' minimum
 
Street Width Matrix
Zone                                             Paving Width
                                                 26' 30' 32' 37' 40' 41' 65'
AG-1  Primary Agricultural Zone                   
AG-2  Secondary Agricultural Zone                 
AG-SC Special   Agricultural / Conservation Zone
                                                  
                                                 Subject to Design Review
AG-SE Special Agricultural / Events Zone
AG-SI Special Agricultural / Industrial Zone
SRC   Special Recreation / Conservation Zone
TA    Transitional Agricultural Zone
LLR   Large Lot Residential Zone             SP -  P P  -   -   -
R-1   Suburban Residential Zone              -  -  P SP -   SP* -
R-2   Low Density                            -  -  P SP -   SP* -
      Residential Zone
R-3   Medium Density Residential Zone        -  -  P P  -   P*  -
R-3SL Small Lot Residential Zone             P  -  P P  -   P*  -
R-4   High Density Residential Zone          P  -  P P  -   P   -
RO    Residential Office Zone                P  -  - SP -   SP* -
B-1   Light Business Zone                    -  -  - -  -   SP  SP*
B-2   General Business Zone                  -  -  - -  -   SP  SP*
AC    Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone       -  -  - -  -   SP  SP*
B-3   Heavy Business Zone                    -  -  - -  -   SP  SP*
ME    Industrial Estates Zone                -  SP - -  SP* -   -
M-1   Light Manufacturing Zone               -  SP - -  SP* -   -
M-2   Heavy Manufacturing Zone               -  SP - -  SP* -   -
M-3   Mixed Use                              -  SP - -  SP* -   -
      Manufacturing Zone
CD    Commercial Development Zone
TD    Travel Development Zone
 
RD       Residential Development Zone
A        Airport Zone                      Subject to Design Review
GCO      Gateway Corridor Overlay District
M and MD Manufactured Home Overlay Zone
 
SP Follow standard cross section plan. P Designed Residential
* Wider street width required by subdivision committee on streets acting as
collectors/arterials
- Street width not allowed in this zoning class.
Note: There may be exceptions in certain situations.
Designed Residential Development.
Driveway widths restricted on average lot width.
 
Lot Width   Max Driveway Width
100’+ - 7136' wide
70'-51'     24' wide
50’-min   12’ wide
            Widths don’t include flare per standard driveway detail
            Flare must occur on lot on which driveway is serving
 
Driveway location must be planned and approved by subdivision committee. This
would include staggered locations to allow for 20’ of clear zone for fire and
emergency vehicles while moving down the street.
Off street parking per dwelling must be considered with design. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9480, effective 04-15-2014)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9688, effective 06-12-2018)
33-13   Blocks
   A.   Block Length. Intersecting streets determining block lengths shall be
provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet
existing streets and customary subdivision practice in the immediate area.
Blocks shorter than 450 feet and longer than 1200 feet in residential districts
should be avoided.
   B.   Block Width. The width of a block shall be sufficient to allow for two
tiers of lots with utility easement, if required. Blocks intended for business
or industrial use shall be of such width as may be best suited for the
contemplated use of the property taking into consideration the probable
arrangement of parking and truck loading and maneuvering upon the property.
   C.   Very Large Lots and Blocks. When a tract is subdivided into larger than
normal lots or parcels, such lots or parcels should be so arranged as to permit
the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate
resubdivision with provision for adequate utility connections for such
resubdivision. Easements for the future openings and extension of such streets
may, at the direction of the Planning Commission, be made a requirement of the
plat.
33-14   Lots
   A.   Minimum Dimensions. The minimum width of lots shall be as required by
the Zoning Chapter of the Grand Island City Code. Side lot lines should be at
right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. Lots
having a depth of less than 100 feet should be avoided. Lot sizes shall meet or
exceed the requirement of the Zoning Chapter and should as near as practical
meet or exceed the typical lot size for building sites in the immediate
vicinity. Each lot shall be a buildable site after taking into account all yard
spaces required by the Zoning Chapter. Excessive lot depth in relation to width
should be avoided.
   B.   Corner Lots Wider. Corner lots in residential areas shall be of
sufficient size to comply with the requirements of the Zoning Chapter.
   C.   Double Frontage. Lots with street frontage at both front and rear shall
be avoided except when backing on a controlled access thoroughfare.
   D.   Street Frontage. Each lot shall have frontage (minimum width of twenty
(20) feet) on a street that will allow for practical, physical vehicular
ingress/egress, and allow for the proper provision of present or future
municipal services to the lot.
   E.   Reversed Frontages and Key Lots. Reversed frontages at cross street
intersections should be avoided except where it will match existing
development. Key lots, being those inside lots fronting on side streets, should
be avoided except where they are matching existing development and other lots
are excessively deep. Key lots shall be prohibited where they disrupt utility
or drainage easements. Reverse frontage and normal corner lots when adjacent to
a key lot shall have additional width to allow front yard setbacks on both
streets.
   F.   Septic Tanks. In subdivisions within city jurisdiction outside of
corporate limits where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of
lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields.
Standards set forth by the appropriate County and State or other agencies shall
be met.
   G.   Flag Lots. Flag lots, being those lots landlocked from public right-of-
way except for a narrow tract of land of less width than minimum frontage as
required by the Zoning Chapter should be discouraged except where development
cannot reasonably be accomplished without their use. When such lots are
platted, it shall be a requirement of the developer, builder, and owner to
direct and maintain storm water drainage from the flag lot to the public right-
of-way without directing the flow to adjoining property, i.e., drainage shall
be by means of that strip of land connecting the area of the structure to the
public right-of-way unless other drainage facilities are approved by the public
works director.
(Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004)
33-15   Easements
   A.   Utility Easements. Unless otherwise required by the director of
Planning, the director of utilities operations, or the public works director,
utilities easements shall be 20 feet wide, falling half on adjoining lots along
rear lot lines, and where necessary the same shall apply to side lot lines. The
full width of an easement may fall on one lot. They shall be planned for easy
and continuous access for maintenance, shall be continuous through the block
and shall connect as nearly in line as possible with adjoining easements. To
facilitate the use of easements, rear lot lines in curvilinear platting shall
form straight lines for as long a distance as feasible. Direction changes shall
fall so that a side lot line will intersect the point of change so as to allow
the guywire easements to be located on lot lines.
   B.   Drainage Easements. Drainage easements for storm sewers or open
channels shall be required where storm drainage cannot be practically carried
under streets or in the right-of-way. Open channel drainage easements shall be
required where there is evidence that the natural drainage for a large area
traverses the subdivision. Drainage easements shall be sufficient in width so
that motorized equipment may be used in their maintenance.
33-16   Pedestrian Ways
Pedestrian ways may be required so as to allow cross access for pedestrians in
very long blocks. In general, blocks of 800 feet or more in length may have a
requirement for a pedestrian way near the center of the block and shall have a
minimum width of six feet. Pedestrian ways shall have a sidewalk width of four
feet and have a minimum 42 inch high chain link fence on both sides.
33-17   Reserve Strips Of Land
Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from their property, or
from any other street or alley, shall not be permitted within any subdivided
area.
33-18   School, Park, Or Open Space Sites
The Planning Commission may require the subdivider to reserve for purchase-
option certain parcels of land for public use. The public agency shall have
from the time of submission of the preliminary study to the submission of the
final plat to exercise the purchase-option under this provision. The exact
location of the reserved area shall be subject to approval of the Planning
Commission.
Article 33-V
Minimum Improvements
33-19   Minimum Improvements
33-20   Installation Of Improvements
33-19   Minimum Improvements
Inasmuch as the primary purpose of subdividing land is to create building
sites, and inasmuch as vehicular access and certain utilities are essential to
urban development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to install
in accordance with plans, specifications, and data approved by the public works
director, certain required improvements as follows:
   A.   Staking. The following described monuments shall be installed before
the public works director shall approve the plat, or in lieu thereof, a
performance bond in an amount equal to the cost of doing such work shall be
furnished to the City of Grand Island before the public works director shall
certify to the council that the required improvements have been satisfactorily
arranged.
      1.   The external boundaries, corners of blocks and lots, all points of
curvature, and points of tangency, shall be monumented by an iron rod or pipe
not less than 1/2 inch outside diameter and extending at least 24 inches below
grade.
   B.   Grading of Lots. When any building site is filled to a depth in excess
of five feet, said fill shall be laid down in six-inch layers, and each layer
shall be given six passes with a sheepsfoot roller with optimum moisture
present for compaction to equal the bearing strength of the natural ground,
indicated by Proctor test or other test which may be approved by the public
works director.
   C.   Storm Drainage shall be conveyed to an approved storm drainage system
if available and adequate to accept the runoff from the fully developed
subdivision. Available shall mean a system approved by the public works
director to serve the proposed subdivision. If an approved system is available
but not of adequate capacity, then provisions must be made for on-site
detention to reduce the peak flow out of the subdivision to that which the
approved system can accommodate. The detention cell shall be sized to
accommodate a ten-year design storm as per criteria acceptable to the public
works director. In computing cell capacity only the capacity above the
elevation at which approved positive drainage exists will be considered.
Detention cells without approved positive drainage will not be accepted.
Determination of the approved form of positive drainage shall be made by the
public works director. Gravity drainage shall be used if possible. Provisions
shall be made for surface water traversing the subdivision. The subdivision
agreement shall prohibit filling in of ditches or other drainage facilities and
specify ownership and maintenance responsibility of detention cells and other
drainage features not dedicated to the public.
   D.   Sanitary Sewer shall be provided to connect all lots in the subdivision
in accordance with standard specifications of the City of Grand Island to an
approved public system if available and adequate to accept the flow from the
fully developed subdivision. Available shall mean an existing approved system
or a system approved for construction by the City. The city council may extend
consideration of the preliminary study for up to 120 days to consider a
sanitary sewer extension approval. In no case shall the minimum diameter for
residential developments be less than eight inches, and for commercial and
industrial developments the minimum shall be ten inches. If an approved system
is not available, then individual systems may be permissible on an initial
basis, however, the subdividers shall be required to install the complete
system to serve the subdivision even though it may not be connected with the
approved system.
The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply
to existing right-of-ways, with existing improvements, when determined by the
Planning Director along with recommendations from the Public Works Department
and the Utility Department that public service mains will not be installed to
serve the subdivision in the near future.
The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply
for a subdivision having four (4) lots or less unless the subdivision is part
of a larger development being finalized in phases, except when:
      1.   The construction of the public system which will serve the
subdivision is provided for in the current approved Capital Improvement Program
for the City of Grand Island, or;
      2.   The Council officially amends said program to include a public
system which will serve the subdivision, and;
      3.   The City can provide the subdivider sufficient information for the
design and construction of his system.
In the event that individual systems are to be used, then the Subdivision
Agreement shall state that the lot owners waive the right to protest creation
of a sanitary sewer district abutting the subdivision or to serve the
subdivision, shall keep all easements free of any obstructions, including
fences, trees and bushes, sheds, etc.; shall indemnify the City of any removal/
replacement/repair costs for obstructions in easements for the construction of
such district, and shall connect to such district within two (2) years of the
district construction completion.
   E.   Water Supply shall be provided to connect all lots in the subdivision
in accordance with standard specifications for the City of Grand Island to an
approved public system if available and adequate to serve the needs of the
fully developed subdivision. Available shall mean an existing approved system
or a system approved for construction by the City. The city council may extend
approval of the preliminary study for up to 120 days to consider a water main
extension approval. Fire hydrants shall be installed in a pattern approved by
the director of utility operations and the fire chief. If an approved system is
not available, then individual systems may be permissible on an initial basis,
however, the subdivider shall be required to install the complete system to
serve the subdivision even though it may not be connected with the approved
system.
The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply
to existing right-of-ways, with existing improvements, when determined by the
Planning Director along with a recommendation from the Public Works Department
and the Utility Department that public service mains will not be installed to
serve the subdivision in the near future.
The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply
for a subdivision having four (4) lots or less unless the subdivision is part
of a larger development being finalized in phases, except when:
      1.   The construction of the public system which will serve the
subdivision is provided for in the current approved Capital Improvement Program
for the City of Grand Island, or;
      2.   The Council officially amends said program to include a public
system which will serve the subdivision, and;
      3.   The City can provide the subdivider sufficient information for the
design and construction of his system.
In the event that individual systems are to be used, then the Subdivision
Agreement shall state that the lot owners waive the right to protest creation
of a water district abutting the subdivision or to serve the subdivision, shall
keep all easements free of any obstructions, including fences, trees and
bushes, sheds, etc.; shall indemnify the City of any removal/replacement/
repair costs for obstructions in easements for the construction of such
district, and shall connect to such district within two (2) years of the
district construction completion.
   F.   Grading shall be completed to official grade on all streets for the
full width of the right-of-way and fills shall be compacted sufficiently to
assure adequate support for permanent paving, as set forth by standard
specifications of the City of Grand Island.
   G.   Street Surfacing. Paving, including curbs and gutters, shall be
completed on all streets in accordance with the standard specifications of the
City of Grand Island and in conformity with any official street plans which may
be adopted by the city council of Grand Island. Standard installations for
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water may be required to be installed
before paving, subject to the recommendation of the public works director, even
though such facilities cannot be connected with the City system at the time of
approval of the plat.
   H.   Public sidewalks four feet wide shall be constructed in accordance with
sidewalk standards along each side of all public street right-of-way to serve
all lots in the plat. This requirement may be waived until the Council directs
such installation for a subdivision having four lots or less unless:
      1.   the subdivision has curb and gutter; or,
      2.   such installation would result in continuity with an existing
sidewalk on at least one side of the new subdivision; or,
      3.   the subdivision is part of a larger development being finalized in
phases.
   I.   Inspections of improvements under construction shall be performed under
the supervision of a professional registered engineer and upon completion,
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Department of Public Works
prior to acceptance by the City of Grand Island. The subdivider may enter into
an agreement with the City whereby the developer of the subdivision shall pay
for inspection personnel which may be furnished by the City under supervision
of the public works director, on all improvements constructed by such developer
of such subdivision as provided for in this chapter. An “as-built” set of plans
and specifications including required test results bearing the seal and
signature of a registered professional engineer shall be filed with the
Director of Public Works by the subdivider prior to acceptance of these
improvements by the City.
33-20   Installation Of Improvements
Developers may select either method or combination of methods listed below to
comply with the minimum improvements requirements:
   A.   They may install the required improvements before council approval of
the final plat.
   B.   They may submit a petition or petitions requesting the City to
construct street surfacing, sanitary sewer, and water mains in the proposed
subdivision by the district method. In that event, the City will prepare plans
and specifications for all such improvement districts and shall assess the cost
of such improvements to the adjacent property, as provided by law. The size of
any street improvement district, sanitary sewer district, or water main
district, shall be determined by the city council. Construction of any such
district shall be subject to the City's ability to finance any of the
improvements. When any length of a full-width street is being dedicated as a
part of the subdivision, the subdivider shall install water and sewer lines,
without using the improvement district method, prior to the creation of any
street improvement district.
   C.   They may enter into a Subdivision Agreement for the installation of the
required improvements.
Sidewalks shall be constructed when the adjacent lot is built upon and shall be
regulated and required with the building permit for such lots, unless a waiver
to construct when directed by the city council is provided in the Subdivision
Agreement.
Article 33-VI
Miscellaneous
33-21   Modification Of Requirements
33-22   Subdivision Naming
33-23   Original Mylar Subdivision Plat
33-24   Penalty
33-21   Modification Of Requirements
Upon hearing, the city council may modify or waive specific provisions of this
chapter in its application to specific tracts of land, provided, it finds that:
   A.   The strict application of a particular provision would produce undue
hardship.
   B.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
proposed subdivision, or in the case of modifications or waivers affecting an
entire proposed subdivision the hardship is not shared generally with other
similar subdivisions.
   C.   The authorization of the modification or waiver will not be a
substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the proposed
subdivision will not be adversely changed.
   D.   The granting of such modification or waiver is based upon demonstrable
and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of
convenience, profit, or caprice.
   E.   The granting of such modification will not unduly compromise the intent
of this chapter.
33-22   Subdivision Naming
Submitted plats shall not have a number to start the subdivision name. example
– 4 Times 4. Sub. (not allowed); Four Times Four (allowed). Subdivision names
that start with initials with periods are not accepted. Example: R.J.M.
Subdivision (not allowed); RJM Subdivision (allowed).
(Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006)
33-23   Original Mylar Subdivision Plat
The original Mylar of subdivision plats submitted to the Regional Planning
Commission for review, shall be signed by all title holders involved with the
plat, prior to the time of the regular meeting date, and the Mylar present at
the meetings for the chairman to sign.
Mylar plats not presented at the meeting, will be signed by the chairman at the
next regular regional planning commission meeting. subdivision shall not be
forwarded to the City Council until all such signatures are in place.
Mylar plats will not be released by the City until such time as all subdivision
agreements have been signed and connection fees or other fees related to the
development have been paid by the developer.
(Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006)
33-24   Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006)
ADDENDUM "B" DRAWING STANDARDS AND SAMPLE PLATS
Drawing standards refer to drawings presented in model space. Line type and
line width on paper space drawings shall match model space drawings as
presented.
Examples:
(1)   Subdivision Boundary – The outer boundary line of the subdivision. Layer
Name: Subdivision Boundary.
The boundary shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight of 1.00mm and
shall be a solid line.
(2)   New Easements – Easements dedicated with this plat. Layer Name: New
Easements.
Easements shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight of 0.30mm and shall
be a dashed line.
(3)   Existing Easements – Easements dedicated prior to this plat. Layer Name:
Existing Easements.
Existing easements shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight 0.18mm and
shall be a dashed line.
(4)   Lot Line – New lot lines. Layer Name: New lot lines.
New lot lines shall be drawn in AutoCAD line weight of 0.30mm and shall be a
solid line.
(5)   Measurements – Distance, angles, bearings. Layer Name: Measurements or
Dimension
Measurements shall be shown with distance, angle, and bearings on all lot lines
where allowable. In a case of large subdivision plats, distance, angle and
bearings shall be shown along the centerline on existing and new easement.
Text fonts, size and placement shall be readable, legible and clear.
(6)   Adjacent Properties
Surrounding property lines, subdivision, undeveloped ground, right of way,
easements, section lines or quarter section lines shall be drawn in AutoCAD
line weight of 0.18mm and shall be dashed or dash dot. Subdivisions adjacent
shall also show subdivision names, lot numbers, block numbers.
Note: Subdivision plats plotted on Mylar shall have no gray tone lines.
(7)   All plats and revised plats submitted shall include a schedule of
revisions showing the time and date of the original drawing and subsequent
revisions.
(8)   Hall County Register of Deeds.
A space shall be reserved on the subdivision plat for the register of deeds
stamp; a space shall be 6”x3”.
All notary stamps must be clear, complete and readable when reproduced. All
signatures must be clear, complete and readable when reproduced.
All dates and signatures must agree with the dates and signatures in the
acknowledgements. (the acknowledgement must state the exact name that was
signed.)
A paper copy of the subdivision plat shall be presented to the Register of
Deeds offices for review at the time copies are presented to the Regional
Planning department for review.
Names and titles in acknowledgements must be identical to the signatures and
titles of the parties who sign. (acknowledgments must include the marital
status of individuals and/or position or title for persons signing on behalf of
partnerships, corporations or limited liability corporations).
(Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006)
CHAPTER 34
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Article 34-I   Telecommunications
Article 34-II   Wireless Communication Facilities 
Article 34-III   (Reserved)
Article 34-IV   Public Transportation System
Article 34-I
Telecommunications
34-1   Purpose
34-2   Definitions
34-3   Penalties
34-4   Other Remedies And Regulations
34-5   Registration, Fees And Duration
34-6   Registration Required
34-7   Registration Purpose, Exception
34-8   Registration; Construction Permits
34-9   Registration; Compensation To City
34-10   Conditions Of Registration; Interference With The Public Ways
34-11   Maintenance Of Facilities
34-12   Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities
34-13   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities
34-14   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities
34-15   Restoration Of Rights-Of-Way
34-16   Construction; Applications
34-17   Construction; Location Of Facilities
34-18   Construction; Conduit Occupancy
34-19   Fees; Registration, Application And Public Way Occupancy
34-20   Severability
34-1   Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to:
   A.   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   B.   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   C.   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   D.   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the City for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   E.   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held by the
City;
   F.   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of
the City.
34-2   Definitions
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:
Affiliate shall mean a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls,
is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.
City shall mean the City of Grand Island, its elected and appointed officers,
employees, and duly appointed and authorized agents.
City Property shall mean all real property owned or controlled by the City
whether in fee ownership or other interest.
Code shall mean the Grand Island City Code, as amended.
Overhead Facilities shall mean utility facilities and telecommunications
facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
Person shall mean corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies,
firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, other entities and
individuals.
Public Ways includes the surface of an space above and below any real property
in the City which the City owns or in which it holds an interest as a trustee
for the public including, but not limited to, all public streets, highways,
roads, alleys, easements, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other
public place, area or property under the ownership or control of the City, and
any rights-of-way established, dedicated or devoted for public utility
purposes.
Rights-of-Way shall mean all real property and public ways, which the City owns
or in which the City has an ownership interest.
State shall mean the State of Nebraska.
Surplus Space shall mean that portion of the usable space on a utility pole
which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the Nebraska Public Service Commission to allow its
use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
Telecommunications Carrier includes every person that directly or indirectly
owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities used or to be
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications
service.
Telecommunications Facilities shall mean the plant, equipment and property
within the City used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer
telecommunications service.
Telecommunications Provider includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
Telecommunications Service shall mean the providing or offering for rent, sale
or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, unless
excluded or exempted by local, state or federal law.
Underground Facilities shall mean utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations
or supports for overhead facilities.
Usable Space shall mean the total distance between the top of a utility pole
and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Nebraska
Public Service Commission.
Utility Facilities shall mean the plant equipment and property including, but
not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within
public ways and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or
telecommunications services.
34-3   Penalties
Any person found violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction. Upon conviction any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine as provided by §
1-7 of this Code. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
34-4   Other Remedies And Regulations
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any other remedies at
law or in equity that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter. The
City Administrator is authorized to establish regulations and procedures for
the implementation of this chapter.
34-5   Registration, Fees And Duration
   A.   To the extent permitted by law, any telecommunications carrier or
provider who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise
locate telecommunications facilities in public ways and/or to provide
telecommunications service, including but not limited to local exchange
service, to persons or areas within the City shall register with the City
pursuant to this Chapter and pay all fees provided herein.
   B.   A registration shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years
from the date on which the City Administrator certifies that the information
required pursuant to §
34-6 has been submitted to the Administrator. A registration may be renewed by
either submitting information in duplicate to the City Administrator as set
forth in §
34-6 or submitting affidavits in duplicate attesting that the information
submitted for the initial registration remains unchanged except to the extent
modified by attachments to said affidavits. Upon filing a registration renewal
the registrant shall pay all fees as provided herein.
34-6   Registration Required
All telecommunications carriers or providers required to register pursuant to §
34-5, shall register with the City by submitting information in duplicate to
the City Administrator which shall include the following:
   A.   The identity and legal status of the registrant including any
affiliates.
   B.   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
   C.   A general description of registrant’s existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the City.
   D.   Information sufficient for the City to determine whether the
transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services
provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or
privilege subject to any municipal tax or fee.
   E.   Copies of the registrant’s certificate of convenience and necessity
issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission.
   F.   A copy of relevant portions of the registrant’s certificate of
convenience and necessity application may be filed in lieu of item (C) above.
   G.   Such other information as the City may require for purposes of this
Chapter.
34-7   Registration Purpose, Exception
   A.   The purpose of registration is to:
      1.   Provide the City with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the City, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the City;
      2.   Assist the City in enforcement of this Chapter;
      3.   Assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes or charges that are lawfully permissible and may be due the City; and
      4.   Assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
   B.   A person which provides telecommunications services solely to itself,
its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or between
closely located buildings under common ownership or control is excepted from
the registration requirement pursuant to this Chapter, provided that such
company or person does not use or occupy any public ways of the City.
34-8   Registration; Construction Permits
All registrants shall obtain permits and pay all fees required by the code
prior to commencement of construction.
34-9   Registration; Compensation To City
In the absence of state, federal or other law to the contrary, each registrant
hereunder is subject to the City’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
annually fix a fair, reasonable and non discriminatory compensation to be paid
for use of public ways or property and such municipal taxes as are authorized
by state and federal law.
34-10   Conditions Of Registration; Interference With The Public Ways
No registrant may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to
unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the City. All such
facilities shall be moved by and at the expense of the registrant, temporarily
or permanently, as determined by the City.
34-11   Maintenance Of Facilities
Each registrant shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in
a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
codes, rules and regulations.
34-12   Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities
   A.   Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, a
registrant shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities
within the public ways whenever the City Administrator shall have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
for:
      1.   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation by the City or
other governmental entity of any public improvement in or upon the public ways.
      2.   The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways.
      3.   The vacation of a public street or the release of a utility
easement.
   B.   Provided the City has complied with the One Call Notification System
Act the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any
telecommunications facility within the public ways as a result of or in
connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the public ways by or on
behalf of the City unless directly or proximately caused by the willful,
intentional or malicious acts of the City.
34-13   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, any registrant
or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized
telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public
ways shall at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the
public ways. If such registrant or responsible person fails to remove such
facilities or appurtenances, the City may cause the removal and charge the
registrant or responsible person for the costs incurred. A telecommunications
system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:
   A.   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways.
   B.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit.
   C.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location
not permitted by the City.
   D.   Any such other circumstances deemed reasonably necessary by the City
Administrator in order to protect public health, safety and welfare.
34-14   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities
The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications
facilities located within the pubic ways as the City may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. The City shall use its best efforts to notify the grantee through
its Emergency Management Department and the One Call Notification System Act
prior to cutting or moving the grantee’s telecommunication facilities.
34-15   Restoration Of Rights-Of-Way
The Registrant shall comply with the following:
   A.   When a registrant, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in
or affecting any public ways, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any
obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property including trees,
landscaping and grounds to the same condition which existed before the work was
undertaken.
   B.   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required hereunder, the registrant shall temporarily restore the affected ways
or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the registrant’s sole
expense and the registrant shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather conditions no longer prevent such
permanent restoration.
   C.   A registrant or other person acting on its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
public ways.
34-16   Construction; Applications
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities in public
ways shall be submitted upon forms provided by the Public Works Department. The
applicant shall pay all permit and plan review fees and shall include any
additional information as requested by the Public Works Department. The
application shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in
sufficient detail to demonstrate:
   A.   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
   B.   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing
utility poles.
   C.   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points along the route which are within the public way.
   D.   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts,
pipes, mains and installations, if known, which are within the public way along
the underground route proposed by the applicant.
   E.   A landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and
restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
34-17   Construction; Location Of Facilities
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with
the following terms and conditions unless hardship or a valid reason to locate
elsewhere can be demonstrated to the City Administrator:
   A.   A registrant with written authorization to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles, and then only if surplus space is available. If either of the
foregoing do not exist, registrant, with prior written approval of the
Utilities Director may construct additional poles.
   B.   Whenever all existing telephone, electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located underground within public ways, a
registrant with written authorization to occupy the same public ways must also
locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   C.   Whenever all new or existing telephone, electric utilities, cable
facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated
underground within public ways, a registrant that currently occupies the same
public ways shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground at its
expense.
34-18   Construction; Conduit Occupancy
In furtherance of the public purpose of reduction of public way excavation, it
is the goal of the City to encourage both the shared occupancy of underground
conduit as well as the construction, whenever possible, of excess conduit
capacity for occupancy of future public way occupants.
34-19   Fees; Registration, Application And Public Way Occupancy
The following fees, which shall be listed on the City's User Fee Schedule,
shall be paid in connection with the administration of this Chapter:
   A.   Registration Fee to be paid at the time of filing registration
information.
   B.   Occupation tax for local exchange service to be paid quarterly.
   C.   Pole Rental to be paid annually for installing and operating
telecommunications facilities on or in conjunction with City utility
facilities, including particularly utility poles.
34-20   Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
Chapter, or its application to any person is, for any reason, declared invalid,
in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
Article 34-II
Wireless Communication Facilities
34-75   Purpose
34-76   Definitions
34-77   Applicability
34-78   Access To Right-Of-Way
34-79   Preferred Pole Locations
34-80   Alternative Sites Analysis
34-81   Antenna Arrays
34-82   Accessory Uses, Equipment, Design, And Standards
34-83   Independent Technical And Legal Review
34-84   Indemnification
34-85   FCC Shot Clock Requirements
34-86   Multiple Sites In One Application
34-87   Severability And Conflicts
34-75   Purpose
The provisions of this Article shall be known as the Wireless Communication
Facilities regulations. It is the purpose of these provisions to delineate
restrictions, development standards and siting criteria, and establish removal
procedures in order to protect the City from the uncontrolled siting of
wireless communication facilities in locations that have significant adverse
effects and cause irreparable harm. It is further the purpose of these
provisions:
   A.   To protect the community’s visual quality and safety while facilitating
the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless communication services. More
specifically, it is the City’s goal to minimize the visual impact of wireless
communication facilities on the community, particularly in and near residential
zoning districts and historic districts and landmarks;
   B.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve
the aesthetic character of the Grand Island community, and to reasonably
regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities
within the City to the extent permitted under state and federal law;
   C.   To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by
establishing standards for siting design;
   D.   To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the
wireless industry;
   E.   To accommodate the growing consumer need and demand for wireless
communication services;
   F.   To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for
review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless transmission
equipment, to provide advanced communication services to the City, its
residents, businesses and the community at large;
   G.   To ensure City zoning regulations are applied consistently with federal
and state telecommunications laws, rules, regulations and controlling court
decisions;
   H.   To provide regulations which are specifically not intended to, and
shall not be interpreted or applied to, (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit
the provision of wireless services, (2) unreasonably discriminate among
functionally equivalent service providers, or (3) regulate wireless
communication facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of
the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such
emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission; and
   I.   To incorporate the legislative findings and declarations in Nebraska
Revised Statute 86-1202.
34-76   Definitions
All terms in this Article which are not specifically defined herein shall be
construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Orders, Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission. As used in this Article, the following terms
shall have the meanings set forth below:
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.
Antenna array means a single or group of antenna elements, not including small
wireless facility antennas, and associated mounting hardware, transmission
lines, remote radio units, or other appurtenances which share a common
attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for
the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving wireless communication signals.
Antenna support structure means any building or structure other than a tower
which can be used for the location of wireless communication facilities.
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to such codes so long as such amendments are not in conflict with
the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and to the extent such codes have
been adopted by the authority and are generally applicable in the jurisdiction.
Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
Application means a written request submitted by an applicant to an authority
(1) for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on an existing utility
pole or wireless support structure or (2) for a permit for approval for the
installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole to support the
installation of a small wireless facility.
Authority means the State of Nebraska or any agency, county, city, village, or
other political subdivision thereof, except as otherwise excluded herein.
Authority does not include public power suppliers, state courts having
jurisdiction over an authority, or an entity that does not have zoning or
permit-granting authority.
Authority pole means a utility pole owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf
of an authority.
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace small wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole. Collocate or collocation does not include the
installation of a new utility pole or new wireless support structure in the
right-of-way.
Communications facility means the set of equipment and network components
including wires, cables, and associated facilities used by a cable operator as
defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a
telecommunications carrier as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as such section
existed on January 1, 2019, a provider of information service as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(24), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, or a wireless
services provider, to provide communications services, including cable service
as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(8), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, an
information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as such section existed on
January 1, 2019, wireless services, or other one-way or two-way communications
service.
Communications network means a network used to provide communications service.
Communications service means a cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522, as
such section existed on January 1, 2019, an information service as defined in
47 U.S.C. 153, as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a telecommunications
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as such section existed on January 1,
2019, or a wireless service.
Communications service provider means a cable operator as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522, a provider of information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, or a
telecommunications carrier as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as such sections
existed on January 1, 2019. Communications service provider includes a wireless
provider.
Decorative pole means an authority pole that is specially designed and placed
for aesthetic purposes.
Distributed Antenna System or DAS means a network consisting of transceiver
equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations
throughout the desired coverage area.
Electric distribution pole means a pole and wires that carry approximately
14,000 volts.
Electric transmission pole means a pole and wires that carry 69,000 volts or
more.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Fee means a one-time, nonrecurring charge.
Historic district means any prehistoric or historic district, site, building,
structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National
Register of Historic Places, in accordance with Stipulation VI.D.1.a (i)-(v) of
the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement for Review of Effects on Historic
Properties for Certain Undertakings Approved by the Federal Communications
Commission codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C, as such regulation existed
on January 1, 2019, or designated pursuant to state historic preservation law
if such designation exists at the time of application.
Law means federal, state, or local law, statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, resolution or ordinance.
Macro cell means an antenna or antennas mounted on or in a tower, ground-based
mast, rooftops or structures, at a height that provides coverage to the
surrounding area, excluding small wireless facilities and distributed antenna
systems.
Microwireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, and
twelve inches in height and with any exterior antenna no longer than eleven
inches.
Permit means a written authorization required by an authority to perform an
action, initiate, continue, or complete installation of a small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or attached to an existing wireless
support structure, or to install, modify, or replace a utility pole to support
installation of a small wireless facility.
Person means an individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a
partnership, an association, a trust, or any other entity or organization,
including an authority.
Public power supplier means a public power district or any other governmental
entity providing electric service. Public power supplier includes a municipal
electric utility or a rural public power supplier.
Rate means a recurring charge.
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, sidewalk, alley, dedicated utility easement, or similar property, but
not including a freeway as defined in section 39-1302, the National System of
Interstate and Defense Highways, or a private easement.
Rural public power supplier means a public power district, a public power and
irrigation district, an electric cooperative, or an electric membership
association, that does not provide electric service to any city of the
metropolitan class, city of the primary class, or city of the first class.
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets each of the
following conditions: (1) The facilities (a) are mounted on structures fifty
feet or less in height including the antennas or (b) are mounted on structures
no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures; (2) each
antenna associated with the deployment is no more than three cubic feet in
volume; (3) all other equipment associated with the structure, whether ground-
mounted or pole-mounted, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume; (4)
the facilities do not require antenna structure registration under 47 C.F.R.
part 17, as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019; (5) the facilities are
not located on tribal lands, as defined in 36 C.F.R. 800.16(x), as such
regulation existed on January 1, 2019; and (6) the facilities do not result in
human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety
standards specified in 47 C.F.R. 1.1307(b), as such regulation existed on
January 1, 2019.
Street light means, for purposes of this Article, poles used or to be used for
the City’s lighting in the right-of-way and City parks, and street lights in
other areas as may be approved by the City. The term street lights includes
non-standard street lights; however, the term does not include traffic signal
poles, electric transmission and distribution poles, or light poles for sports
fields or arenas, stadium lighting or other lighting of any kind, and does not
pertain to poles or other structures owned by others regardless of whether
maintained by the City for lighting or any other purpose.
Technically feasible means that by virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the
proposed placement for a small wireless facility, or its design or site
location, can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
Traffic signal means a set of automatically operated colored lights, typically
red, amber, and green, for controlling traffic at road intersections and
crosswalks. Traffic control signals are devices placed along, beside, or above
a roadway to guide, warn, and regulate the flow of traffic, which includes
motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, pedestrians and other road users.
Transmission equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any
FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not
limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, microwave dishes, coaxial or fiber-
optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. The term includes equipment
associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to,
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless
services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
Utility pole means a pole located in the right-of-way that is used for wireline
communications, lighting, the vertical portion of support structures for
traffic control signals or devices or a similar function, or for the
collocation of small wireless facilities and located in the right-of-way.
Utility pole does not include (1) wireless support structures, (2) any
transmission infrastructure owned or operated by a public power supplier or
rural public power supplier, and (3) any distribution or communications
infrastructure owned or operated by a rural public power supplier.
Notwithstanding the mandatory inclusion of this definition by the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, for purposes of this Article, the City
strongly discourages the placement of small wireless facilities on the vertical
portion of support structures for traffic control signals for public welfare
and safety reasons.
Utility support structure means utility poles or utility towers supporting
electrical, telephone, cable or other similar facilities.
Wireless Communication Facilities or WCF means equipment for the transmission
or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications
or other signals for commercial communications purposes, typically consisting
of a group of antennas, a tower or base station, transmission cables and other
transmission equipment, backup power supplies, power transfer switches, cut-off
switches, electric meters, coaxial cables, fiber optic cables, wires,
telecommunications demarcation boxes and related materials and equipment and an
equipment enclosure or cabinets including small wireless facilities.
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
(a) equipment associated with wireless communications and (b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular power supply, and
small back-up battery, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless
facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include
(a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within the equipment which is
collocated, (b) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless
structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to,
or directly associated with, a particular antenna, or (c) a wireline backhaul
facility.
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person
authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State of Nebraska, when
acting to build or install wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless
services provider.
Wireless provider means a wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider when acting as a coapplicant for a wireless services
provider.
Wireless services means any services using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether mobile or at a fixed location, provided to
the public using wireless facilities.
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure means a structure such as a guyed or self-supporting
tower, billboard, building, or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities other than a structure
designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. Wireless
support structure does not include a utility pole.
Wireline backhaul facility means an above-ground or underground facility used
to transport communications services from a wireless facility to a
communications network.
34-77   Applicability
   A.   Public Power Supplier Poles. A public power supplier shall not be
required to allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles
owned, operated, or managed by a public power supplier except pursuant to a
negotiated pole attachment agreement containing reasonable and
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, including, but not limited to,
applicable rates, and the permit, operational, and safety requirements of the
public power supplier. The City is a public power supplier.
   B.   Annual Rate for Collocation on Public Power Supplier Poles. The annual
pole attachment rate for the collocation of a small wireless facility supported
by or installed on a utility pole owned, operated, or managed by a public power
supplier shall be fair, reasonable, nondiscriminatory, cost-based, and set by
the board of such public power supplier in accordance with section 70-655.
   C.   All new antennas, DAS and small wireless facilities in all zoning
districts shall be subject to these regulations.
   D.   A Tower Development Permit and Conditional Use Permit are required if a
pole is to be located outside of the right-of-way.
   E.   New antenna arrays meeting the requirements of §
34-81 are permitted outright.
   F.   DAS and small wireless facilities are permitted uses pursuant to §
34-77(L).
   G.   Antennas attached to distribution poles and street light poles in the
public right-of-way shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest
point of the pole structure and may be installed: 1) when permitted by the pole
owner’s franchise; or 2) by amendment to the pole owner’s franchise or right-of
way use easement and consent of the City upon payment of reasonable
compensation for use of the right-of-way.
   H.   Preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this Article unless modified as described by this Article.
   I.   The following are exempt from this Article:
      1.   FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;
      2.   Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private
television reception not exceeding one (1) meter in diameter;
      3.   A WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the
federal, state or local government, or a written determination of public
necessity by the City; except that such facility must comply with all federal
and state requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Article for up to one month after the duration of the state of emergency;
      4.   A temporary, commercial WCF installed for providing coverage of a
special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to
administrative approval by the City. The WCF shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Article for up to two weeks before and one week after the
duration of the special event;
      5.   Other temporary, commercial WCFs installed for a period of up to
ninety (90) days, subject to the City’s discretion; provided that such
temporary WCF will comply with applicable setbacks and height requirements;
      6.   Antennas attached to existing structures (such as commercial
buildings, houses or apartments) for Internet purposes and uses, solely for
occupants of the building, for which the antennas are attached as long as the
height limitations of the zoning district are not exceeded and the antenna
design is satisfactory to the City; and
      7.   Routine maintenance and repair of antennas and replacement of
antennas so long as the replacement antennas are of similar design, size, type,
height, weight and color. Applicable building permits may be required for
antenna replacement.
   J.   Pole-Mounted Equipment. All pole-mounted transmission equipment shall
be mounted as close as technically possible to the pole so as to reduce the
overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible subject to applicable
safety codes.
   K.   License or Agreement. For all WCFs to be located within the right-of-
way, prior to submitting for a permit, the applicant must have a valid
municipal agreement, license, franchise or exemption otherwise granted by
applicable law. Prior to the installation or construction of a WCF within the
right-of-way or a utility easement, the registrant or provider must notify all
utilities located within such right-of-way regarding the use of the right-of-
way or easement.
   L.   Subject to the other requirements of this Article, Distributed Antenna
Systems and small cells in the right-of-way are subject to approval via permits
and administrative review by the City Administrator for use outside of the
right-of-way and the Public Works Department for use inside of the right-of-way
unless their installation requires the construction of a new pole exceeding the
maximum height limitation of the underlying zoning district. A permit is
required for replacement utility support structures.
   M.   Use of Street Lights. For public safety and welfare considerations, the
City strongly discourages wireless providers from placing small wireless
facilities on any poles (street light, traffic signal or otherwise) located at
an intersection having traffic control signals. Instead, the City encourages
wireless providers to place small wireless facilities on street lights
elsewhere in the right-of-way. The City also encourages wireless providers to
place small wireless facilities on structures or buildings outside of the
right-of-way rather than placing new poles in the right-of-way.
   N.   For public safety and welfare reasons, the City will not allow the
placement of small wireless facilities on electric transmission poles. However,
small wireless facilities may be placed on distribution poles subject to the
other requirements of this Article.
34-78   Access To Right-Of-Way
   A.   General Terms.
      1.   The term of an Agreement shall be for up to ten (10) years unless
extended by mutual written agreement of the parties.
      2.   The Agreement authorizes the provider’s non-exclusive use of the
right-of-way for the sole purpose of installing, maintaining and operating
wireless communication facilities, including any pole built for the sole or
primary purpose of supporting the wireless communication facilities to provide
the services expressly authorized in the Agreement, subject to applicable laws,
this Article and the terms and conditions of the Agreement. The Agreement
authorizes use only of the right-of-way in which the City has an actual
interest. It is not a warranty of title or interest in any right-of-way, and it
does not confer on the provider any interest in any particular location or to a
superior or preferred location within the right-of-way. All use of City poles
or other structures in the right-of-way shall require payment of fees for such
use.
      3.   The provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep and maintain
its wireless communication facilities and poles in the right-of-way in a safe
condition, and in good order and repair.
      4.   In the event of an emergency regarding the provider’s small wireless
facilities, or related poles, the provider shall immediately notify the City of
the nature of the emergency and planned response to the emergency.
   B.   Permit Required. No person may construct, install or maintain in the
right-of-way any wireless communication facilities or pole without first
receiving a permit from the Public Works Department.
   C.   Application Requirements. The application shall be submitted by the
provider or its duly authorized representative to the City Engineer.
Applications shall contain the following:
      1.   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and email address,
including emergency contact information for the applicant.
      2.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all
consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant or provider with respect
to the filing of the application.
      3.   A description of the proposed work and wireless communication
facility sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
Article.
      4.   If applicable, a copy of the authorization from the owner of the
pole, tower or support structure on or in which the wireless communication
facility will be placed or attached.
      5.   Detailed construction drawings and photo simulations regarding the
proposed wireless communication facility.
      6.   To the extent the proposed wireless communication facility involves
collocation on a pole, tower or support structure, a structural report prepared
by a Nebraska licensed professional engineer evidencing that the pole, tower or
support structure will support the collocation (or that the pole, tower or
support structure will be modified to meet structural requirements) in
accordance with applicable codes.
      7.   For any new above-ground wireless communication facilities, accurate
visual depictions or representations, if not included in the construction
drawings or photo simulations.
      8.   Any other submission requirements per published City policies or
regulations.
   D.   Pole Attachment or Other Agreement. Prior to installing in the right-
of-way any wireless communication facility, or any pole built for the sole or
primary purpose of supporting a wireless communication facility, a person shall
enter into a Pole Attachment or other agreement (“Agreement”) with the City
expressly authorizing use of the right-of-way for the wireless communication
facility or pole proposed to be installed. The Agreement shall provide for the
attachment to City-owned poles or structures in the right-of-way in addition to
poles or structures owned by unrelated third parties, provided that the
applicant secures the written consent of the third party for such attachment.
34-79   Preferred Pole Locations
   A.   All poles for supporting small wireless facilities in the right-of-way
are permitted only after applying the following siting priorities, ordered from
most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (6):
      1.   existing street lights;
      2.   relocated street lights;
      3.   replacement of street lights (with a pole of dual functionality) at
the same location that can structurally support the Small Wireless Facilities;
      4.   new poles in the right-of-way specifically for Small Wireless
Facilities;
      5.   electric distribution poles if they can meet the pole attachment
agreement requirements;
      6.   traffic control signals but they must show why none of the other
choices will work and ensure that the provider’s equipment will not interfere
with the functionality of the traffic signals.
   B.   The applicant for a pole shall address preferences 4-6 in an
alternative sites analysis prepared pursuant to §
34-80 below.
34-80   Alternative Sites Analysis
   A.   For a pole other than 1-3 in §
34-79, the applicant must address the City’s preferred locations with a
detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected.
The City’s location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete
written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked,
alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service
coverage or capacity objectives of the applicant, together with a factually
detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate
and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant
rejected the alternative candidate.
   B.   A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection
may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant
provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify
at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.
   C.   For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative
sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity
objectives the applicant will provide (a) a description of its objective,
whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage or capacity; (b) detailed
maps or other exhibits with clear and concise Radio Frequency (“RF”) data to
illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative (whether it be
collocation or a more preferred location); and (c) a description of why the
alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the
objective.
34-81   Antenna Arrays
Antenna arrays are permitted in any zoning district as long as they are located
upon an existing structure, excluding single family and duplex properties, that
provides sufficient elevation for the array’s operation without the necessity
of constructing a tower or other apparatus to extend the antenna array more
than ten feet (10’) above the structure. Installation on City property requires
the execution of necessary agreements.
34-82   Accessory Uses, Equipment, Design, And Standards
   A.   Accessory Uses.
      1.   Accessory uses shall be limited to such structures and equipment
that are necessary for transmission or reception functions, and shall not
include broadcast studios, offices, vehicles or equipment storage, or other
uses not essential to the transmission or reception functions.
      2.   All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials
equal to or better than those of the primary building on the site and shall be
subject to applicable permits.
   B.   Accessory Equipment. All accessory equipment located at the base of a
WCF shall be located or placed (at the applicant’s choice) in an existing
building, underground, or in an equipment shelter or cabinet that is (1)
designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally
compatible construction and colors; and (2) be located so as to be unobtrusive
as possible consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF.
   C.   Site Design Flexibility. Individual WCF sites vary in the location of
adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local variables. By
mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have
been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project
could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site.
Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so as to best
camouflage, disguise them, or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely
compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure, upon approval by
the City.
   D.   General Standards.
      1.   Landscaping and Screening. Equipment shelters and cabinets and other
on the ground ancillary equipment shall be screened with landscaping (except
for those in the right-of-way) as required for the district in which they are
located or with another design acceptable to the City. Alternatively, where
technically feasible, the applicant shall incorporate the cabinet and other
equipment into the base of a new pole (for example, for a small wireless
facility) provided there is adequate space in the right-of-way and that ADA
sidewalk accessibility requirements can be met. All provisions of the ADA
(including, but not limited to, clear space requirements) shall be met by the
applicant.
      2.   New Poles. To the extent technically feasible, new poles must be
designed to match the existing light fixtures and other poles, and they shall
serve a dual purpose (for example, a new light fixture, flag pole or banner
clips).
   E.   Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions Compliance Report. A written report will
be prepared, signed and sealed by a Nebraska-licensed professional engineer
which assesses whether the proposed WCF demonstrates compliance with the RF
emissions limits established by the FCC. In no event shall any small wireless
facilities, either individually or collectively with those of others, exceed
the maximum permissible RF emission standards of the FCC. In the event the
FCC’s maximum permissible RF standards are exceeded, the wireless provider
shall immediately cease and desist the use of its equipment and facilities.
34-83   Independent Technical And Legal Review
Although the City intends for City staff to review applications to the extent
feasible, the City may retain the services of an independent technical expert
and attorney of its choice to provide evaluations of permit applications for
WCFs. The consultant shall have verifiable experience in the field of wireless
communication facilities. The consultant’s review may include, but is not
limited to (a) the accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the
application; (b) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies
proposed by the applicant; (c) the validity of conclusions reached by the
applicant; and (d) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable
approval criteria set forth in this Article. The applicant shall pay the
reasonable cost for any independent consultant fees through a deposit,
estimated by the City, within ten (10) days of the City’s request. When the
City requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for
purposes of application processing timelines until the deposit is received. In
the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the City
shall refund any unused portion within thirty (30) days after the final permit
is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty (30) days after
the City receives a written request from the applicant. If the costs and fees
exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the
City before the permit is issued. The consultant shall provide an itemized
description of the services and related fees and charges.
34-84   Indemnification
Each permit issued for a WCF located on City property shall be deemed to have
as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant, registrant and
wireless provider defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its
officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all
liability, damages, or charges (including attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising
out of claims, suits, demands, actions or causes of action as a result of the
permit process, a granted permit, construction, erection, location,
performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal, or restoration of the WCF.
34-85   FCC Shot Clock Requirements
   A.   Eligible Facilities Request. This Section implements Section 6409(a) of
the Spectrum Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as interpreted by the FCC in its
Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order
released September 27, 2018 which requires a state or local government to
approve any Eligible Facilities Request for a modification of an existing tower
or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station. Eligible Facilities Requests shall be
governed by the provisions of Federal law including, but not limited to,
application review, the sixty (60) day shot clock, tolling and deemed granted
remedy.
   B.   Collocation for other than Small Wireless Facilities. This Section
implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No.
14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27,
2018 regarding collocation applications for other than small wireless
facilities including, but not limited to, application review, the ninety (90)
day shot clock and tolling.
   C.   New Macro Cell Tower. This Section implements, in part, 47 U.S.C.
Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as
interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory
Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018 regarding new
macro cell tower applications including, but not limited to, application
review, the one hundred fifty (150) day shot clock and tolling.
   D.   Small Wireless Facilities - Collocation on Existing Structures. This
Section implements the shot clock procedures that are contained in the
Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018,
regarding the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures,
including but not limited to application review, the sixty (60) day shot clock,
resetting the sixty (60) day shot clock once the City timely sends a notice of
an incomplete application and tolling.
   E.   Small Wireless Facilities - New Structure. This Section implements the
shot clock procedures that are contained in the Declaratory Ruling and Third
Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the construction of
small wireless facilities on a new structure, including but not limited to
application review, the ninety (90) day shot clock, resetting the ninety (90)
day shot clock once the City timely sends a notice of an incomplete application
and tolling.
34-86   Multiple Sites In One Application
An applicant may propose no more than ten (10) sites in a consolidated
application. The denial of a site in a consolidated application shall not
affect the approval of any remaining sites.
34-87   Severability And Conflicts
   A.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion
of this Article, or its application to any person is, for any reason, declared
invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction,
said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   B.   These Wireless Communication Facilities regulations are in addition to
other regulations in the City Code. In case of a conflict between regulations,
the more restrictive shall control.
Article 34-III
(Reserved)
§34-88.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-89.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-90.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-91.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-92.    Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-93.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-94.   Reserved
§34-95.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-96.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-97.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-98.   Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
Article 34-IV
Public Transportation System
34-105   Public Transportation System
34-105   Public Transportation System
The city council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, hereby appropriates for
itself the authority to do any one or more of the following in order to provide
for the general welfare of the citizens of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska:
Acquire by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, or otherwise, lease,
purchase, construct, own, maintain, and operate, or contract for the operation
of a public passenger transportation system, excluding taxicabs and railroad
systems, and to exercise any other powers authorized by law.
The exercise of the power herein granted shall be accomplished by further
action of this council in such manner and method as it deems appropriate.
CHAPTER 35
WATER
Article 35-I   In General
Article 35-II   Meters And Rates
Article 35-III   Mains Constructed By Private Parties 
Article 35-IV   Temporary Service And Abandonment 
Article 35-V   Backflow Prevention
Article 35-VI   Groundwater Control Area No 1 
Article 35-VII   Groundwater Control Area No 2 
Article 35-VIII   Groundwater Control Area No 3 
Article 35-IX   Groundwater Control Area No 4
Article 35-I
In General
35-1   Utilities Director; Authority
35-2   Reports To Be Submitted
35-3   Application For Water Service
35-4   Water Service; Order Required
35-5   Service Pipes; Specifications; Laying
35-6   Service Pipes; Tapping
35-7   Service Pipes; Cost And Installation
35-8   Excavations In Paved Streets
35-9   Refilling Excavations
35-10   Curb Stops; Stop Boxes
35-11   Tapping Mains Or Distributing Pipes
35-12   Repairs And Maintenance
35-13   Exposure Of Water Pipes To Frost
35-14   Public Fire Hydrants
35-15   Reserved
35-16   Use Of Water For Construction Purposes
35-17   City May Suspend Use Of Water
35-18   Right Of City To Shut Off Water
35-19   Injuring Waterworks Property
35-20   Notice When Premises Vacated
35-21   Right Of Entry To Examine Fixtures, Etc.
35-22   Report Of Leakage; Violations
35-23   Contract For Water; Violations
35-1   Utilities Director; Authority
The authority and powers vested in the Utilities Director by this Chapter
shall, in all cases, be subject to review by the Mayor and City Council.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-2   Reports To Be Submitted
It shall be the duty of the Utilities Director to report to the City Council
monthly a particular account of the affairs of the water operations for the
preceding month, together with all suggestions and recommendations as deemed
proper. The Director shall also make and submit a statement at the beginning of
each fiscal year for the whole of the preceding year.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-3   Application For Water Service
Every person desiring a supply of water from the City water system shall make
application therefore to the Utilities Director upon forms furnished for such
purpose.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-4   Water Service; Order Required
The Utilities Director shall not order water to be supplied into any location,
whether new or existing construction, until the water system to be served has
been inspected and approved by the Grand Island Office of the Chief Building
Official.
Service Pipes 2” and Smaller: Water will not be supplied into any location
except upon the order of the Utilities Director. Plumbers are allowed to turn
water into service pipes for testing, construction, or maintenance on the order
of the Utilities Department or Office of the Chief Building Official.
Service Pipes Larger than 2”: Water will not be supplied into any location
except upon the order of the Utilities Director, and plumbers are prohibited
from turning the water into any service pipe. Only the Utilities Department and
Office of the Chief Building Official has the authority to put water into any
service pipe for testing, construction, maintenance, or turn on purposes.
When water has been turned off from any consumer, the consumer shall not turn
it on or permit it to be turned on without the written consent of the Utilities
Director and Office of the Chief Building Official.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9912, effective 01-04-2023) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,038, effective 9-23-
2025)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
35-5   Service Pipes; Specifications; Laying
A service pipe shall be defined as a private service, tapped off a public water
main, feeding a single lot or single entity/tenant.
Service Pipes 2” and Smaller: High density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) or copper
of any standard diameter herein defined, may be used at the option of the
consumer. High density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) may not be used in area bounded
by the groundwater control areas noted herein. Service pipe shall be at least
one-eighth inch larger in diameter than the tap through which it is supplied.
All new service pipe, two inches or smaller in diameter, laid between the water
main and the curb stop at the property line shall be built of continuous
construction without joints, unions, or splices; however, 2" copper pipe may be
installed with soldered joints or compression fittings.
In all cases, service pipes larger than 2”, which are laid between the water
main in the street and the backflow device, shall be of C900 (DR-14) Polyvinyl
Chloride (PVC) or pressure class 350 ductile iron, either mechanical joint or
slip joint pipe. C900 (DR-14) PVC may not be used in area bounded by the
groundwater control areas noted herein. PVC shall be installed with tracer wire
as detailed in the City of Grand Island Division VI Specifications and
Standards. Any and all piping between the City water main and the service
connection valve must be ductile iron pipe. All piping between the connection
valve to the City water main and the structure shall be built of the same
material with exception of riser pipes from underground through floor. Riser
pipes shall be ductile iron pipe from vertical fitting at the base of the riser
up to the meter. If the service pipe enters the structure horizontally, the
service shall be ductile iron from a minimum of 5’ outside of the structure,
through wall and up to the meter. All fittings shall be ductile iron. For
trenchless applications, restrained joint ductile iron pipe shall be used.
All installations must conform to City of Grand Island Division VI
Specifications and Standards, the Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Grand
Island, or current AWWA standards; whichever is most restrictive. All piping
associated with fire protection shall conform to the testing and flushing
requirements of the adopted version of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA). All other piping shall be tested and flushed per the adopted version of
the adopted Plumbing Code and/or the discretion of the Office of the Chief
Building Official. Any piping found to be transferring electric current should
be brought to the attention of the Office of the Chief Building Official at the
time of discovery.
All service pipes shall be laid under the surface of the ground with no less
than five feet of earth cover, and in all cases shall be so protected as to
prevent rupture by freezing unless otherwise authorized by the Utilities
Department and the Office of the Chief Building Official.
2” and smaller piping shall meet the following specifications:
Copper Pipe:
Copper pipe shall be Type K, cold drawn to size and of the proper bending
temper and shall be made from phosphorized copper completely deoxidized and
have a purity of at least 99.9%. Copper pipe shall have the following
dimensions:
 
Nominal Size in Inches Wall Thickness in Pounds/Lineal Foot Outside Diameter in
                       Inches                               Inches
3/4                    0.065             0.641              0.875
1                      0.065             0.839              1.125
1 1/2                  0.072             1.36               1.625
2                      0.083             2.06               2.125
 
High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE):
The underground HDPE water service lines shall meet the following requirements:
   1)   NSF approved for drinking water.
   2)   Minimum of 200 psi rated for pressure.
   3)   ASTM D 2737 & AWWA C901.
   4)   All connections will conform to the standard copper tubing sizes noted
herein.
   5)   Buried with an insulated, 14 gauge or larger, copper tracer wire taped,
or zip tied (nonmetallic), to the pipe every 5 feet.
      a.   Must be attached to the corporation cock at one end and terminated
on a City approved tracer wire access point at the curb stop on the other end.
      b.   Must be terminated on a City approved tracer wire access point at
the curb stop on one end and the shutoff valve in the structure at the other
end.
   6)   If being used to replace an existing metallic service line, electrical
grounding of the building must be modified to meet the requirements set forth
in the National Electric Code as adopted by the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9929, effective 06/28/2023) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,038, effective 9/23/
2025)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 9929 on 6/28/2023 Amended by
Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
35-6   Service Pipes; Tapping
No person shall be permitted to make or have made any taps or connection with
any water service pipe between the water meter and the water mains.
35-7   Service Pipes; Cost And Installation
For Single Family Residential Services: The customer is responsible for all
costs of the new service installation. This includes the Utility tapping fee,
any outstanding assessment fees, Office of the Chief Building Official and
Utilities Department Fees, and all material and labor construction costs. All
new service piping on the customer side of the curb stop must be installed
under the supervision of a Contracting Plumber licensed within the jurisdiction
or City of Grand Island Utilities Department personnel holding water operator
licenses in cases being done in support of the lead service replacement
program. All new service piping from the water main up to, and including, the
curb stop may be installed under the oversite of the Utilities Department or a
Contracting Plumber. Once installed, and a meter release has been issued, the
Utilities Department will take ownership of all components from the water main
up to, and including, the curb stop. The customer will retain ownership and
maintenance responsibility of all components from the curb stop up to, and
including all facilities on their property. If the water service is a lead
service line, the City shall be solely responsible for replacement of the lead
service line in the event of a leaking or damaged service line. The City of
Grand Island shall have and execute a plan to annually remove lead water
service lines from its system. Any construction work, involving both private
and public water service lines, deemed necessary via the aforementioned plan
will be performed and financed by the Utilities Department.
For Commercial, Industrial, and Multi-Family Services: The customer is
responsible for all costs of the new service installation. This includes the
Utility tapping fee, any outstanding assessment fees, Office of the Chief
Building Official and Utilities Department and/or Utility Engineering Fees, and
all material and labor construction costs. All new service piping must be
installed under the supervision of a Contracting Plumber licensed within the
jurisdiction, with the exception of service work performed in the right-of-way
as part of a water main construction project may be installed by Utility
Personnel, Utility Contractors, or a Contracting Plumber. The customer will
retain ownership and maintenance responsibility of all components from the
water main up to, and including, all facilities on their property. Looped fire
mains will not be allowed unless given a written exception by the Utilities
Director.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,038, effective 9-23-2025)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 9948 on 11/8/2023 Amended by
Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
35-8   Excavations In Paved Streets
Whenever it shall be necessary to cut into, excavate in, bore in, or remove any
portion of the paving in any street in the City to serve any lot with water, or
to repair or relay any service pipe connecting any water main with any lot, a
Right-Of-Way work permit must first be obtained from the Public Works
Department of the City of Grand Island.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-9   Refilling Excavations
After service pipes are laid, in refilling the opening, the earth shall be
backfilled and compacted per City of Grand Island specifications The streets,
sidewalks, and pavements shall be restored to as good condition as before the
excavation, and all dirt, stones or rubbish shall be removed immediately after
completing the work. Should an excavation in any street, alley, or highway be
left open or unfinished for the space of twenty-four hours, or should such work
be improperly done or should any rubbish not be removed, the Utilities Director
shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the expense incurred
shall be charged to and paid by the person responsible for such work, and shall
be paid before water is supplied
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-10   Curb Stops; Stop Boxes
Unless otherwise permitted, curb stops will be placed in the service pipe, in
City ROW or a Public Utility Easement, and within six inches of the property/
easement line, or as directed by the Utilities Department or Office of the
Chief Building Official, and protected by a valve box reaching from the top of
the curb stop to the surface of the ground, of suitable size to admit a valve
key for turning on and off the stop, and with a cast iron cover, having the
word "Water" marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement, sidewalk or
top of the ground. The valve box shall be kept closed and in good repair by the
water consumer. In case a consumer refuses to keep the valve box in good
condition, the Utilities Department shall put the same in good order, at the
expense of the owner of the premises.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
35-11   Tapping Mains Or Distributing Pipes
No entity except the Grand Island Utilities Department will be permitted, under
any circumstances, to tap the water mains or distributing pipe or install
corporation stops or appurtenances thereon. All pipes shall, in all cases, be
tapped at the two o'clock position or at level, and not in any case nearer than
eighteen inches of either end of the pipe, nor nearer than three feet to any
other tap.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,038, effective 9-23-2025)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
35-12   Repairs And Maintenance
All single family residential customers, as defined by the building code
adopted by the City of Grand Island, assume ownership and repair/maintenance
costs of the service line between the curb stop and their dwelling including
the piping, meter, and backflow device. The Utilities Department will assume
ownership from the water main up to, and including, the curb stop.
All commercial/industrial/multi-family entities, as defined by the building
code adopted by the City of Grand Island, assume ownership and repair/
maintenance costs of the entire service line and fire line from the water main
to their property and all materials on their property including the isolation
valves, private line valves, tracer wire, tracer wire access points, fire
hydrants, valve boxes,, piping, meter(s), and backflow device(s).
All persons taking city water shall keep the service pipes, tracer wire, tracer
wire access points, meters, and other apparatus in good working order and
repair, and protect the same from frost at their own risk and expense. Leaking
service pipes, and other water service appurtenances shall be repaired in a
timely manner by the consumer at the consumer's expense. Equipment not in good
working order shall be replaced or repaired by the consumer at the consumer's
expense. The Utilities Department shall have the right to operate the curb
stops and/or valves at any time deemed necessary by the Utilities Director. The
City shall not be responsible for any damage to or damage caused by failure of
the customer's service pipe, corporation stops, curb stops, valves, or any
other appurtenances of the water service, unless caused by gross negligence or
intentional acts by the City or its employees or agents.
In all cases, service pipes laid between the corporation stop and curb stop,
must be of the same, uniform, material. Similarly, all piping laid between the
curb stop and a structure must be of the same, uniform, material.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9929, effective 06-28-2023)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 9929 on 6/28/2023
35-13   Exposure Of Water Pipes To Frost
No person shall dig up or uncover so as to expose to the frost, any water pipe
of the city, except under the direction of the Utilities Director. All exposed
water main must be protected from freezing by the use of insulating blankets or
other approved methods whenever the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-14   Public Fire Hydrants
All hydrants erected in the City for the purpose of extinguishing fire are
hereby declared to be for public use. It shall be unlawful for anyone but
authorized persons to obstruct a public hydrant, open any of such hydrants,
attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere with the same.
For purposes of this section, authorized persons shall mean members of the Fire
Department, and then only for the use and purpose of the Fire Department, or
persons specially authorized by the City or the Utilities Director, and then
only in the exercise of the authority delegated by the City or Utilities
Director. Hydrants not located in public right-of-way or public easements shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, which includes an
annual inspection which can be completed by either the Grand Island Utilities
Department or by a Contractor at the expense of the customer. The Grand Island
Utilities Department fee will be published annually on the City Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-15   Reserved
35-16   Use Of Water For Construction Purposes
The Utilities Director shall have the authority to issue permits for the use of
water for building and construction purposes. The regular charge shall be paid
as though the water was taken by regular customer service. Temporary water
meters and backflow devices will be provided by the Utilities Department upon
request of service. Only the Grand Island Utilities Department shall be allowed
to install, remove, or relocate temporary water meters. The customer is
responsible for the protection of the device, including physical damage and
freezing, during usage.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-17   City May Suspend Use Of Water
The City reserves the right to suspend the use of water for fountains, or for
sprinkling yards, lawns and gardens or for any other purpose whenever in the
opinion of the City Council the public exigency may require it.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-18   Right Of City To Shut Off Water
The City may shut off the water supply at any time, from any or all premises,
to repair the plant, pumps or mains, to make extensions or connections, or for
violations of this chapter or failure to pay water charges, or for any other
purpose that may be deemed necessary by the Utilities Director, any permit
granted to the contrary notwithstanding, and no claim for damages shall be made
against the City or the Utilities Director on account of any such shutoff or on
account of a failure of the water supply from any cause.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-19   Injuring Waterworks Property
No person shall willfully or carelessly break, damage or deface, interfere
with, or disturb any equipment, apparatus, fixtures, attachments or
appurtenances of the water works of the City, or any public or private hydrant,
valve, meter, water supply or service pipe, or any part thereof, or commit any
act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above
mentioned properties.
35-20   Notice When Premises Vacated
If any consumer of City water shall move from the premises for which water is
being supplied by the City, or if such premises shall be destroyed by fire,
such consumer shall notify the Utilities Director thereof, who shall cause the
water to be shut off from such premises.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-21   Right Of Entry To Examine Fixtures, Etc.
All consumers of City water shall permit the Utilities Director, or person
designated by the Director, during reasonable daytime hours, to enter their
premises or buildings for the purpose of testing any meter, or to examine the
pipes, meters or other fixtures.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-22   Report Of Leakage; Violations
It shall be the duty of the police of the City to report to the Utilities
Director all cases of leakage and of violations of this chapter or any other
ordinances relating to the water works of the City that may be brought to their
notice, and they shall enforce the observance of all such provisions, so far as
they have that authority to do so.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-23   Contract For Water; Violations
All the rules, regulations and provisions of this Chapter shall be considered a
part of the contract with every person who is supplied with water through the
waterworks system of the City, and every such person, by taking water, shall be
considered and held to consent to be bound thereby, and when any of them are
violated, or such others as the City or Utilities Director may adopt, the water
shall be cut off from the building or place of such violation, and the water
shall not be turned on again except by order of the Utilities Director and on
payment of the expenses of shutting off and turning on the same, and upon such
other terms as the Utilities Director shall determine; provided, there is a
satisfactory understanding with the offending party that no further cause for
complaint shall arise.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
Article 35-II
Meters And Rates
35-24   Meter; Generally
35-25   Meters; Access
35-26   Water To Be Furnished At Meter Rates
35-27   Charges When Meter Out Of Order
35-28   Billing; Nonpayment; When Bills Due
35-29   Minimum Rates
35-30   Schedule Of Rates
35-31   (Reserved)
35-32   Sprinkler Systems
35-33   Water Charges To Be A Lien
35-24   Meter; Generally
All water meters used in connection with the waterworks system of the City
shall be of standard manufacture, approved by the Utilities Director, and put
in place or removed by the Utilities Director or some other employee of the
City designated for that purpose. The cost of such meters and the placing or
removing or the keeping of the same in good order and repair shall be at the
expense of the consumer. All work, repairs, and removals of such meters shall
be done under the supervision and direction of the Utilities Director, and in
such case the owner or consumer shall pay to the City the actual cost for such
repairs, and, upon failing to do so, the Utilities Director may cause the water
to be cut off from such premises.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-25   Meters; Access
The owner or tenant of any premises served with City water shall provide ready
and convenient access to the water meter located on such premises so that it
may be easily examined and read by the Utilities Director or any person
designated by the Director to perform such functions. If a meter reading is not
available, the City may determine an estimated consumption based on historical
consumption for billing purposes until a meter reading is available.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-26   Water To Be Furnished At Meter Rates
All water furnished through the waterworks system of the City shall be
furnished at meter rates.
35-27   Charges When Meter Out Of Order
Should any water meter get out of order or repair and fail to register
properly, the consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption, as
shown by the meter when in order, for six months previous, or fraction thereof,
if the same has not been used that long.
35-28   Billing; Nonpayment; When Bills Due
All money due the City for water furnished will become due and payable upon
billing by the City.
It shall be the duty of the Utilities Director, on all water accounts remaining
unpaid thirty days after the bill for the same is rendered, or within such
thirty day period, if in the Director's discretion the circumstances warrant,
to shut off the supply of water to such consumer and the same shall remain shut
off until the account is paid in full, together with the cost of turning the
same off and on. Bills for water furnished shall be rendered by the Utilities
Director monthly or quarterly, and shall designate the number of cubic feet of
water registered at the date of the bill and shall subtract therefrom the
number of cubic feet of water registered at the date of last settlement, and
compute the amount due for the difference in dollars and cents, in accordance
with the rates fixed by this article or by resolution of the City Council. All
officers of the Utilities Department are positively prohibited from allowing
credit to anyone.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-29   Minimum Rates
The minimum rates as set forth in this article shall be uniform and apply in
all cases where water is furnished within or without the City as the case may
be, and such minimum rate shall be credited to the account of each consumer, or
the person to be charged, until the amount paid as a minimum rate shall be
exhausted by water charges as aforesaid. The charges for water furnished at the
rates set forth in this article shall be collected by the Utilities Director as
provided by this article. If the amount of water consumed monthly is not
sufficient to exhaust the minimum rate as herein below provided and charged by
the City, such consumer or person to be charged shall not be entitled to any
return or credit for any portion of such minimum rate. The minimum rate shall
be charged for each dwelling unit which is directly or indirectly connected to
the City water system. For the purposes of this article, a dwelling unit shall
mean one or more rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by
one family for living and sleeping purposes, and shall include a manufactured
home. If more than one dwelling unit is served from a single water meter as in
the case of apartments and manufactured home courts, a percentage of the
minimum rate shall be charged against each unit, depending on the number of
dwelling units per water meter as follows:
 
2-5 dwelling units         65%
6-10 dwelling units        60%
11-20 dwelling units       55%
21 and over dwelling units 50%
 
The above charges shall be computed upon the yearly average of the number of
dwelling units occupied.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-30   Schedule Of Rates
SCHEDULE OF RATES WITHIN CITY
The monthly service fee and monthly usage rate to be charged for water
furnished within the corporate limits of the City shall be as follows:
Monthly Service Fee:
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
Meter Size Service Fee
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
Meter Size   Service Fee
Less than 1" $6.90
1-1/2"       $12.70
2"           $30.40
3"           $51.90
4"           $70,60
6"           $241.10
8"           $1,342.60
10"          $4,292.40
12"          $6,027.00
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Rates Effective: October 1, 2025
Meter Size Service Fee
Rates Effective: October 1, 2025
Meter Size   Service Fee
Less than 1" $7.30
1-1/2"       $13.60
2"           $32.50
3"           $55.60
4"           $75.50
6"           $258.00
8"           $1,436.60
10"          $4,592.90
12"          $6,448.90
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Monthly Usage Rate:
 
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
$/100 cf per month ($/100 cf)
First 5            $0.87
Next 35            $1.28
Next 960           $0.83
Over 1,000         $0.69
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
 
Rates Effective: October 1, 2025
$/100 cf per month ($/100 cf)
First 5            $0.93
Next 35            $1.37
Next 960           $0.89
Over 1,000         $0.73
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Plus:
A customer charge for unfunded federal mandates for the Clean Water Act and the
City’s backflow program, in addition to the regular rates charged for water
furnished to the customer as follows:
Effective October 1, 2024: $0.83 per month
Effective October 1, 2025: $0.89 per month
Schedule of Rates Outside City
The monthly service fee and monthly usage rate to be charged for water
furnished outside and beyond the corporate limits of the City shall be as
follows:
Monthly Service Fee:
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
Meter Size Service Fee
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
Meter Size   Service Fee
Less than 1" $8.20
1-1/2"       $15.30
2"           $36.50
3"           $62.30
4"           $84.70
6"           $289.30
8"           $1,611.10
10"          $5,150.90
12"          $7,232.40
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Rate Effective: October 1, 2025
Meter Size Service Fee
Rate Effective: October 1, 2025
Meter Size   Service Fee
Less than 1" $8.80
1-1/2"       $16.40
2"           $39.00
3"           $66.70
4"           $90.60
6"           $309.50
8"           $1,723.90
10"          $5,511.40
12"          $7,738.70
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Monthly Usage Rate:
 
Rates Effective: October 1, 2024
$/100 cf per month ($/100 cf)
First 5            $1.05
Next 35            $1.54
Next 960           $1.00
Over 1,000         $0.82
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
 
Rates Effective: October 1, 2025
$/100 cf per month ($/100 cf)
First 5            $1.12
Next 35            $1.65
Next 960           $1.07
Over 1,000         $0.88
 
Plus Water City Dividend.
Plus:
A customer charge for unfunded federal mandates for the Clean Water Act and the
City’s backflow program, in addition to the regular rates charged for water
furnished to the customer as follows:
Effective October 1, 2024: $0.83 per month
Effective October 1, 2025: $0.89 per month
City Dividend for Utility Ownership
All water services provided by the Grand Island Utilities Department will be
subject to a City Dividend for Utility Ownership. The City Dividend for Utility
Ownership will be set by resolution in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule
and calculated as a percentage of the total bill. The City
Dividend for Utility Ownership will be identified as a separate line item on an
electric bill and will be calculated as follows:
Water City Dividend = Water Bill Before Sales Tax * Water City Dividend Rate
The City Dividend for Utility Ownership will be subject to applicable sales
tax.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8935, effective 10-01-2004)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8987, effective 07-27-2005)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9181, effective 10-01-2008)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9371, effective 04-01-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9393, effective 08-02-2012)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9977, effective 10-01-2024)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9977 (Amended), effective 10-01-2024)
35-31   (Reserved)
35-32   Sprinkler Systems
Owners of all private fire sprinkler systems connected to City water mains
shall pay the City an annual fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island
Fee Schedule.
35-33   Water Charges To Be A Lien
All water and meter rates shall be charged to and collected from the owner of
the premises served and the same shall be a lien on such premises and real
estate where used, and may be collected by the city at any time after the same
becomes due by civil action in the courts. The Utilities Director may report
the names of owners of any premises served with water that are delinquent in
the payment of their water bills or charges, showing the amount due from each
delinquent, together with a description of the property upon, or for which the
water has been supplied, and thereupon the City Council shall, by resolution,
direct the City Clerk to file with the City Treasurer a certified copy of such
report and resolution, directing that the amount assessed against the different
premises, as shown by such report, be placed upon the assessment rolls and tax
books of the City for collection as other taxes.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
Article 35-III
Mains Constructed By Private Parties
35-34   Water Mains; Department Standards
35-35   Plans Signed By Engineer
35-36   Review And Approval Of Plans
35-37   Cost To Review Plans
35-38   Workmanship And Materials
35-39   Water Main Inspection And Approval
35-40   Commencement Of Service
35-41   Service Pipes
35-34   Water Mains; Department Standards
A water main shall be defined as an extension of the publicly maintained water
system, which services at least two independent lots and at least two
independent entities/tenants. The design and construction of all water mains
connected, either directly or indirectly, by private persons or entities, to
the existing City water system shall meet all standards and specifications
established by the Grand Island Utilities Department and AWWA standards and
specifications, whichever is most restrictive.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
35-35   Plans Signed By Engineer
All water main construction plans and specifications shall bear the signature
and seal of a registered professional engineer who has prepared them.
35-36   Review And Approval Of Plans
All water main construction plans and specifications shall be reviewed and
approved by the Grand Island Utilities Director, the Fire Department, and
Department of Public Works. Prior to review and approval of plans and
specifications the private person or entity constructing the water main shall
pay a review fee to the Utilities Director as set forth in the City of Grand
Island fee schedule. All additional permits and fees shall be obtained and paid
prior to construction.
For all water services larger than 2”, plans and specifications shall be
reviewed and approved by the City of Grand Island. Prior to commencement of
construction, the private person or entity constructing the water service shall
obtain a plumbing permit and pay a permit fee from the Office of the Chief
Building Official. All additional permits and fees shall be obtained and paid
prior to construction.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9613, effective 12-07-2016) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,038, effective 9-23-
2025)
35-37   Cost To Review Plans
The Utilities and Building Department may charge to review plans submitted by
persons or entities proposing to construct water mains and/or water services
(larger than 2”) in the planning area. The charge shall be at the rate
established and published from time to time by the City Fee Schedule.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,038, effective 9-23-2025)
35-38   Workmanship And Materials
All workmanship and materials shall comply fully with the requirements of the
approved plans and specifications. If at any time within one year after the
date of the final inspection any defect shall appear which in the opinion of
the Utilities Director is due to inferior materials or workmanship, the
property owner shall do whatever is necessary to remedy the defect at no cost
to the City of Grand Island. The Utilities Director will notify the property
owner in writing of the defects and repairs to be made. If the party notified
fails to commence repairs within ten days, the Utilities Department may cause
the defects to be remedied and charge the costs and expense involved to the
property owner. The contractor surety shall not be relieved until the defects
or repairs are corrected and approved and a written release is furnished to the
surety by the requesting department.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,038, effective 9-23-2025)
35-39   Water Main Inspection And Approval
The Utilities Department shall investigate and approve or reject the laying of
all water mains and/or water services. The City shall have the right to enter
property containing water mains at all reasonable hours for inspection and
investigation purposes.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,038, effective 9-23-2025)
35-40   Commencement Of Service
Before any water main which is constructed by a private person or entity and
connected to the City water system will be accepted and service commenced, the
following requirements must be met:
   A.   The water mains must pass all pressure tests required by the Utilities
Department.
   B.   The water mains must pass all water quality tests required by the City
of Grand Island or any state or federal agency.
   C.   The registered professional engineer must inspect and approve the water
main and issue a certificate of completion attesting that the water mains were
constructed in accordance with the water main construction plans and
specifications.
   D.   The Public Works Director must accept the engineer's certificate of
completion. (Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-41   Service Pipes
All service pipes must conform to City of Grand Island Division VI
Specifications and Standards, the Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Grand
Island, or current AWWA standards; whichever is most restrictive.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
Article 35-IV
Temporary Service And Abandonment
35-42   Temporary Connections
35-43   Abandonment Of Service Pipes
35-42   Temporary Connections
No person may connect any temporary service pipe to the city water mains or
distribution lines without the approval of the Utilities Director. Persons
wishing to make a temporary service pipe connection shall file a written
request for such connection with the Grand Island Utilities Director,
specifying the connection desired to be made, giving the number of feet of
service pipe required, a diagram of the premises and equipment to be served,
and an estimate as to the duration of the temporary service pipe connection.
The Director may, at his or her discretion, approve the temporary service pipe
connection which shall be done at the expense of the applicant and under the
supervision of the Director. Such temporary service pipe shall at all times be
under the absolute control and supervision of the Utilities Department, and the
City reserves the right to disconnect the temporary service pipe at any time
there is reasonable cause to believe the applicant is failing to comply with
the terms and conditions of the temporary connection permit or is jeopardizing
either the City water system or the quality of water in the premises or
equipment being served. The temporary service pipe permit shall expire at the
earliest of either the applicant's estimated time of duration or the connection
of the premises or equipment to an approved permanent service line. The
applicant may obtain an extension of time on the temporary service pipe permit
for good cause shown to the Director.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-43   Abandonment Of Service Pipes
Unused service taps, valves and/or pipes shall be abandoned at the discretion
of the Utilities Department.
All persons abandoning any water service pipe shall have a licensed plumber
turn off the line at the water main tap. All copper services 1.5” and smaller
shall be cut and crimped as close as possible to, not to exceed one foot from,
the tap or have a sweated cap installed depending on the discretion of the
City. All 2” copper services should be cut within a foot of the main and a cap
should be sweated on the remaining stub. All high density polyethylene (HDPE)
service pipes should be completely removed and of length of copper pipe, not to
exceed 12”, should be inserted into the corporation stop with a sweated on cap
placed on the end of the stub. All services shall be abandoned at the direction
of the Utilities Department. The Utilities Department shall be notified
whenever a service pipe is abandoned and shall be permitted to inspect and
approve all work done in connection with such abandonment. Any person failing
to abandon a service pipe in compliance with this section shall be guilty of a
violation of the Grand Island City Code and shall pay the Utilities Department
for the costs of properly shutting off, closing or crimping any abandoned
service pipe and shall be liable for any damages to municipal property caused
by the improperly abandoned service pipe. The Utilities Director may approve
alternate means of closing and abandoning service pipes upon request if the
foregoing procedure is impractical.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9929, effective 06-28-2023) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,038, effective 9-23-
2025)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023 Amended by Ord. 9929 on 6/28/2023 Amended by
Ord. 10,038 on 9/23/2025
Article 35-V
Backflow Prevention
35-44   Definitions
35-45   Backflow Prevention
35-46   Backflow Protection For Existing Facilities
35-47   Evaluation Of Hazard And Backflow Protection Requirements
35-48   Device Certification
35-49   Backflow Inspections
35-50   Backflow Prevention; Order Authority
35-51   Appeal Of Backflow Prevention Order
35-52   Backflow Preventer; Installation, Maintenance, And Testing
35-53   Customers Responsibility
35-54   Backflow Prevention; Penal Provision; Violation; Penalty
35-44   Definitions
Definitions of terms as stated in the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the
City of Grand Island, are hereby adopted for the purposes of this Article.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-45   Backflow Prevention
In order to provide protection and prevent the potential of pollutants and
contaminants from entering the public water system, backflow protection devices
shall be required on all water service lines installed, replaced, or repaired
after March 1, 1993. Backflow protection shall be in accordance with §
35-47 and as approved by the Utilities Director in cooperation with the
Building Department Director.
35-46   Backflow Protection For Existing Facilities
The Utilities Director, in cooperation with the Building Department Director,
shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, inspections as required to determine
the backflow protection requirements of facilities connected to the City water
system, such protection shall be in conformance with adopted plumbing codes.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-47   Evaluation Of Hazard And Backflow Protection Requirements
Evaluation of hazard shall be in accordance with the adopted plumbing code for
commonly encountered equipment, fixtures, facilities, and their use. For a more
complete list, refer to the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Eighth Edition,
published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, University of Southern California, which is incorporated by reference
as a part of this section.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015)
35-48   Device Certification
Backflow preventers required by this Article shall have been tested and
approved or listed for the intended use by one of the following organizations:
   A.   Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydrologic Research,
University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, California
90089.
   B.   American National Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, New
York 10018.
   C.   Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook,
Illinois 60062.
   D.   National Sanitation Foundation, 2355 West Stadium Boulevard, P. O. Box
1468, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106.
   E.   International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5032
Alhambra Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90032.
35-49   Backflow Inspections
The Building Department or Utilities Department may inspect any premise to
determine what level of protection will be necessary to protect the public
health and safety.
In order to inspect a premise, the inspecting department shall give notice to
the customer, setting forth a proposed date and time at least ten (10) working
days in advance. If the customer cannot make the premises available for
inspection on that date and time, the customer shall contact the Department to
arrange another date and time for inspection. If the Department and the
customer cannot agree on a date and time for inspection within 30 days of the
initial notice, the water service line shall be shut off.
All inspections shall be made during normal working hours.
35-50   Backflow Prevention; Order Authority
The Utilities Director or Building Department Director shall have the authority
to issue any order consistent with the provisions of this ordinance in order to
protect the public health and safety. Any order of either department shall be
in writing and shall clearly state the nature of the order, compliance
requirements and set a reasonable date by which compliance must be met. All
orders will be mailed to the customer certified mail, return receipt requested.
35-51   Appeal Of Backflow Prevention Order
The customer shall have the right to appeal any order issued in accordance with
§
35-50 to the Plumbing Board. This appeal shall be done in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 26, Plumbing, of the Grand Island City Code.
35-52   Backflow Preventer; Installation, Maintenance, And Testing
The cost of the installation, maintenance, and testing of backflow preventers
in accordance with this Article shall be paid by the customer. All backflow
prevention devices shall be installed in accordance with all manufacturers'
instructions and guidelines, in a manner that the device shall be accessible
for inspection and testing, and in accordance with §
35-47. A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer shall not be installed
in a pit or other location which may be subject to flooding.
35-53   Customers Responsibility
Backflow prevention devices shall be maintained in good working condition by
the customer.
   A.   The customer shall be responsible to cause all backflow, backpressure
or back-siphonage protection devices equipped with test ports to be tested as
often as required by the Utilities Director, but at least upon initial
installation, when repaired, and once each year. All tests shall be done by a
Backflow Preventer Test and Repair Technician, Grade VI Water Supply Operator,
certified by the State of Nebraska Department of Health. Test results shall be
forwarded to the Utilities Director on standard reporting forms. The test
report shall be signed by the certified tester, attesting to proper backflow
preventer operation. Devices equipped with test ports and installed on lawn
sprinkling systems which are supplied with water from a service line equipped
with a backflow, backpressure or back siphonage detection device shall be
tested upon initial installation, replacement of integral parts, and every
fifth year thereafter.
   B.   Public water supply system consumers are required to assess and report
potential backflow hazards on their premises and take any steps necessary for
protection of public health and safety as often as reasonably requested by the
Utilities Director and which shall be no less often than every five years.
35-54   Backflow Prevention; Penal Provision; Violation; Penalty
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this
ordinance, or who modifies plumbing or backflow preventers so as to defeat the
protection against backflow, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and/or
disconnection of water service.. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed each day of such failure to comply.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9912 on 1/4/2023
Article 35-VI
Groundwater Control Area No 1
35-60   Purpose
35-61   Definitions
35-62   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
35-63   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
35-64   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
35-65   Well Registration
35-66   Existing Well Registration, Information Required
35-67   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
35-68   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
35-69   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
35-60   Purpose
The United States Environmental Protection Agency issued a Record of Decision
(ROD) for the Cleburn Street Well Superfund Site on June 7, 1996, which
identified three sources of subsurface soil and groundwater contamination.
These sources included the former One Hour Martinizing facility, Liberty
Cleaners and Shirt Launderers, and Ideal Cleaners. The former Nebraska Solvent
Company was identified as a possible fourth contamination source subject to
subsequent evaluation and testing. The ROD described selected remedies for the
three source areas, an element of which required the City of Grand Island to
enact and enforce institutional control ordinances designating a Groundwater
Control Area No. 1 in which groundwater use would be restricted to prevent
human exposure and consumption of potentially contaminated groundwater,
requiring registration of existing wells and requiring approval and
registration of new wells. The institutional control ordinances are to remain
in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination identified in the
ROD is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of
drinking water pursuant to 42 USC §300g, et seq., the Safe Drinking Water Act,
or its successor legislation.
35-61   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within the Groundwater
Control Area No. 1 described in Section
35-62.
Groundwater Contamination means the chemicals of concern (COC) described in the
United States Environmental Protection Agency Record of Decision (ROD) for the
Cleburn Street Well Superfund Site dated June 7, 1996, which was received and
accepted by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Resolution 98-28.
Groundwater Control Area No. 1 means a defined area within the corporate limits
of the City of Grand Island subject to the institutional controls provided in
this Article which are intended to prohibit human consumption of potentially
contaminated groundwater from wells.
Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a
natural subterranean supply or aquifer.
The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and
Regulation of Water are adopted by reference, except where such definitions are
in conflict with those provided in this section above.
35-62   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
The outer boundaries of the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 are described as
follows: Commencing at the southeasterly corner of the intersection of 9th
Street and Adams Street; thence running northeasterly along the south boundary
of 9th Street to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of 9th Street and
Sycamore Street; thence running southeasterly along the west boundary of
Sycamore Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Sycamore
Street and 1st Street; thence running southwesterly along the north boundary of
1st Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of 1st Street and
Locust Street; thence running southerly along the west boundary of Locust
Street to the intersection of Locust Street and Division Street; thence running
southwesterly along the north boundary of Division Street to the northeasterly
corner of the intersection of Division Street and Adams Street; thence running
northwesterly along the east boundary of Adams Street to the point of
beginning.
35-63   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
   A.   This Article shall remain in full force and effect for an initial term
of twenty-five (25) years from the effective date following approval and
adoption by the Mayor and City Council. Pursuant to subsection (2) below, this
Article shall remain in full force and effect for a second term of twenty-five
(25) years, ending April 23, 2049.
   B.   The term of this Article may be extended by the Mayor and City Council
if at the end of the initial term there remains groundwater contamination
identified in the ROD described in Section
35-60 making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water
pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation.
   C.   In the event the City of Grand Island is notified during the initial
term by the Environmental Protection Agency that groundwater contamination
within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 has been reduced to a level making
the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the
Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation, the Mayor and City
Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9973 on 5/7/2024
35-64   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
   A.   Groundwater pumped from wells within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1
shall not be used for any human consumption including drinking water, cooking,
washing or other household uses. Because groundwater from wells within the
groundwater control area may be contaminated and present a hazard to the
health, safety and welfare of persons exposed to said water, any known human
consumption of groundwater from wells within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1
is a violation of this Article and is declared a public nuisance subject to
abatement as provided hereafter.
   B.   This Article shall not apply to uses of groundwater pumped from wells
within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 which do not involve human
consumption, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water for
industrial, commercial or residential uses and watering of vegetation other
than gardens, plants and trees producing food for human consumption.
35-65   Well Registration
   A.   All wells for which drilling has commenced or existing within the
Groundwater Control Area No. 1 as of the effective date of this Article shall
be registered with the Building Department by the person owning the real estate
on which the well is located. There shall be no fee for registering an existing
well.
   B.   No person shall drill or install a well within the Groundwater Control
Area No. 1 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Building
Department. There shall be a nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the Building Department contemporaneously
with making an application for a well permit.
35-66   Existing Well Registration, Information Required
The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in
connection with registering a well in existence as of the effective date of
this Article:
   A.   The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the
well is located.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the well is
located.
   C.   The address of all properties being served by groundwater pumped from
the well.
   D.   A description of the uses of the water pumped from the well, including
specifically whether such groundwater is used for human consumption including,
but not limited to drinking, cooking, washing, or other household uses.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property currently served by the
well.
   F.   The depth of the well, if known.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the well.
35-67   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in
connection with applying for a well permit for a new well in the Groundwater
Control Area No. 1:
   A.   The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the
proposed well is to be located.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed
well is to be located.
   C.   The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from
the proposed well.
   D.   A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed
well, including a certification that said groundwater will not be used for
human consumption, including but not limited to drinking, cooking, washing, or
other household uses.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the
proposed well.
   F.   The depth of the proposed well.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.
35-68   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
Whenever the Building Department Director, or his/her designee has inspected
any well within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 and determined that
groundwater pumped from the well is being used in violation of this Article,
he/she shall send a written notice to the owner of record or owner’s duly
authorized agent, or person in possession, charge or control, or to the
occupant by ordinary first-class mail and by certified mail, return receipt
requested, notifying the addressee of the violation. The written notice shall
contain the following information:
   A.   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises on which the well is located.
   B.   A brief and concise description of the acts or circumstances
constituting a violation of this Article.
   C.   A brief and concise description of the corrective action required to be
taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this code.
   D.   A brief and concise statement advising the addressee that if the well
and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within
the time specified, that the Building Department Director, or his/her designee
may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City
Attorney, with the consent of the Mayor, to file an action to abate the public
nuisance and charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of
record and the addressee.
35-69   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
If the addressee of the written notice described in Section
35-68 fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand
Island, at the written request of the Building Department Director, or his/her
designee directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may
proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to Section
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the written
notice.
In the event the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might
cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare,
or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the
written notice to abate pursuant to Section
20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal
action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The City of Grand Island, with the
consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary
and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate
said public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the
health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this
Article.
Article 35-VII
Groundwater Control Area No 2
35-74   Purpose
35-75   Definitions
35-76   Groundwater Control Area No 2 Boundaries
35-77   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
35-78   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
35-79   Well Registration
35-80   Existing Well Registration, Information Required
35-81   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
35-82   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
35-83   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
35-74   Purpose
The U.S. Army, in consultation with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA), and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ), issued a
Record of Decision and Record of Decision Amendment (collectively ROD) for the
former Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CHAAP) which identified soil and
groundwater contamination consisting of explosives above the USEPA Health
Advisory Levels. The revised proposed plan for OU1 ROD Amendment identifies the
Preferred Remedial Alternative for remediating groundwater at Operable Unit One
(OU1) of CHAAP and provides the rational for the OU1 ROD Amendment. The
preferred remedial alternatives include remedies for the on-post and off-post
groundwater plume containing explosives. The on-post explosives plume will be
treated to remedial action objectives using existing extraction and treatment
technologies. The On-Post Plume Institutional Controls will include land use
restrictions, enforcement of the Hall County Reuse Plan for agricultural and
industrial zoning on CHAAP and prohibiting water supply well drilling in the
plume area. The Health Advisory Level in effect as of March 1, 2001, is 2ug/1
(microgram per liter) or 2 ppb (parts per billion).
Pending natural attenuation obtaining the remedial action objectives of the
ROD, the U.S. Army has requested that the City of Grand Island enact and
enforce an ordinance instituting Off-Post Plume Institutional Controls by
designating a groundwater control area in which groundwater use would be
restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of potentially
contaminated groundwater, requiring registration of existing wells, prohibiting
installation of new wells supplying water for human consumption in the plume
area, and requiring approval and registration of new wells. The Institutional
Control Ordinance is to remain in full force and effect until the explosive
contamination identified in the ROD is attenuated to less than USEPA Health
Advisory Levels.
35-75   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within Groundwater Control
Area No. 2 described in Section 35-72.
Groundwater Contamination means the explosives described in the U.S. Army
Record of Decision and Record of Decision Amendment (ROD) for the former
Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CHAAP).
Groundwater Control Area No. 2 means a defined area within the corporate limits
and zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island subject to the Off-Post
Plume Institutional Controls provided in this Article.
Off-Post Plume Institutional Controls means the provisions of this Article
which are intended to prohibit human consumption of potentially contaminated
groundwater from wells and contamination of otherwise uncontaminated water-
bearing zones located within Groundwater Control Area No. 2.
Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a
natural subterranean supply or aquifer.
The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and
Regulation of Water are adopted by reference, except where such definitions are
in conflict with those provided in this section above.
35-76   Groundwater Control Area No 2 Boundaries
The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 2 shall be maintained in the
Hall County – City of Grand Island Cooperative Geographic Information System
(GIS) using information supplied by the U.S. Army and modified in accordance
with periodic monitoring data prepared by the U.S. Army and reviewed by the
USEPA and NDEQ.
35-77   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
   A.   This Article shall remain in full force and effect for so long as there
remains groundwater contamination identified in the ROD described in §35-70
making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water because
of explosives contamination above the USEPA Health Advisory Levels then in
effect.
   B.   When the City of Grand Island is notified by the U.S. Army or the USEPA
that groundwater contamination within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 has been
reduced to a level below the USEPA Health Advisory Levels, the Mayor and City
Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.
35-78   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
   A.   Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 2
shall not be used for any human consumption including drinking water, cooking,
washing or other household uses. Because groundwater from wells within the
groundwater control area may be contaminated and present a hazard to the
health, safety, and welfare of persons exposed to said water, any known human
consumption of groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 is
a violation of this Article and is declared a public nuisance subject to
abatement as provided hereafter.
   B.   This Article shall not apply to uses of groundwater pumped from wells
within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 which do not involve human consumption,
including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water for industrial,
commercial or residential uses and watering of vegetation other than gardens,
plants, and trees producing food for human consumption.
35-79   Well Registration
   A.   All wells for which drilling has commenced or existing within
Groundwater Control Area No. 2 as of the effective date of this Article shall
be registered with the Building Department by the person owning the real estate
on which the well is located. There shall be no fee for registering an existing
well.
   B.   No person may drill or install a well within Groundwater Control Area
No. 2 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Building
Department. There shall be a nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of
Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the Building Department contemporaneously
with making an application for a well permit.
   C.   No person may drill or install a well within Groundwater Control Area
No. 2 which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight
casings are installed which conform to the regulations governing water well
construction, pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of
the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure
Division (178 NAC 12, Section 003.11D - Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).
35-80   Existing Well Registration, Information Required
The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in
connection with registering a well in existence as of the effective date of
this Article:
   A.   The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the
well is located.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the well is
located.
   C.   The address of all properties being served by groundwater pumped from
the well.
   D.   A description of the uses of the water pumped from the well, including
specifically whether such groundwater is used for human consumption including,
but not limited to drinking water, cooking, washing, or other household uses.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property currently served by the
well.
   F.   The depth of the well, if known.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the well.
35-81   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in
connection with applying for a well permit for a new well in the Groundwater
Control Area No 2:
   A.   The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the
proposed well is to be located.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed
well is to be located.
   C.   The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from
the proposed well.
   D.   A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed
well, including a certification that said groundwater will not be used for
human consumption, including but not limited to drinking water, cooking,
washing, or other household uses.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the
proposed well.
   F.   The depth of the proposed well.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.
Following installation of any new, permitted well in Groundwater Control Area
No. 2, a copy of the well boring logs shall be filed with the Building
Department and made a part of the records for the real estate on which the well
is located.
35-82   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
Whenever the Building Department Director, or his/her designee has inspected
any well within the Groundwater Control Area No. 2 and determined that
groundwater pumped from the well is being used in violation of this Article,
the Director shall send a written notice to the owner of record or owner’s duly
authorized agent, or person in possession, charge or control, or to the
occupant by ordinary first-class mail and by certified mail, return receipt
requested, notifying the addressee of the violation. The written notice shall
contain the following information:
   A.   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises on which the well is located.
   B.   A brief and concise description of the acts or circumstances
constituting a violation of this Article.
   C.   A brief and concise description of the corrective action required to be
taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this code.
   D.   A brief and concise statement advising the addressee that if the well
and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within
the time specified, that the Building Department Director, or his/her designee
may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City
Attorney, with the consent of the Mayor, to file an action to abate the public
nuisance and charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of
record and the addressee.
35-83   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
If the addressee of the written notice described in Section
35-78 fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand
Island, at the written request of the Building Department Director, or his/her
designee directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may
proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to Section
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the written
notice.
In the event the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might
cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare,
or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the
written notice from the City Attorney to abate pursuant to Section
20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal
action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The City of Grand Island, with the
consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary
and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate
said public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the
health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this
Article.
Article 35-VIII
Groundwater Control Area No 3
35-84   Purpose
35-85   Definitions
35-86   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
35-87   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
35-88   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
35-89   Well Installation
35-90   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
35-91   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
35-92   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
35-84   Purpose
   A.   The Parkview Well Superfund Site (“Site”) is located in the
southwestern portion of the city of Grand Island in Hall County, Nebraska. The
Site consists of two areas of groundwater contamination and associated source
areas which resulted from the historical mismanagement of industrial solvents.
   B.   The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued an
Interim Record of Decision dated September 26, 2006 (“Interim ROD”), and a
Record of Decision dated September 30, 2007 (“Final ROD”), and an Explanation
of Significant Differences for the Site. The RODs identified two contaminant
source areas. A contaminant source area located at a facility at 3304 Engleman
Road South has resulted in contamination in the groundwater which trends to the
east. This groundwater contamination is referred to in the RODs as the Southern
Plume. A contaminant source area located at a facility at 3445 West Stolley
Park Road has resulted in groundwater contamination which trends to the east.
This groundwater contamination is referred to in the RODs as the Northern
Plume.
   C.   The RODs presented the selected remedies for the source areas and the
plumes. A component of the selected remedies in the Interim ROD is the
enactment by the City of Grand Island of an institutional control ordinance
designating a Groundwater Control Area through which groundwater use would be
restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of contaminated
groundwater and prohibit the installation of new wells supplying water for
human consumption in the plume areas. This institutional control ordinance is
to remain in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination
identified in the RODs is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be
used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42
U.S.C. §§ 300f – 300j-26, or its successor legislation.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-85   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
City means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Domestic use means human consumption and any use of groundwater for human
health and sanitation including, but not limited to, drinking, cooking,
washing, bathing, showering, and other similar household uses.
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and any successor
departments or agencies of the United States. Submissions to be made to EPA
hereunder shall be sent to: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 901 North 5th
Street, Kansas City, Kansas 66101, and shall reference the “Parkview Well
Superfund Site.”
Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within the Groundwater
Control Area No. 3 described in §
35-86.
Groundwater contamination means the chemicals of concern described in the RODs
for the Parkview Well Superfund Site.
Groundwater Control Area No. 3 means a defined area within the corporate limits
of the City of Grand Island subject to the institutional controls provided for
in this Article which are intended to prohibit human exposures to contaminated
groundwater from wells.
NDEQ means the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, and any successor
departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.
NDNR means the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources, and any successor
departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.
RODs mean those Records of Decision, and Explanation of Significant Differences
described in §
35-84 above, as well as any subsequent Records of Decision, Record of Decision
Amendments, and/or Explanation of Significant Differences, issued by EPA
pertaining to the Site.
Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a
natural subterranean supply or aquifer.
The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and
Regulation of Water - are adopted herein by reference, except where such
definitions are in conflict with those provided herein.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-86   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 3 are described as follows and
are shown on the attached map: Commencing at a point of intersection of the
north boundary of Husker Highway and the easterly boundary of U.S. Highway 30;
thence running easterly along the north boundary of Husker Highway to the
intersection of Husker Highway and U.S. Highway 281/U.S. Highway 34; thence
continuing easterly running along the north boundary of U.S. Highway 34 to the
northwesterly corner of the intersection of Garland Street; thence running
northerly and then easterly along the west boundary of Garland Street to the
northwesterly corner of the intersection of Garland Street and South Blaine
Street; thence running northerly along the west boundary of South Blaine Street
to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of South Blaine Street and West
Stolley Park Road; thence running westerly along the south boundary of West
Stolley Park Road to the southeasterly corner of the intersection of West
Stolley Park Road and Old Highway 30; thence running southwesterly along the
south boundary of Old Highway 30, merging with U.S. Highway 30 and continuing
southwesterly along the south boundary of U.S. Highway 30 to the point of
beginning.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9865, effective 12-29-2021)
35-87   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
   A.   This Article shall remain in full force and effect as long as there
remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use
cleanup levels provided for in the RODs making the groundwater unsafe to be
used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or
its successor legislation.
   B.   Following EPA notifying the City that the groundwater contamination
within the groundwater Control Area No. 3 has been reduced to a level making
the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the
Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and
City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-88   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
   A.   Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3
shall not be used for any domestic use which may result in human exposures.
Such uses include drinking, food preparation, washing, bathing, showering, and
other household uses which result in human exposures to contaminated
groundwater. Because groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No.
3 may be contaminated and presents a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare
of persons exposed to such water, any human consumption or prohibited use of
groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 is a violation of
this Article and is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement as
provided in §
35-91 of this Article.
   B.   No new well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute
(gpm) may be drilled or installed in Groundwater Control Area No. 3 unless and
until the party proposing the well installation has demonstrated, by a
hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm,
that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater
contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RODs
for the Site. Any such hydrological study shall be submitted to EPA for review
and approval prior to well installation.
   C.   This Section on Prohibited Groundwater Uses shall not prohibit: (i)
uses of groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3
which do not result in human exposure to contaminated groundwater, including,
but not limited to, groundwater monitoring wells, EPA or NDNR remediation
wells, wells that produce 50 gpm or less for dewatering purposes, wells used
for non-contact cooling water for industrial, commercial or residential uses,
or wells used for watering vegetation not used for human consumption, or (ii)
human exposure from recreational and athletic activities occurring at lakes,
ponds, rivers, and streams. Discharges from dewatering wells must be
appropriately handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable City, State
and Federal laws including National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
permits under the Clean Water Act.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9865, effective 12-29-2021)
35-89   Well Installation
   A.   No person shall drill or install a well with a design capacity of more
than 50 gallons per minute within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 prior to
applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Central Platte Natural
Resource District.
   B.   No person may install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 3
which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight casings are
installed which conform to the regulations governing water well construction,
pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of the Nebraska
Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure Division (178
NAC 12, Section 003.11D - Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-90   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
The following information shall be submitted to the City’s Building Department
prior to drilling a new well in Groundwater Control Area No. 3:
   A.   A copy of the well permit obtained from the Central Platte Natural
Resources District.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed
well is to be located.
   C.   The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from
the proposed well.
   D.   A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed
well; including a certification that such groundwater will not be used for
domestic use which may result in human exposures.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the
proposed well.
   F.   The depth of the proposed well and pump intake.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.
   H.   An application for any dewatering well will include a plan for the
appropriate handling and disposal of the discharge water in accordance with
applicable City, State and Federal laws including NPDES permits.
   I.   A statement as to whether the design capacity of the proposed well
exceeds 50 gpm. If the design capacity of the well exceeds 50 gpm, the owner of
the well shall demonstrate, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent
environmental consulting firm in accordance with §
35-88(B) of this Article, that the operation of the well will not cause the
movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial
action provided for in the RODs for the Site.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-91   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
Whenever the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, has
inspected any well within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 and determined that
such well is being operated, or that the groundwater pumped from the well is
being used, in violation of this Article, he/she will send a written notice to
the owner of record of the real property where the well is located, or the
owner’s agent, or the occupant of the property, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, notifying such party of the violation. The written notice
will contain the following:
   A.   The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property where the well is located.
   B.   A description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of
this Article.
   C.   A description of the corrective action required to be taken to render
the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this Article.
   D.   A statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater
uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time
specified, the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, may
order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City
Attorney, with the consent of the City’s Mayor, to file an action to charge the
costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee.
The charge shall constitute a lien against said property.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
35-92   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
   A.   If the addressee of the notice described in §
35-91 of this Article fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified,
the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the City’s Building
Department Director, or his/her designee, directed to the City Attorney, and
with the consent of the Mayor, may abate said public nuisance pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the notice.
   B.   If the City, in its sole discretion, determines that the use of the
groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses
a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare
of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice to abate pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be required as a condition
precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The
City, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting
such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and
permanently abate such public nuisances and protect the public health, safety
or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in
violation of this Article.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011)
Article 35-IX
Groundwater Control Area No 4
35-93   Purpose
35-94   Definitions
35-95   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
35-96   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
35-97   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
35-98   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
35-99   Well Installation
35-100   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
35-101   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
35-102   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
35-93   Purpose
   A.   The Nebraska Solvents Company Site (“Site”) is located in the eastern
portion of the City of Grand Island in Hall County, Nebraska, and in a portion
of western Merrick County. The Site consists of one area of groundwater
contamination and an associated source area which resulted from the historical
mismanagement of industrial solvents.
   B.   The Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ) approved on
March 21, 2011 a Remedial Action Plan (RAP) dated February 1, 2010. The RAP
identified one contaminant source area located at a facility at 1200 Highway 30
East that has resulted in contamination in the groundwater which trend to the
east and then northeast.
   C.   The RAP presented the selected remedies for the source area and the
plume. A component of the selected remedies in the approved RAP is the
enactment by the City of Grand Island of an institutional control ordinance
designating a Groundwater Control Area through which groundwater use would be
restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of contaminated
groundwater and prohibit the installation of new wells supplying water for
human consumption in the plume area. This institutional control ordinance is to
remain in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination identified
in the RAP is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a
source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. §§
300f –300j-26, or its successor legislation.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-94   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
City means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Domestic use means human consumption and any use of groundwater for human
health and sanitation including, but not limited to, drinking, cooking,
washing, bathing, showering, and other similar household uses.
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Groundwater contamination means the chemicals of interest described in the RAP
for the Site.
Groundwater Control Area No. 4 means a defined area within the jurisdictional
limits of the City of Grand Island subject to the institutional controls
provided for in this Article which are intended to prohibit human exposures to
contaminated groundwater from wells.
NDEQ means the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, and any successor
departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.
NDNR means the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources, and any successor
departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.
RAP means the Remedial action Plan submitted to NDEQ and approved March 22,
2011.
Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a
natural subterranean supply or aquifer.
The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 – Irrigation and
Regulation of Water – are adopted herein by reference, except where such
definitions are in conflict with those provided herein.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-95   Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 4 are described as follows and
are shown on the attached map. Commencing 135 feet to the west of the
intersection of Museum Drive and East Seedling Mile Road; thence running
westerly to the western lease boundary of the 1200 Highway 30 East Site; thence
running southerly to the intersection of the lease boundary and Highway 30
East; thence running east-southeasterly to the intersection of Stuhr Road and
an extension of East Gregory Street; thence running easterly along Gregory
Street to Shady Bend Road, thence running east-northeasterly to East Seedling
Mile Road; thence following East Seedling Mile Road to the intersection with
Gunbarrel Road; thence southerly to the Wood River; thence east-northeasterly
along a path 350 feet south of and parallel to Fort Kearney Road to the
intersection with a southerly extension of Beck Road; thence running northerly
along Beck Road to the farm access road 2,270 feet south of Highway 30 East,
thence running westerly for 1,000 feet; thence running southwesterly along a
path 1,130 feet south of and parallel to Highway 30 East to the point of
beginning. A map of the boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 4 shall be
maintained in the City’s Geographical Information System Mapsifter (or any
successor application, if any).
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-96   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
   A.   This Article shall remain in full force and effect as long as there
remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use
cleanup levels provided for in the RAP making the groundwater unsafe to be used
as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act of its
successor legislation.
   B.   Following NDEQ notifying the City that the groundwater contamination
within the Groundwater Control Area No. 4 has been reduced to a level making
the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the
Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and
City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-97   Duration Of Institutional Control Ordinance
   A.   This Article shall remain if full force and effect as long as there
remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use
cleanup levels provided for in the RAP making the groundwater unsafe to be used
as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its
successor legislation.
   B.   Following NDEQ notifying the City that the groundwater contamination
within the Groundwater Control Area No. 4 has been reduced to a level making
the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the
Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and
City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-98   Prohibited Groundwater Uses
   A.   Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4
shall not be used for any domestic use which may result in human exposures.
Such uses include drinking, food preparation, washing, bathing, showering, and
other household uses which result in human exposures to contaminated
groundwater. Because groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No.
4 may be contaminated and presents a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare
of persons exposed to such water, any human consumption or prohibited use of
groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 is a violation of
this Article and is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement as
provided in §§
35-101 to
35-102 of this Article.
   B.   No new well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute
(gpm) may be drilled or installed in Groundwater Control Area No. 4 unless and
until the party proposing the well installation has demonstrated, by a
hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm,
that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater
contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RAP
for the Site. Any such hydrological study shall be submitted to NDEQ for review
and approval prior to well installation.
   C.   This Section on Prohibited Groundwater Uses shall not prohibit uses of
groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 which do
not result in human exposure to contaminated groundwater, including, but not
limited to, groundwater monitoring wells, EPA, NDNR, or NDEQ remediation wells,
wells that produce 50 gpm or less for dewatering purposes, for non-contact
cooling water for industrial, commercial, or residential uses, or wells used
for irrigation. Discharges from dewatering wells must be appropriately handled
and disposed of in accordance with applicable City, State and Federal laws
including National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permits under the
Clean Water Act.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-99   Well Installation
   A.   No person shall drill or install a well with a design capacity of more
than 50 gallons per minute within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 prior to
applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Central Platte Natural
Resources District.
   B.   No person may install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 4
which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight casings are
installed which conform to the regulations governing water well construction,
pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of the Nebraska
Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure Division (178
NAC 12, Section 003.11D – Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-100   New Well Registration, Application For Well Permit
The following information shall be submitted to the City’s Building Department
prior to drilling a new well in groundwater Control Area No. 4:
   A.   A copy of the well permit obtained from the Central Platte Natural
Resources District.
   B.   The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed
well is to be located.
   C.   The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from
the proposed well.
   D.   A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed
well, if any; including a certification that such groundwater will not be used
for domestic use which may result in human exposures.
   E.   Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the
proposed well.
   F.   The depth of the proposed well and pump intake.
   G.   A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.
   H.   An application for any dewatering well will include a plan for the
appropriate handling and disposal of the discharge water in accordance with
applicable City, State and Federal laws including NPDES permits.
   I.   A statement as to whether the design capacity of the proposed well
exceeds 50 gpm. If the design capacity of the well exceeds 50 gpm, the owner of
the well shall demonstrate, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent
environmental consulting firm in accordance with §
35-98(B) of this Article, that the operation of the well will not cause the
movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial
action provided for in the RAP for the Site.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-101   Violations Of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement Of Public
Nuisance
Whenever the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, has
inspected any well within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 and determined that
such well is being operated, or that the groundwater pumped from the well is
being used, in violation of this Article, he/she will send a written notice to
the owner of record of the real property where the well is located, or the
owner’s agent, or the occupant of the property, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, notifying such party of the violation. The written notice
will contain the following:
   A.   The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property where the well is located.
   B.   A description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of
this Article.
   C.   A description of the corrective action required to be taken to render
the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this Article.
   D.   A statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater
uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time
specified, the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, may
order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City
Attorney, with the consent of the City’s Mayor, to file an action to charge the
costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee.
The charge shall constitute a lien against said property.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
35-102   Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisance
   A.   If the addressee of the notice described in §
35-101 of this Article fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified,
the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the City’s Building
Department Director, or his/her designee, directed to the City Attorney, and
with the consent of the Mayor, may abate said public nuisance pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the notice.
   B.   If the City, in its sole discretion, determines that the use of the
groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses
a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare
of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice to abate pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be required as a condition
precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The
City, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting
such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and
permanently abate such public nuisances and protect the public health, safety
or welfare of the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in
violation of this Article.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012)
CHAPTER 36
ZONING
Article 36-I
Title And Purpose
36-1   Title
36-2   Purposes
36-1   Title
This chapter may be known and may be cited and referred to as the zoning
regulations of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
36-2   Purposes
This chapter has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to lessen
congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to promote the distribution of population, land
classifications and land development to support provisions for adequate
transportation, water flows, water supply, drainage, sanitation, recreation,
and other public requirements; to protect property against blight and
depreciation; and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.
Article 36-II
Definitions
36-6   Rules
36-7   Abbreviations And Acronyms
36-8   Definitions
36-6   Rules
For the purpose of this chapter the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and
numbers used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future.
   B.   The word "persons" includes a corporation, members of a partnership or
other business organization, a committee, board, council, commission, trustee,
receiver, agent or other representative.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory.
   D.   The words "use", "used", "occupy" or "occupied" as applied to any land
or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged" or
"designed" to be used or occupied.
   E.   The word "commission" shall refer to the Hall County Regional Planning
Commission.
   F.   The phase “Planning Director” shall refer to the Planning Director of
the Hall County Regional Planning Commission
   G.   The word “Inspector” shall refer to the Building Department and any
employee of said department
   H.   Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary
meaning in relation to the context.
36-7   Abbreviations And Acronyms
For purposes of this chapter the following shall be standard abbreviations and
acronyms found through the regulation.
AU     Animal Unit
CAFO   Confined Animal Feeding Operation
FCC    Federal Communication Commission
GIS    Geographic Information System
HCRPC  Hall County Regional Planning Commission
kV     Kilovolt
kW     Kilowatt
LFO    Livestock Feeding Operation
NDWEE  Nebraska Department of Water, Energy and Environment or its successor
NSFM   Nebraska State Fire Marshall or successor department
NHHS   Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services or successor department
NDOR   Nebraska Department of Roads or successor department
R.O.W. right-of-way or rights-of-way
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture
 
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36-8   Definitions
(A)
Abandonment shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent
to resume as distinguished from short term interruptions such as during periods
of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure.
Abut, Abutting shall mean to border on, being contiguous with or have property
or district lines in common, including property separated by an alley.
Access or Access Way shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians
and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a
property or use as required by this chapter.
Accessory Building (see Building, accessory)
Accessory Living Quarters shall mean living quarters within an accessory
building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by
temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no
kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling
unit.
Accessory Structure shall mean a detached subordinate structure located on the
same lot with the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the principal structure.
Accessory Use shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly
subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory use does
not alter the principal use of the subject lot or affect other properties in
the district.
Acreage shall mean any tract or parcel of land which does not qualify as a farm
or development.
Adjacent shall mean near, close, or abutting; for example, an Industrial
District across the street or highway from a Residential District shall be
considered as "Adjacent".
Adult Cabaret shall mean cabaret that features go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
Adult Companionship Establishment shall mean an establishment which provides
the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Establishment shall mean any business which offers its patrons services
or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing,
describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," including, but without limitation, to adult
bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, saunas, adult companionship
establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses,
adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and
adult body painting studios.
Adult Hotel or Motel shall mean a hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club shall mean a massage parlor or health club
which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater shall mean a business within an enclosed
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting visual-
media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade shall mean any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motor picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Motion Picture Theaters shall mean a business within an enclosed building
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting visual media material
if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or
if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Novelty Business shall mean a business which has as a principal activity
the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices, which are
designed for sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna shall mean a sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or
reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
Aesthetic Zoning shall mean zoning to accomplish a standard of exterior
architectural appeal and/or neighborhood harmony.
Agricultural and Farm Buildings and Structures shall mean any building or
structure which is necessary or incidental to the normal conduct of a farm
including but not limited to residence of the operator, residence of hired men,
barns, buildings and sheds for housing livestock, poultry and farm machinery,
buildings for the storage or shelter of grain, hay and other crops, silos,
windmills and water storage tanks.
Agricultural Operations (see “Farming”)
Agriculture shall mean the use of land for agricultural purposes, of obtaining
a profit by raising, harvesting, and selling crops or by the feeding, breeding,
management, and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing
animals, or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products, or any
other agricultural or horticultural use. Agricultural use shall not be
construed to include any parcel of land of less than twenty acres or any non-
agricultural commercial or industrial development.
Airport shall mean any area which is used or is intended to be used for the
taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant
areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or
facilities, including open spaces, taxiways, and tie-down areas.
Airport Hazard Zone consists of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones
and Transition Zones. The outer boundary of the Hazard Zone is composed of a
series of connected tangents and simple curves that also constitute the outer
boundaries of the Approach and Turning Zones.
Alley shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet
or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service
access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street
and to provide access to utility services located therein. Buildings facing an
alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this chapter
related to frontage on a dedicated street.
Alteration shall mean any change, addition or modification in construction or
occupancy of an existing structure.
Alteration, Structural (see Structural alteration)
Amendment shall mean a change in the wording, context, or substance of this
chapter, an addition or deletion or a change in the district boundaries or
classifications upon the zoning map.
Amusement Arcade shall mean a building or a part of a building where five or
more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-orientated
amusement devices are available and are maintained for use.
Amusement Park shall mean a facility, primarily outdoors, that may include
structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment,
including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, buildings
for shows and entertainment, and restaurants and souvenir sales.
Animal Hospital shall mean a place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as
a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental
to such hospital use.
Animals, Domestic (see Household pet)
Animal Unit (see Livestock Feeding Operation)
Animals, Farm shall mean livestock associated with agricultural operation,
commonly kept or raised as a part of a agricultural operation including but not
limited to horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, chickens and turkeys.
Antenna (see definition in §
36-169 of this chapter.)
Antique Shops shall mean a place offering primarily antiques for sale. An
antique for the purpose of this chapter shall be a work of art, piece of
furniture, decorative object, or the like, of belonging to the past, at least
30 years old.
Apartment shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or
multiple family dwelling arranged, intended or designed for a place of
residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit. (Also, see Dwelling Unit.)
Apartment House (see Dwelling, multiple family)
Appearance shall mean the outward aspect visible to the public.
Appropriate shall mean the sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site
and the whole community.
Appurtenances shall mean the visible, functional objects accessory to and part
of buildings.
Architectural Character (see Architectural Concept.)
Architectural concept shall mean the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or
group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development
that produces the architectural character.
Architectural feature shall mean a prominent or significant part or element of
a building, structure, or site. Architectural features may include special
lines, massing, and/or texture.
   A.   Lines shall mean visual elements of the building, either within the
façade or on the building edge, which are in a linear form either horizontally
or vertically and may be composed of masonry, glass, or other related
materials.
   B.   Mass shall pertain to the volume, bulk of a building or structure.
   C.   Texture shall mean the quality of a surface, ranging from mirror
finish, smooth, to coarse and unfinished.
Architectural style shall mean the characteristic form and detail, as of
buildings of a particular historic period.
Artisan Production Shop shall mean a building or portion thereof used for the
creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by more than three
but less than six artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use.
Artist Studio shall mean a place designed to be used, or used as, both a
dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson,
including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine
arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music,
painting, sculpture, and writing.
Attached Permanently shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to
require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or
structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.
Attractive shall mean having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the
observer.
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) shall mean an automated device that performs
banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling
financial institution.
Automobile Wrecking Yard (see Salvage Yard as defined herein.) (B)
Ballroom shall mean a place or hall used for dancing, other than those listed
under the definition of “Adult Cabaret”. Ballrooms may also be used for
reunions, weddings and receptions.
Bar shall mean any establishment whose principal business is serving alcoholic
beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. (Also, see Nightclub.)
Beacon shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source;
also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
Bed and Breakfast Inn shall mean a house, or portion thereof, where short-term
lodging rooms and meals are provided. The operator of the inn shall live on the
premises.
Bedroom shall mean a room within a dwelling unit planned and intended for
sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door or doorway.
Berm shall mean a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the
aesthetic character.
Best Interests of Community shall mean interests of the community at large and
not interest of the immediate neighborhood.
Billboard shall mean an outdoor advertisement sign which directs attention to a
business commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
Block shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public
streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, unplatted land, City-County boundaries,
or adjoining property lines.
Block Frontage shall mean that section of a block fronting on a street between
two intersecting streets or other block boundary.
Board of Adjustment shall mean that board that has been created by the city and
which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals,
interpretations of, and variances to the zoning regulations.
Boarding or Rooming House shall mean a building containing a single dwelling
unit and provisions for not more than five (5) guests, where lodging is
provided with or without meals for compensation.
Brew-on Premises Store shall mean a facility that provides the ingredients and
equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Brew-on-
premises stores do not include the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the
owner of the brew-on-premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.
Brew Pub shall mean a restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer as
an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast
into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. By definition, these
establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale annually. The
area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall
not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space.
Brewery shall mean an industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads and/or
similar beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures
more than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.
   A.   Brewery, Craft shall mean a brew pub or a micro brewery.
   B.   Brewery, Micro shall mean a facility for the production and packaging
of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or
wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than 10,000 barrels
per year. The development may include other uses such as standard restaurant,
bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
Broadcasting Tower shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of
radio, television, radar, or microwaves which exceeds the maximum height
permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that
noncommercial radio towers not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height shall
not be considered broadcast towers.
Buffer shall mean a strip of land established to protect one type of land use
from another incompatible land use or between a land use and a private or
public road. (Also, see Screening.)
Buffer Zone shall mean an area of land that separates two zoning districts and/
or land uses that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one use on the
other.
Building shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but shall
not include temporary buildings as defined in "Structure, Temporary". Operable
and licensed trailers, with wheels, shall not be considered as buildings.
Building Accessory shall mean any detached subordinate building that serves a
function customarily incidental to that of the main building or main use of the
premises. Customary accessory building includes farm buildings, garages,
carports, and small storage sheds.
Building, Area of  shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas
occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot.
Building Code shall mean the various codes of the City that regulate
construction and requires building permits, electrical permits, mechanical
permits, plumbing permits, and other permits to do work regulated by the
adopted building code of the City, and other codes adopted by the City that
pertain to building construction.
Building, Height shall mean the vertical distance measured from the centerline
of the improved street to the highest point of a roof surface, if a flat roof,
to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d2d1cce0f34f560dc979feb6a482dca982b5a456/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4346.png]
 
Building Inspector shall mean the building inspectors for the City of Grand
Island, Nebraska.
Building Principal shall mean a building or buildings within which the main or
primary use of the lot or premises is located. (Also, see Use, Principal.)
Building Setback Line shall mean the minimum of distance as prescribed by this
chapter between any property line and the closed point of the building wall
line or face of any building or structure related thereto.
(C)
Campground shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of
tents, campers, and major recreational vehicles and which primary purpose is
recreational, having open areas that are natural in character.
Car Wash shall mean a building or structure or an area of land with machine or
hand operated facilities for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of
motor vehicles, not including semi-trailer tractors, buses, and commercial
fleets.
Car Wash, Industrial shall mean a mechanical facility for the washing, waxing
and vacuuming of heavy trucks and buses.
Carport shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two (2)
enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.
Cellar shall mean a building space having more than one-half (1/2) of its
height below the average adjoining grade lines.
Cemetery shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead
and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, and
mausoleums.
Channel shall mean the geographical area within either the natural or
artificial banks of a watercourse or drainageway.
Charitable shall mean a public or semi-public institutional use of a
philanthropic, charitable, benevolent, religious, or eleemosynary character,
but not including sheltering or caring of animals.
Child Care Center shall mean a facility licensed to provide child care for
thirteen (13) or more children. In addition to these regulations, Child Care
Centers shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
Church, Storefront shall mean a religious facility contained within a store or
similar structure not typically used for religious activities that are now used
as a meeting place for a congregation. Structures adapted for congregations
including barns, stores, warehouses, old public buildings, and single-family
dwellings.
City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.
Clear View Zone shall mean the area of a corner lot closest to the intersection
that is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian
and vehicular traffic. (Also see Sight Triangle.)
Club shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated),
religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which
are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for
profit.
Cluster Development shall mean a development designed to concentrate buildings
in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and the preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d2d1cce0f34f560dc979feb6a482dca982b5a456/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4348.png]
 
Code shall mean the Grand Island City Code.
Coffee Kiosk shall mean a retail food business in a freestanding building that
sells coffee, or other beverages, and remade bakery goods from a drive-through
window to customers seated in their automobiles for consumption off the
premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating.
Cohesiveness shall mean the unity of composition between design elements of a
building and/or a group of buildings and the landscape development.
Commercial Feeding Operation (See Livestock Feeding Operation)
Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.
Common Area or Property shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with
the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the
owners of the individual building sites in a Planned Development or condominium
development.
Community Center shall mean a place, structure, or other facility used for and
providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally
open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve various segments of
the community.
Community Sanitary Sewer System shall mean an approved central sewer collecting
system, meeting state and county requirements, available to each platted lot
and discharging into a treatment facility. This does not include individual
septic systems.
Community Water Supply System shall mean a public water supply system which
serves at least fifteen service connections used by year round residents or
uses, or regularly serves 25 or more year round residents or uses.
Compatibility shall mean harmony in the appearance of two or more external
design features in the same vicinity.
Compatible Uses shall mean a land use which is congruous with, tolerant of, and
has no adverse effects on existing neighboring uses. Incompatibility may be
affected by pedestrian or vehicular traffic generation, volume of goods handled
and environmental elements such as noise, dust, odor, air pollution, glare,
lighting, debris generated, contamination of surface or ground water,
aesthetics, vibration, electrical interference, and radiation.
Comprehensive Development Plan shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan of
Grand Island, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies
for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting
the purposes and requirements set forth in state statutes.
Conditional Use shall mean a use where allowed by the district regulations,
that would not be appropriate generally throughout the zoning district without
restrictions, but which, if controlled as to number, size, area, location,
relationship to the neighborhood or other minimal protective characteristics
would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Conditional Use Permit shall mean a permit issued by the City Council that
authorizes the recipient to make conditional use of property in accordance with
the provisions of Article 6 and any additional conditions placed upon, or
required by said permit.
Condominium shall be as defined in state statutes, whereby four or more
apartments are separately offered for sale.
Confinement shall mean totally roofed buildings, which may be open-sided (for
ventilation purposes only) or completely enclosed on the sides, wherein animals
or poultry are housed over solid concrete or dirt floors, or slatted (partially
open) floors over pits or manure collection areas in pens, stalls, cages, or
alleys, with or without bedding materials and mechanical ventilation. The word
"confinement" shall not mean the temporary confined feeding of livestock during
seasonal adverse weather.
Conflicting Land Use shall mean the use of property which transfers over
neighboring property lines negative economic, or environmental effects,
including, but not limited to, noise, vibration, odor, dust, glare, smoke,
pollution, water vapor, mismatched land uses and/or density, height, mass,
mismatched layout of adjacent uses, loss of privacy, and unsightly views.
Congregate Care Facility shall mean a long-term care facility exclusively for
persons 60 years of age or older, and which shall include, without limitation,
common dining, social and recreational features, special safety and convenience
features designed for the needs of the elderly, such as emergency call systems,
grab bars and handrails, special door hardware, cabinets, appliances,
passageways, and doorways designed for residents including: meal services,
transportation, housekeeping, linen, and organized social activities.
Congregate Housing shall mean a residential facility for four or more persons
fifty-five (55) years of age or over, their spouses, or surviving spouses,
providing living and sleeping facilities including meal preparation, dining
areas, laundry services, room cleaning and common recreational, social, and
service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents including resident
staff personnel who occupy a room or unit in the residential facility.
Conservation shall mean the protection and care that prevents destruction or
deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings or
natural resources.
Conservation Area shall mean environmentally sensitive and valuable lands
protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological
integrity, balance or character, except in overriding public interest,
including but not limited to: wetlands, floodways, flood plains, drainage ways,
river or stream banks, and areas of significant biological productivity or
uniqueness.
Conservation Easement shall mean an easement granting a right or interest in
real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas
predominantly in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition and retaining
such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife, or maintaining
existing land uses or preserving the ability said land to be used for specific
purposes such as on site wastewater treatment systems.
Convenience Store shall mean a one-story, retail store that is designed and
stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to
customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a
"supermarket.") It is dependent on, and is designed to attract and accommodate
large volumes of stop-and-go traffic. (Also, see self-service Station.)
Contiguous shall mean the same as "Abut".
Copy Center shall mean a retail establishment that provides duplicating
services using photocopying, blueprint, and offset printing equipment, and may
include the collating and binding of booklets and reports.
Country Club shall mean a land area and buildings containing golf courses,
riding arenas, fishing or hunting facilities and/or similar facilities, a
clubhouse, and customary accessory uses, open only to members and their guests.
Court shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building or buildings and abounded on three (3) or more sides by such
buildings.
Cul-de-Sac shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
Curve Lot (see "Lot, Curve".)
(D)
Dairy Farm shall mean any place or premises upon which milk is produced for
sale or other distribution.
Density shall mean the number of dwelling units per acre of land allowable on a
given tract or parcel of land.
Detention Cell shall mean a facility for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff.
Developer shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is
responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit,
conditional use permit or sign permit.
Development shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations for
which necessary permits may be required.
Development Concept Plan (See Site Plan.)
Development Review shall mean the review, by the city of subdivision plats,
site plans, rezoning requests, or permit review.
District shall mean any defined area within the jurisdiction of the
governmental entity that is designed to allow specific uses and structures as
defined in the corresponding textual portion of the regulation.
Dog Kennel (See Kennel, commercial; and Kennel, private.)
Domestic Animals (See Household Pet.)
Downzoning shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a less
intensive or more restrictive district such as from commercial district to
residential district or from a higher density to a lower density residential
district.
Drive-In Facility shall mean an establishment where customers can be served
without leaving the confinement of their vehicle.
Driveway shall mean any vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading
facility.
Dump shall mean a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding by
burial, incineration, or by any other means for any garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. Such use shall not
involve any industrial or commercial process.
Duplex shall mean the same as "Dwelling, Two (2) Family".
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used
exclusively for single family residential purposes.
Dwelling ,  Farmstead shall mean any single family dwelling unit / residence
associated with a farming operation either on a separate tract of land or
located as a part of the larger operation area.
Dwelling, Manufactured Home. A factory-built structure which is to be used as a
place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a
permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame
any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in
compliance with standards promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
Dwelling, Modular (Is considered a conventional type single-family dwelling).
Any prefabricated structure, used for dwelling purposes, moved on to a site in
an essentially complete constructed condition, in one or more parts, and when
completed is a single family unit on a permanent foundation, attached to the
foundation with permanent connections. To be a modular home it shall meet or be
equivalent to the construction criteria as defined by the Nebraska State
Department of Health and Human Services under the authority granted by Section
71-1555 through 71-1567 Revised Statutes of Nebraska 1943, in addition to any
amendments thereto.
Dwelling, Multiple shall mean a building or buildings designed and used for
occupancy by three (3) or more families, all living independently of each other
and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
Dwelling, Seasonal shall mean a dwelling designed and used as a temporary
residence and occupied less than six months in each year.
Dwelling, Single Family is a building having accommodations for or occupied
exclusively by one family which meet all the following standards:
   A.   The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of
floor area, above grade, for single story construction;
   B.   The home shall have no less than an eighteen (18) foot exterior width;
   C.   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-
half (2 1/2) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run;
   D.   The exterior material is of a color, material and scale comparable with
those existing in residential site-built, single family construction;
   E.   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or simulates
asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or is a standing seam residential grade steel
material, or rock;
   F.   The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and have
wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed, and
   G.   The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are uniformly
applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning district.
   H.   Permanent foundation: continuous perimeter base on which building rests
to be constructed from either poured concrete, laid masonry block, brick or
all-weather wood foundation on a footing to be placed a minimum of thirty-six
(36) inches below the final ground level.
Dwelling, Single-Family (Attached) shall mean a one-family dwelling unit that
is attached to one additional single-family dwelling. Said dwelling units are
separated by an unpierced common wall through the structure that also sits
along the property line separating ownership of the structure.
Dwelling, Two (2) Family shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for
the occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each other and having
separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
Dwelling Unit. One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease on a
weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other rooms
or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.
(E)
Easement shall mean a right to use a parcel of land, granted to the general
public, utility, corporation or person(s) for a specific purpose or purposes.
Educational Institution shall mean a public or nonprofit institution or
facility which conducts regular academic instruction at preschool,
kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and collegiate levels, including graduate
schools, universities, junior colleges, trade schools, nonprofit research
institutions and religious institutions. Such institutions must either: (1)
Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards established by
the State Board of Education; or (2) Confer degrees as a college or university
or undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) Conduct research; or (4) Give
religious instruction. Private schools, academies, or institutes incorporated
or otherwise, which operate for a profit, commercial, or private trade schools
are not included in this definition.
Eleemosynary Institution shall mean any building or group of buildings devoted
to and supported by charity.
Encroachment shall mean an advancement or intrusion beyond the lines or limits
as designated and established by this chapter, and to infringe or trespass into
or upon the possession or right of others without permission.
Enlargement shall mean the expansion of a building, structure, or use in
volume, size, area, height, length, width, depth, capacity, ground coverage, or
in number.
Environmentally Controlled Housing shall mean any livestock operation meeting
the definition of a Livestock Feeding Operation (LFO) and is contained within a
building which is roofed, and may or may not have open sides and contains
floors which are hard surfaced, earthen, slatted or other type of floor. The
facility is capable of maintaining and regulating the environment in which the
livestock are kept.
Erected shall mean constructed upon or moved onto a site.
Existing and Lawful shall mean the use of a building, structure, or land was in
actual existence, operation, and use, as compared to the use being proposed,
contemplated, applied for, or in the process of being constructed or remodeled.
In addition, the use must either have been permitted, authorized, or allowed by
law or any other applicable regulation prior to the enactment of a zoning
regulation when first adopted or permitted, authorized or allowed by the
previous zoning regulation prior to the adoption of an amendment to that zoning
regulation.
Expressway shall mean a street or road that provides fast and efficient
movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic between areas and does not
provide direct access to property.
Exterior building component shall mean an essential and visible part of the
exterior of a building.
External design feature shall mean the general arrangement of any portion of a
building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color, and
texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows,
doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such
portions as will be open to public view from any street, place, or way.
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction shall mean the area beyond the corporate limits,
in which the City has been granted the powers by the state to exercise zoning
and building regulations and is exercising such powers.
(F)
Facade shall mean the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from
the building's exterior.
Factory shall mean a structure or plant within which something is made or
manufactured from raw or partly wrought materials into forms suitable for use.
Family shall mean a household head and one or more persons related to the head
by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or duly authorized custodial
relationship living together in a single dwelling, or no more than five (5)
unrelated persons living together in a single dwelling.
Family Child Care Home I shall mean a child care operation in the provider’s
place of residence which serves between four (4) and eight (8) children at any
one time. A Family Child Care Home I provider may be approved to serve no more
than two (2) additional school-age children during non-school hours. In
addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirements of the
State of Nebraska.
Family Child Care Home II shall mean a child care operation either in the
provider’s place of residence or a site other than the residence, serving
twelve (12) or fewer children at any one time. In addition to these
regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirements of the State of
Nebraska.
Farm shall mean an area containing at least twenty (20) acres or more which is
used for growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, and
grain, and the storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the
usual farm poultry and farm animals. The term farming includes the operating of
such area for one or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses
for treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as hereinafter
prescribed; provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage
or offal to swine or other animals.
Farming shall mean the planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains,
hay or plants commonly grown in Nebraska with the necessary accessory uses for
treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as prescribed
hereunder, provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage
or offal to swine or other animals.
Farmstead. In contrast to a farmstead dwelling, a tract of land of not less
than 1 acre and not more than 20 acres, upon which a farm dwelling and other
outbuildings and barns existed as of August 1, 2004, and was used for single-
family resident purposes.
Feed Lot shall mean the confinement of horses, sheep, pigs, and other food
animals in buildings, lots, pens, pools or ponds which normally are not used
for raising crops or for grazing animals.
Fence shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary.
   A.   Fence, Open shall mean a fence, including gates, which has, for each
one foot (1’) wide segment extending over the entire length and height of
fence, fifty percent (50%) or more of the surface area in open spaces which
affords direct views through the fence.
   B.   Fence, Solid shall mean any fence that does not qualify as an open
fence.
Flood (see definition in §
36-128 of this chapter.)
Flood Plain (see definition in §
36-128 of this chapter.)
Floodway (see definition in §
36-128 of this chapter.)
Floor Area. Whenever the term "floor area" is used in this chapter as a basis
for requiring off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that,
unless otherwise stated, said floor area applies not only to the ground floor
area but also to any additional stories of said structure. All horizontal
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls.
Food Sales shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical
uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy
shops.
Frontage  shall mean that portion of a parcel of property which abuts a
dedicated public street or highway.
(G)
Garage, Private shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main
building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the
occupants of the dwelling, including carports.
Garage, Public shall mean any garage other than a private garage.
Garage, Repair shall mean a building designed and used for the storage, care,
repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major
mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work as a commercial business (Also,
see Service Station).
Garbage shall mean any waste food material of an animal or vegetable nature,
including that which may be used for the fattening of livestock.
Gated Communities shall mean residential areas that restrict access to normally
public spaces. These are subdivisions of usually high-end houses. The type of
gates can range from elaborate guard houses to simple electronic arms.
Grade shall mean the average of the finished ground level at the center of all
walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a
sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
Grand Island Fee Schedule shall mean the fee schedule adopted and maintained by
the City of Grand Island, which establishes the required fees to be collected
for various City services.
Graphic element shall mean a letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or
other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
Greenhouse shall mean a building or premises used for growing plants,
preparation of floral arrangements for off-site delivery to customers, cold
storage of flowers or dry storage of materials used for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.
Greenway shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements
thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip
of land set aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridal path, or other similar
access-way.
Ground Cover shall mean plant material used in landscaping which remains less
than twelve (12) inches in height at maturity. (Also, see Landscaping.)
Ground Water shall mean water occurring beneath the surface of the ground that
fills available openings in the rock or soil materials such that they may be
considered saturated.
Group Care Home shall mean a home which is operated under the auspices of an
organization which is responsible for providing social services,
administration, direction, and control for the home which is designed to
provide twenty-four hour care for individuals in a residential setting.
Group Home shall include both Group Care Home and Group Home for the Disabled.
Group homes shall be classified by size as follows:
Group Home (Small) shall mean a home designed to accommodate no more than 5
persons and shall be allowed in all zoning districts that permit dwelling units
in the same manner as other dwelling units. These homes shall be built to no
less than an R3 residential standard as defined by the International Building
Code.
Group Home (Medium) shall mean a facility designed to house between 6 and 16
persons and shall require a conditional use permit in the LLR, R1, R2, R3 and
R4 Districts and permitted in the RO, B1, B2, B3 and M3 zoning districts. These
facilities shall be built to no less than an R4 residential standard as defined
by the International Building Code.
Group Home (Large) shall mean a facility designed to house more than 16 persons
and shall be permitted in the RO, B1, B2, B3, and M3 zoning districts. These
facilities shall be built to an Institutional standard as defined by the
International Building Code
Group Home for the Disabled shall mean a dwelling with resident staff shared by
four or more handicapped persons who live together as a single housekeeping
unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide
care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents
with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as
possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term
"disabled" shall mean having:
   A.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of
living independently;
   B.   A record of having such an impairment; or
   C.   Being regarded as having such impairment.
Handicap shall not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined in state statutes.
Group Housing shall mean two or more separate buildings on a lot, each
containing one or more dwelling units.
Guest Building shall mean an accessory building which is designed to be
occupied by one (1) or more guests for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen
facilities, not including dormitories.
(H)
Half-Story shall mean a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of
which are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story.
Halfway House shall mean a licensed home for individuals on release from more
restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, living together as a single housekeeping
unit, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to
mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.
Hard Surfaced shall mean any surface used for movement of vehicular and / or
pedestrians which is properly designed and paved with a permanent type, dust-
free surface such as asphalt, concrete, or paving brick.
Harmony shall mean a quality that represents an appropriate and congruent
arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and
landscape elements.
Hazardous Waste shall mean waste products of industrial or chemical process
including finished surplus, used, contaminated, or unwanted fertilizer,
herbicide, petroleum products, or other such processed waste material that
requires special handling treatment and disposal methods.
Health Club shall mean privately owned for profit facilities such as
gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, recreational clubs, reducing salons,
and weight control establishments.
Health Recreation Facility shall mean an indoor or outdoor facility including
uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, whirlpool spa and/
or sauna and pro shop.
Hedge shall mean a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape
material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
Height of Building (see definition of Building Height herein.)
Holding Pond shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit,
dam, embankment, or combination of these for temporary storage of liquid
livestock wastes.
Home for the Aged (see Long-Term Care Facility)
Home Improvement Center shall mean a facility engaged in the retail sale of
various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders’ hardware, paint and
glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery.
Home Occupation shall mean an “in-home” or “home based” or entrepreneurial
business operating from a residential dwelling within the extra-territorial
jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island. Home occupations are considered
accessory uses to properties in all zoning districts.
Homeowners Association shall mean a private, nonprofit corporation or
association of homeowners of properties in a fixed area, established for the
purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining various common properties and
facilities.
Hotel shall mean a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings,
offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public
and providing services associated with restaurants, meeting rooms, and
recreational facilities. The word "hotel" includes motel, inn, automobile
court, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist court, motor hotel.
Household Pet shall mean an animal that is customarily kept for personal use or
enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but not be limited to
domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, fish, and rodents.
Housing for the Elderly shall mean a multi-family structure, controlled by
either a public entity, private for profit, institutional body, or non-profit
corporation. The facility houses predominantly persons 62 years of age or
older.
(I)
Impervious Surface shall mean a surface that has been compacted or covered with
a layer of material making the surface highly resistant to infiltration by
water, such as rock, gravel, or clay and conventionally surfaced streets,
roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and driveways.
Incidental Use shall mean a use, which is subordinate to the main use of a
premise.
Independent (restricted) Housing shall mean a residential facility limited to
persons 62 years of age or over, or disabled persons.
Industry shall mean the manufacture, fabrication, processing reduction or
destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment
thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance
thereof and including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses,
wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.
Infill Development shall mean the construction of a building or structure on a
vacant parcel located in a predominately built up area.
Infill Site shall mean any vacant lot, parcel, or tract of land within
developed areas of the city, where at least 80 percent of the land within a
300-foot radius of the site has been developed, and where water, sewer,
streets, schools, and fire protection have already been constructed or are
provided.
Institutional Building shall mean a public and public/private group use of a
nonprofit nature, typically engaged in public service (i.e. houses of worship,
nonprofit cultural centers, charitable organizations).
Intensity shall mean the degree to which land is used referring to the levels
of concentration or activity in uses ranging from uses of low intensity being
agricultural and residential to uses of highest intensity being heavy
industrial uses. High intensity uses are normally uses that generate
concentrations of vehicular traffic and daytime population and are less
compatible with lower intensive uses.
Intent and Purpose shall mean that the Commission and Council by the adoption
of this Regulation, have made a finding that the health, safety, and welfare of
the Community will be served by the creation of the District and by the
regulations prescribed therein.
(J)
Juice Bar (See Adult Establishment.)
Junk shall be any worn-out, cast-off, old, or discarded articles of scrap,
copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, and other
old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
Junk Yard (see definition of Salvage Yard herein.) (K)
Kennel, Boarding and Training shall mean any lot or premises on which three (3)
or more dogs, cats or non-farm/non-domestic or any combination of five (5) or
more thereof, at least four (4) months of age, are boarded, bred, or trained
for a fee.
Kennel, Commercial shall mean an establishment where three (3) or more dogs,
cats, or other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic or any combination of
five (5) or more thereof, at least four (4) months of age are groomed, bred,
boarded, trained, or sold as a business.
Kennel, Private shall mean the keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training
of four or more animals over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the
owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the
primary objective.
(L)
Lagoon shall mean a wastewater treatment facility which is a shallow,
artificial pond where sunlight, bacterial action, and oxygen interact to
restore wastewater to a reasonable state of purity. This includes both human
and livestock wastes. All lagoons shall meet the minimum design criteria
established by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. All lagoons shall have the
proper permits approved prior to starting construction.
Land Use Plan shall mean the same as Comprehensive Development Plan.
Landfill shall mean a disposal site employing a method of disposing solid
wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards in accordance with
state and federal requirements.
Landscape shall mean plant materials, topography, and other natural physical
elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
Landscaping shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in
conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued
maintenance thereof.
Large Box Retail shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user that occupies
no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. These uses typically
include: membership wholesale clubs emphasizing in large bulk sales, discount
stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, especially warehouse style point of sale
concepts and department stores.
Laundry, Self Service shall mean an establishment that provides home-type
washing, drying, and/or ironing facilities for customers on the premises.
Life Care Facility shall mean a facility for the transitional residency of the
elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to
congregate apartment living where residents share common meals and culminating
in full health and continuing care nursing home facility. (Also, see Congregate
Housing and Housing for the Elderly.)
Light Cut-Off Angle shall mean an angle from vertical, extending downward from
a luminaries, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination outward
at the ground plane.
Limits of Grading shall mean the outermost edge of the area in which the
existing topography is to be altered by cutting and/or filling.
Liquids Manure shall mean that type of livestock waste that is in liquid form,
collected in liquid manure pits or lagoons and which can be sprayed or injected
beneath the surface.
Liquid Manure Storage Pits shall mean earthen or lined pits wholly or partially
beneath a semi or totally housed (ECH) livestock operation or at some removed
location used to collect waste production.
Livestock (See Animals, Farm.)
Livestock Feeding Operation (LFO) shall mean any farming operation exceeding
the per acre Animal Unit (A.U.) ratio as defined under “farming” or the
feeding, farrowing, or raising cattle, swine, sheep, poultry, or other
livestock, in a confined area where grazing is not possible, and where the
confined area is for more than six (6) months in any one calendar year, and
where the number of animals so maintained exceeds three hundred (300) Animal
Units as defined below. The confined area of the livestock feeding operation
shall include the pens, corrals, sheds, buildings, feed storage areas, waste
disposal ponds, and related facilities. Such facilities shall be constructed
and operated in conformance with applicable county, state, and federal
regulations. Two (2) or more livestock feeding operations under common
ownership are deemed to be a single livestock feeding operation if they are
adjacent to each other or if they utilize a common area of system for the
disposal of livestock wastes. Animal Units (A.U.) are defined as follows:
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Cow/Calf combination One (1) A.U.= One (1) Slaughter,
Feeder Cattle;
One (1) A.U.= One-half (1/2) Horse;
One (1) A.U.= Seven Tenths (.7) Mature Dairy Cattle;
One (1) A.U.= Two and One Half (2.5) Swine (55 pounds or more); One (1) A.U.=
Twenty Five (25) Weaned Pigs (less than 55 pounds); One (1) A.U.= Two (2) Sows
with Litters;
One (1) A.U.= Ten (10) Sheep;
One (1) A.U.= One Hundred (100) Chickens; One (1) A.U.= Fifty (50) Turkeys;
One (1) A.U.= Five (5) Ducks.
Livestock Wastes shall mean animal and poultry excreta and associated feed
losses, bedding, spillage, or overflow from watering systems, wash and flushing
waters, sprinkling waters from livestock cooling, precipitation polluted by
falling on or flowing onto a livestock operation, and other materials polluted
by livestock or their direct product.
Loading Space shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking
of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street,
alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.
Logic of Design shall mean accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
Long-Term Care Facility shall mean a facility as defined in Title 15, Chapter 3
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and Neb. Rev. Stat. Section
71-2017.01. These facilities include:
Nursing facilities
Boarding home
Adult Care Home
Assisted Living Facility
Center for the Developmentally Disabled
Group Residence
Swing Bed
Adult Day Care
Lot shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use
herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required,
that has frontage upon a street, and is a part of a recorded subdivision plat
or has been recorded prior to April 22, 1968, or a parcel of real property
delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as
filed in the office of the County Register of Deeds and abutting at least one
(1) public street or right-of-way.
Lot Area shall mean the total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot lines
of a lot.
Lot, Corner shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If
the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall
be considered an "Interior Lot".
Lot Coverage shall mean the portion of a lot or building site which is occupied
by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, and walks, regardless of
whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy or not.
Lot, Curve shall mean a lot fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way
of a curved street, which street has a centerline radius of three hundred (300)
feet or less.
Lot Depth shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d2d1cce0f34f560dc979feb6a482dca982b5a456/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4350.png]
 
Lot, Flag shall mean a lot with frontage and access provided to the bulk of the
lot by means of a narrow corridor. The measurement of the actual lot frontage
shall be made along the widest portion of the lot along the line parallel to
the street.
Lot, Frontage  shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible
street right-of-way other than an alley or an unimproved county road. For the
purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets or roads shall be considered frontage.
Lot, Key shall mean a lot: (1) abutting the entire length of at least one of
its side lot lines, either directly or across an alley, the rear lot line of
any other lot; or (2) situated between two such key lots.
Lot, Interior shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
   A.   Lot Line, Front shall mean the property line abutting a street.
   B.   Lot Line, Rear shall mean a lot line not abutting a street which is
opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
   C.   Lot Line, Side shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot
line.
Lot, Nonconforming shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that
required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created
prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements
were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the
office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road
or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created.
Lot Through shall mean a lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets, not
including a corner lot.
Lot of Record shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the
records of the Hall County Register of Deeds at the time of the passage of a
regulation or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
Lot Width shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot line,
measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines.
(M)
Manufactured Home Park shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that
has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing used or
to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured home spaces are not
offered for sale or sold. The term "manufactured home park" does not include
sales lots on which new or used manufactured homes are parked for the purposes
of storage, inspection, or sale.
Manufactured Home Subdivision shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract or plot
of ground subdivided and used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling
lots for occupancy by manufactured homes.
Manufacturing shall mean uses primarily engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products. These uses are
usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use
power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Uses engaged in
assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered
manufacturing if the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed
improvement. Also included is the blending of material such as lubricating
oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Manufacturing production is usually carried
on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for
industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.
Map, Official Zoning shall mean a map delineating the boundaries of zoning
districts which, along with the zoning text, is officially adopted by the Grand
Island City Council as "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand Island,
Nebraska."
Massage Establishment shall mean any building, room, place, or establishment
other than a regularly licensed and established hospital or dispensary where
non-medical or non-surgical manipulative exercises or devices are practiced
upon the human body manually or otherwise by any person other than a licensed
physician, surgeon, dentist, occupational and/or physical therapist,
chiropractor, or osteopath with or without the use of therapeutic, electrical,
mechanical, or bathing device. Said establishment shall comply with all state
regulations.
Massage Parlor (See Adult Massage Parlor.)
Mechanical Equipment shall mean equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of
which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and similar purposes.
Mini-Storage or Mini-Warehouse (See Self-Service Storage Facility.)
Miscellaneous Structures shall mean structures, other than buildings, visible
from public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and
towers, sheds, shelters, fences, and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up
facilities.
Mixed Use shall mean properties where various uses, such as office, commercial,
institutional, and residential, are combined in a single building or on a
single site in an integrated development project with significant functional
interrelationships and a coherent physical design.
Mobile Home Park (See Manufactured Home Park.)
Mobile Home Subdivision (See Manufactured Home Subdivision.)
Monotony shall mean repetitive sameness, lacking variety and variation, and/or
reiteration.
Motel (See Hotel.)
Motor Vehicle shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon
rails, except mopeds and self-propelled invalid chairs.
(N)
Nebraska Revised Reissued Statutes , 1943 and the abbreviated term Nebr. R. R.
S., 1943 are one and the same.
Nightclub shall mean a commercial establishment dispensing beverages for
consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment
is provided, except as defined under Adult Cabaret. (Also, see Bar.)
Non-Agricultural Land shall mean any tract, parcel or lot that is used for any
purpose that does not meet the definition of Agriculture in this section.
Non-community Water Supply System shall mean any public water supply system
that is not a community water supply system.
Non-Conforming Building shall mean a building or portion thereof which was
lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established
zoning or zoning regulations.
Non-Conforming Use shall mean a use lawful when established but which does not
conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulation.
Non-Farm Buildings are all buildings except those buildings utilized for
agricultural purposes on a farmstead of twenty acres or more which produces one
thousand dollars or more of farm products each year.
Nursery shall mean the use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and
growth of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like from seed or stock, and
the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and
the like purchased elsewhere and transplanted into the soil of the premises. In
connection with the sale of plants, such fungicides, insecticides, chemicals,
peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to be used in
preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.
Nursing Home (see Congregate Care Facility)
Nursery School (see Preschool)
(O)
Office shall mean a building or a portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving, primarily, administrative, professional, or clerical
operations.
Official Map (See Map, Official Zoning District.)
Off-Street Parking Area or Vehicular Use shall refer to all off street areas
and spaces designed, used, required, or intended to be used for parking,
including driveways or access ways in and to such areas.
Open Lots shall mean pens or similar concentrated areas for livestock,
including small shed-type areas or open-front buildings, with dirt, or concrete
(or paved or hard) surfaces, wherein animals or poultry are substantially or
entirely exposed to the outside environment except for possible small portions
affording some protection by windbreaks or small shed-type areas.
Open Space shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment,
exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking
areas, structures, and buildings.
Open Space, Common shall mean a separate and distinct area set aside as open
space within or related to a development, and not on individually owned lots or
dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use
or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Rights-of-way, private
streets, driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for
vehicular use or required yards shall not be included as common open space.
Outlot shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting,
which is intended as open space or other use, for which no building permit
shall be issued for any private structure. Typically uses are limited within
the subdivision agreement and/or plat.
Overlay District shall mean a district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The original zoning district
designation does not change.
Owner shall mean one or more persons, including corporations, who have title to
the property, building or structure in question.
(P)
Paintball shall mean all guns and other devices used for the purpose of firing
pellets containing a latex paint at a person or target.
Paintball Course, Commercial shall mean a commercial recreational park
containing obstacle courses for the purpose of staging paintball battles. Said
facility generally collects a fee, either as membership or on a visit by visit
basis, that allows individuals to participate in paintball activities.
Parcel shall mean a lot or a contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, which may be considered as a unit for purposes of
development.
Park shall mean any public or private land available for recreational,
educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
Parking Area, Private shall mean an area, other than a street, used for the
parking of motor vehicles capable of moving under their own power and
restricted from general public use.
Parking Area, Public shall mean an area, other than a private parking area or
street used for the parking of vehicles capable of moving under their own
power, either free or for remuneration.
Parking Space, Automobile shall mean an area, other than a street or alley,
reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having an area of not
less than 180 square feet and no dimension of less than nine (9) feet, plus
such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
Parkway shall mean an arterial highway with full or partial control of access,
and located within a park or ribbon of park like development.
Performance Guarantee shall mean a financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in
compliance with these regulations as well as with approved plans and
specifications of a development.
Permanent Foundation shall mean a base constructed from either poured concrete,
laid masonry rock, brick, or all-weather wood and placed on a footing located
below ground level to a point below the frost line upon which a building or
structure is permanently attached.
Permanent Tree Protection Devices shall be structural measures, such as
retaining walls or aeration devices that are designed to protect the tree and
its root systems throughout its lifetime.
Permanently Attached shall mean connected to real estate in such a way as to
require dismantling, cutting away, or unbolting in order to remove, relocate,
or replace.
Permitted Use shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a zoning
district.
Person shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or
combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Grand Island,
Nebraska.
Pet Shop shall mean a retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of
domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding
exotic animals and farm animals such as horses, cattle, goats, sheep and
poultry.
Planned Unit Development shall mean a development designed to provide for an
unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses
in accordance with an approved development plan.
Planning Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.
Plant Materials shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass,
perennials, annuals, and bulbs.
Plat shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description
of individual properties, including street rights-of-way, public utility
easements, etc.
Policy shall mean a statement or document of the City, such as the
comprehensive plan, that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making
decisions.
Poultry, Commercial Feeding shall mean a poultry commercial feed lot, whether
the confined feeding operations are enclosed or outdoors.
Premises shall mean a tract of land, consisting of one lot or irregular tract,
or more than one lot or irregular tract, provided such lots or tracts are under
common ownership, contiguous, and used as a single tract. A building or land
within a prescribed area.
Preschool shall mean an early childhood program which provides primarily
educational services, where children do not nap and where children are not
served a meal.
Private Well shall mean a well that provides water supply to less than fifteen
(15) service connections and regularly serves less than twenty-five (25)
individuals.
Prohibited Use shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is
not listed as a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district.
Proportion shall mean a balanced relationship of parts of a building,
landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole.
Protected Zone shall mean all lands that fall outside the buildable areas of a
parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all
areas required as landscaping strips according to the provisions of this
chapter.
Public Utility shall mean any business which furnishes the general public
telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas, water and
sewer, or any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject
to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the state or federal
government.
Public Water Supply shall mean a water supply system designed to provide public
piped water fit for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15)
service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five individuals. This
definition shall include: (1) Any collection, treatment, storage, or
distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and
used primarily in connection with such system; and (2) Any collection or
pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily
in the connection with such system.
(Q)
(R)
Railroad shall mean the land use including the right-of-way (R.O.W.) abutting
railroad properties occupied by uses pertinent to the railroad operation and
maintenance, but not including properties owned by the railroad and leased for
use by others.
Recreational Facility shall mean facilities for the use by the public for
passive and active recreation including tennis, handball, racquetball,
basketball, track and field, jogging, baseball, soccer, skating, swimming, or
golf. This shall include country clubs and athletic clubs, but not facilities
accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests, nor arenas
or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. In
addition, recreational facilities shall mean museums, amphitheaters, race
tracks (including all motor powered vehicles) and wildlife conservation areas
(used for public viewing), and theme parks.
Recreational Vehicle (RV) shall mean a vehicular unit less than forty (40) feet
in overall length, eight (8) feet in width, or twelve (12) feet in overall
height, primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational
camping or travel use having either its own power or designed to be mounted on
or drawn by a motor vehicle. Recreational vehicle includes motor home, truck
camper, travel trailer, camping trailer, and fifth wheel.
Recreational Vehicle Pad. A space for parking a recreational vehicle within a
campground or other allowed place consisting of no less than 800 square feet
with a minimum width of 12 feet. Improvements included within the pad space
include 1 hard surfaced improved parking space of not less than 180 square feet
(20 x 9 or 18 x 10) and 2 hard surfaced improved parallel tire pads of not less
than 2.5 feet by 24 feet.
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park shall mean a tract of land upon which two or
more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living
quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers, vacationers, or
travelers. A Recreational vehicle park on tract of land in excess of 20 acres
used for seasonal events of not more than 14 consecutive days in duration may
provide overflow pads not to exceed 25% of the Recreational Vehicle Pads
provided in compliance with the required improvements. Overflow pads shall be
allowed without the required improvements.
Residence shall mean a building used, designed, or intended to be used as a
home or dwelling place for one (1) or more families.
Restaurant shall mean a public eating establishment at which the primary
function is the preparation and serving of food primarily to persons seated
within the building.
   A.   Restaurant, Drive-In shall mean an establishment that has the
facilities to serve prepared food and/or beverages to customers seated within
motor vehicles for consumption either on or off the premises.
   B.   Restaurant, Entertainment shall mean an establishment where food and
drink are prepared, served, and consumed, within a building or structure that
integrally includes electronic and mechanical games of skill, simulation, and
virtual reality, play areas, video arcades or similar uses, billiards, and
other forms of amusement.
   C.   Restaurant, Fast Food shall mean an establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food and/or beverages in ready-to-consume individual
servings, for consumption either within the establishment, for carryout, or
drive-in; and where food and/or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic,
or other disposable containers.
Retail Trade shall mean uses primarily engaged in selling merchandise for
personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale
of goods. Uses engaged in retail trade sell merchandise to the general public
or to households for personal consumption.
Retention Cell shall mean a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage
of stormwater runoff.
Reverse Spot Zoning shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract
of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and that
uniquely burdens an individual owner largely to secure some public benefit.
Reverse spot zoning usually results from downzoning a tract of land to a less
intensive use classification than that imposed on nearby properties.
Rezoning shall mean an amendment to or change in the zoning regulations either
to the text or map or both.
Rezoning, Piecemeal shall mean the zoning reclassification of individual lots
resulting in uncertainty in the future compatible development of the area.
Right-of-Way shall mean an area or strip of land, either public or private, on
which an irrevocable right of passage has been dedicated, recorded, or
otherwise legally established for the use of vehicles or pedestrians or both.
Road shall mean the same as "Street".
Road, Private shall mean a way, other than driveways, open to vehicular ingress
and egress established for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. (Also,
see right-of-way and Street.)
Road, Public shall mean a public right-of-way reserved or dedicated for street
or road traffic. (Also, see right-of-way and Street.)
Room shall mean an un-subdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit,
excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways, and service porches.
(S)
Salvage Yard shall mean any building, lot, yard or premise used for the
collection, processing, salvage, storage, bailing or shipping of junked
vehicles, vehicle parts, paper, cardboard, glass, plastic, metals, rags, scrap
materials, junk, or material similar to those listed herein.
Satellite Dish Antenna shall mean a round, parabolic antenna incorporating a
reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the
shape of a shallow dish, or cone and used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves.
Scale shall mean a proportional relationship of the size of parts to one
another and to the human figure.
School, Day shall mean a preschool or nursery school for children.
School, Day, Pre-, or Nursery shall mean a school or center for children under
school age, whether licensed as a day care center or not, shall be approved by
the Nebraska State Fire Marshall as being in safety conformance with the
National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet 101, known as the Life Safety
Code and shall be approved by the Nebraska Department of Health and Welfare as
meeting their health and welfare standards.
Screening shall mean a structure or planting that conceals from view from
public ways the area behind such structure or planting.
Selective Clearing shall be the careful and planned removal or trees, shrubs,
and plants using specific standards and protection measures.
Self-Service Station shall mean an establishment where motor fuels are stored
and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the
service station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of
other retail products.
Self-Service Storage Facility shall mean a building or group of buildings
containing individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or
lockers for storage.
Separate Ownership shall mean ownership of a parcel of land by a person who
does not own any of the land abutting such parcel.
Service Stations shall mean buildings and premises where the primary use is the
supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires,
and motor vehicle accessories and where light maintenance activities such as
engine tune-ups, lubrications, and washing may be conducted, but not including
heavy maintenance and repair such as engine overhauls, painting, and body
repair.
Setback Line, Front Yard shall mean the line which defines the depth of the
required front yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the right-of-way
line or highway setback line when one has been established.
Setback Line, Rear Yard or Side Yard shall mean the line which defines the
width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be
parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular
distance prescribed for the yard in the district.
Shopping Center shall mean a group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking
provided on-site, provisions for goods delivery that is separated from customer
access, aesthetic considerations, and protection from the elements.
Shopping Center, Commercial Strip shall mean a commercial development, usually
one store deep, that fronts on a major street for a distance of one city block
or more. Includes individual buildings on their own lots, with or without on-
site parking and small linear shopping centers with shallow on-site parking in
front of the stores.
Shopping Center, Outlet shall mean a commercial development that consists
mostly of manufacturers’ outlet stores selling their own brands at a discounted
price. This definition includes all forms of centers, such as strip style,
enclosed mall style, and village clustered style centers.
Shrub shall mean a multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
Sidewalk Café shall mean an area adjacent to a street level eating or drinking
establishment located adjacent to the public pedestrian walkway and used
exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. The area may be
separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping or a
combination thereof.
Sight Triangle is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision. The area and restrictions of the sight triangle are further
defined in
Chapter 32 of this code.
Sign Base shall mean any decorative, functional element extending upward from
grade to the start of the sign.
Similar Use shall mean the use of land, buildings, or structures of like kind
or general nature with other uses within a zoning district as related to bulk,
intensity of use, traffic generation and congestion, function, public services
requirements, aesthetics or other similarities.
Site Break shall mean a structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas
and create visual interest in a site development.
Site Plan shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, drives, parking, drainage, landscape features, and
other principal site development improvements for a specific parcel of land.
Site, Septic shall mean the area bounded by the dimensions required for the
proper location of the septic tank system.
Skate, In-Line shall mean a boot-type device, which is placed on an
individual’s feet. In-line skates contain wheels on the bottom of the boot,
which are attached in linear fashion.
Skate Park shall mean a recreational facility containing skateboard ramps and
other obstacle courses and devices for use with skateboards and in-line skates.
Skateboard shall mean a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels and is
usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lays upon
the device while it is in motion.
Skateboard Pipe shall mean an outdoor structure which is shaped into a half
circle or oval, that are designed and principally intended to permit persons on
skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other.
Skateboard Ramp shall mean an outdoor structure with an upward inclined
surface, essentially one of the sides of a pipe, which are designed and
principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal
to vertical and back to horizontal.
Sludge shall mean solids removed from sewage during wastewater treatment and
then disposed of by incineration, dumping, burial, or land application.
Solid Waste shall mean waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse,
rubble, sewage, offal, dead animals, or paunch manure.
Specified Anatomical Areas shall mean anatomical areas consisting of less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttock, or female breast(s)
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified Sexual Activities shall mean sexual activities prohibited by state
law.
Spot Zoning shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land
that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and primarily
promotes the private interest of the owner rather than the general welfare.
Spot zoning usually results from an upzoning to a more intensive use
classification.
Standard System shall mean a sewage treatment system employing a building
sewer, septic tank, and a standard soil absorption system.
State shall mean the State of Nebraska.
Storage shall mean the keeping, in a roofed or unroofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles on the same tract or premises for more
than thirty (30) days.
Storm Drain shall mean a conduit that carries natural storm and surface water
drainage but not sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling
water.
Stormwater Detention shall mean any storm drainage technique that retards or
detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination thereof. Said
detention shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by
the City.
Stormwater Management shall mean the collecting, conveyance, channeling,
holding, retaining, detaining, infiltrating, diverting, treating, or filtering
of surface water, or groundwater, and/or runoff, together with applicable
managerial (non-structural) measures.
Stormwater Runoff shall mean surplus surface water generated by rainfall that
does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies
of water.
Story, One-Half shall mean the same as "Half-Story".
Street shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or
condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane,
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this
chapter.
Arterial Street shall mean a street of considerable continuity connecting
various sections of the City, designated as an arterial street on the official
street plan of the City.
Collector Street shall mean a street or highway that is intended to carry
traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the
principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for
circulation within the development as designated in the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
Curvilinear Street shall mean local streets that deviate from straight
alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
Frontage Street shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major street,
major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily for
service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major street
by a dividing strip.
Local Street shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides
direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
Looped Street shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting streets
and having its two (2) outlets connected to the same street.
Major Street shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high
volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial
streets as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
Private Street shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or
alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal
means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street"
includes the term "place."
Side Street shall mean that street bounding a corner or reversed corner lot and
which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth
of the lot.
Street Centerline shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as
established by official survey.
Street Frontage shall mean the distance for which a lot, tract or parcel line
of a zone lot adjoins and is parallel to a public or approved private street,
from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line
intersecting the same street. Additionally each lot, tract or parcel shall
provide access to said street that will allow and provide access to the lot,
tract or parcel for municipal services (e.g. Fire, Emergency Medical Services
and Utilities) and land-based vehicular ingress/egress. (Suggested minimum of
20 feet).
Street Hardware shall mean man-made objects other than buildings that are part
of the streetscape. Examples are: lamp posts, utility poles, traffic signs,
benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.
Street Line shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land
and the contiguous street.
Streetscape shall mean the scene as may be observed along a public street or
way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving,
plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
Structure shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground
or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming
and wading pools and covered patios, signs and towers, excepting outdoor areas
such as paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
Structure, Temporary shall mean a structure without any foundation or footing
and removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
Structural, Alteration shall mean any change in the support members of a
building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling
joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls
or similar components.
Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two
(2) or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, provided
that the smallest lot created by the division is less than ten (10) acres in
size.
Surface Waters shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state,
including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands,
watercourses, waterways, springs, canal systems, drainage systems, and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial, public or
private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9797, effective 11-11-2020)
(T)
Tanning Studio shall mean any business that uses artificial lighting systems to
produce a tan on an individual’s body. These facilities may be either a stand-
alone business or as an accessory use in spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs,
health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any type of
adult establishment.
Tattoo Parlor / Body Piercing Studio shall mean an establishment whose
principal business activity is the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the
body of paying customers.
Tavern (See Bar.)
Temporary Use shall mean a use intended for limited duration to be located in a
zoning district not permitting such use.
Theater shall mean a building or structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion
pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is
received and no audience participation or meal service.
Tower (see definition in §
36-169 of this chapter.)
Townhouse shall mean a one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which
part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear
arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for
access, light, and ventilation.
Trailer, Automobile (see definition in §
22-1 of this code.)
Truck Repair shall mean the repair, including major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or other work that may include
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in gasoline service stations, of trucks having a hauling
capacity of over one (1) ton and buses but excluding pickups and other vehicles
designed for the transport of under eight (8) passengers.
(U)
Upzoning shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a more
intensive or less restrictive district such as from residential district to
commercial district or from a single family residential district to a multiple
family residential district.
Use shall mean the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are
designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
Use, Best shall mean the recommended use or uses of land confined in an adopted
comprehensive plan. Such use represents the best use of public facilities, and
promotes health, safety and general welfare.
Use, Highest shall mean an appraisal or real estate market concept that
identifies the use of a specific tract of land that is most likely to produce
the greatest net return on investment.
Use, Permitted shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a
zoning district.
Use, Principal shall mean the main use of land or structure, as distinguished
from an accessory use. (Also, see Building, Principal.)
Use, Prohibited shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is
not listed as a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district.
Utilitarian Structure shall mean a structure or enclosure relating to
mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.
Utility Easement shall mean the same as "Easement".
Utility Hardware shall mean devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and
vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that
are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a
project.
Utilities, Overhead or Underground "Local Distribution" System of shall mean
the local service distribution circuit or lines and related appurtenances
served from a substation, town border station, reservoir, or terminal facility
which is served from a main supply line, main transmission line, or main feeder
line as may be applicable to electric, communications, gas, fuel, petroleum,
fertilizer, or other chemical utilities. Local electric distribution systems
shall be limited to include all lines and appurtenances carrying a primary
voltage of less than 161 KV from an electric transformer substation to the
consumer. The local telephone distribution system shall be limited to include
the local exchange lines, the local toll lines, and the local communications
equipment facilities structure.
Utilities, Overhead or Underground "Transmission Line, Supply Line, Wholesale
Carrier or Trunk Line, Main Feeder Line" or other applicable designation shall
mean the main supply or feeder line serving a local distribution system of
utilities, and shall include but is not limited to pumping stations,
substations, regulating stations, generator facilities, reservoirs, tank farms,
processing facilities, terminal facilities, towers, and relay stations, and
treatment plants.
Utility Service shall mean any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which
carries gas, water, electricity, oil, wastewater and communications into a
building or development.
(V)
Variance shall mean a relief from or variation of the provisions of this
chapter, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of
property, as distinct from rezoning.
Vegetation shall mean all plant life; however, for purposes of this chapter it
shall be restricted to mean trees, shrubs, and vines.
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Vehicle, Motor (See Motor Vehicle.)
(W)
Warehouse shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
Warehouse and Distribution shall mean a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
Waste Handling System shall mean any and all systems, public or private, or
combination of said structures intended to treat human or livestock excrement
and shall include the following types of systems:
   A.   Holding pond shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an
excavated pit, dam, embankment or combination of these for temporary storage of
liquid livestock wastes, generally receiving runoff from open lots and
contributing drainage area.
   B.   Lagoon shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit,
dam, embankment or combination of these for treatment of liquid livestock waste
by anaerobic, aerobic or facultative digestion. Such impoundment predominantly
receives waste from a confined livestock operation.
   C.   Liquid manure storage pits shall mean earthen or lined pits located
wholly or partially beneath a semi or totally housed livestock operation or at
some removed location used to collect waste production.
   D.   Sediment shall mean a pond constructed for the sole purpose of
collecting and containing sediment.
Wastewater Lagoon (See Lagoon.)
Waters of the State shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this
state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water surface or underground,
material or artificial, public or private, situated wholly within or bordering
upon the state.
Wetland shall mean an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under
normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soiled conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
Wholesale Establishment shall mean an establishment for the on-premises sale of
goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
Wholesale Trade shall mean a use primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional
business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in
buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. The
principal types of establishments included are: Merchant wholesalers; sales
branches and sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing
enterprises apart from their plants for the purpose of marketing their
products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;
petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged in
cooperative marketing of farm products. The chief functions of uses in
wholesale trade are selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm and professional; and bringing buyer and seller
together. In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale
establishments include maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit;
physically assembling, sorting and grading goods in large lots, breaking bulk
and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and various types
of promotion such as advertising and label designing.
(X)
(Y)
Yard shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling
group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
to the sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or
structures permitted by this chapter.
Yard, Front shall mean a space between the front yard setback line and the
front lot line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the
lot. On corner lots, the front yard shall always be on the narrow side of the
lot.
Yard, Rear shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear
lot line, extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side shall mean a space extending from the front yard, or from the front
lot line where no front yard is required by this chapter, to the rear yard, or
rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.
(Z)
Zone Lot shall mean a parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient
size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that
can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by this chapter.
Zoning Official shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered by
the city to administer and enforce the requirements of this chapter.
Zoning District shall mean the same as "District".
Zoning District, Change of shall mean the legislative act of removing one (1)
or more parcels of land from one (1) zoning district and placing them in
another zoning district on the Official Zoning Map.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9208, effective 04-08-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-
2011) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9534, effective 05-01-2015) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9574, effective 03-15-2016) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025,
effective 07-09-2025)
Article 36-III
General Provisions
36-14   Planning Commission Recommendations
36-15   District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation
36-16   Jurisdiction
36-17   Provisions Declared To Be Minimum Requirements
36-18   Zoning Affects Every Structure And Use
36-19   Lot
36-20   Reductions In Lot Area Prohibited
36-21   Obstructions To Vision At Street Intersections Prohibited
36-22   Yard Requirements
36-23   Through Lots
36-24   Interpretation Of Regulations
36-25   Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards
36-26   Projections From Buildings
36-27   Principal Buildings and Accessory Buildings And Uses
36-28   Permitted Modifications Of Height Regulations
36-29   Occupancy Of Basements And Cellars
36-30   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Continuation
36-31   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Repairs Or Alterations
36-32   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Change Of Use
36-33   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Destruction And Reconstruction
36-34   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Discontinuance Or Abandonment
36-35   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Extension Of Nonconforming Uses
36-36   Fees
36-14   Planning Commission Recommendations
Pursuant to state statutes, it shall be the purpose of the Planning Commission
to recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein.
The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon
before submitting its final report, and the City Council shall not hold its
public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the
Commission.
36-15   District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation
No such regulation, restriction, or boundary shall become effective until after
a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearings shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general
circulation in the City at least one (1) time ten (10) days prior to such
hearing.
36-16   Jurisdiction
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the
City of Grand Island, Nebraska, and within the territory beyond said corporate
limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of two (2) miles, as
established on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand
Island, Nebraska", and as may be amended by subsequent annexation.
36-17   Provisions Declared To Be Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this
chapter require a lower height of building or lesser size of yards, courts or
other spaces, or require a lower height of building or lesser number of
stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or
impose other higher standards than are required in any other regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other
regulation requires a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open
spaces, or requires a lower height of building or a lesser number of stories,
or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other
higher standards than are required by the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of such chapter shall govern.
36-18   Zoning Affects Every Structure And Use
No structure or land shall hereafter be reused and no structure or part thereof
shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and
in conformity with the regulations herein or as specified within the zoning
district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed
may be restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming use.
36-19   Lot
Every structure hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case
shall there be more than one (1) principal building on a lot unless otherwise
provided.
36-20   Reductions In Lot Area Prohibited
Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case
shall there be more than one (1) principal building on a lot unless otherwise
provided.
36-21   Obstructions To Vision At Street Intersections Prohibited
Obstructions on corner lots that impede vision in the sight triangle are
prohibited. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit
any necessary retaining wall.
36-22   Yard Requirements
   A.   Yard requirements shall be set forth under the Schedule of Lot, Yard,
and Bulk Requirements for each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated and
shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as herein
permitted.
   B.   All accessory buildings that are attached to principal buildings (e.g.,
attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal
building, as otherwise specified.
   C.   Front Yard . There shall be a front yard setback as required herein,
provided, that where fifty percent or more of the frontage on one street in any
block is built up with buildings, no new building setback shall be less than
either the required setback or the setback of any existing building which next
exceeds the required setback, whichever is greater. This regulation shall not
require a setback of more than 50 feet, and in blocks where the lots have a
street frontage of 100 feet or more the regulation shall not require a setback
of more than 30 feet.
   D.   Side Yard . Any interior side yard may be reduced to zero; provided,
that the opposite side yard meets the required interior side yard setback.
Where the zero side yard setback is used, the abutting property must be held
under the same ownership at the time of initial construction or the owners of
the abutting property must be agreeable to the zero setback. A separation of
not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided between adjacent structures on
abutting sites where the zero side yard setback is utilized. This requirement
shall not apply in an RD Zone or where the same interior property line is
utilized for zero side yard construction on both properties.
For the purpose of upkeep and repair of structures located on an interior
property line, a four (4) foot maintenance easement shall be recorded between
the owner of the property containing said structure and the owner of the
property upon which entry must take place in order to perform maintenance
activities. Such easement shall be an irrevocable covenant and shall run with
the land. Proof of said recorded easement shall be submitted to the Building
Department prior to issuance of a building permit.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 01-05-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9294, effective 05-31-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9689, effective 06-12-
2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9797, effective 11-11-2020)
36-23   Through Lots
Through Lots shall follow the following criteria:
   A.   Where a through lot abuts a major thoroughfare and access is made from
the other frontage street and access along said thoroughfare is restricted, the
rear yard setback for fences and screening devices shall be zero feet. The rear
yard setback for accessory buildings shall follow the prescribed setback within
the zoning district.
   B.   Where a through lot is part of a triple frontage lot and abuts a major
thoroughfare, the rear yard shall meet the standards of §
36-23(A), while the other two frontages shall be treated as a corner lot with a
front yard setback and a street side yard setback.
   C.   Where a through lot occurs, other than along a major thoroughfare, the
following shall apply:
      1.   Where all principal structures in the development face the same
frontage, then the rear yard setback for fences and screening shall be zero
feet and all accessory buildings shall meet the prescribed setback within the
zoning district. This shall apply similarly at triple frontage lots, provided
the remaining two frontages are treated like a typical corner lot.
      2.   Where principal structures face different directions along both
frontages, the rear yard setback for fences and screening shall be the same as
any prescribed rear yard setback within the zoning district. This shall apply
similarly at triple frontage lots, provided the remaining two frontages are
treated like a typical corner lot. All accessory buildings in this condition,
shall comply with the minimum rear yard setbacks rather than the reduced
setback allowed for accessory buildings.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-24   Interpretation Of Regulations
The planning director and chief building official together are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The planning
director and building official together shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this code to adopt policies and procedures in order to
clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code.
Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011)
36-25   Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
required yards:
   A.   All Yards. Steps and accessibility ramps used for wheelchair and other
assisting devices which are four (4) feet or less above grade which are
necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a lot from a
street or alley; chimneys, attached flag poles and window wells projecting
twenty-four (24) inches, window wells for escape windows thirty-six (36) inches
or less into the yard; approved freestanding signs; arbors and trellises; flag
poles; window unit air conditioners projecting not more than eighteen (18)
inches into the required yard; and fences or walls subject to applicable height
restrictions are permitted in all yards.
   B.   Front Yards. Bay windows projecting three (3) feet or less into the
yard are permitted. Rear and Side Yards . Open off-street parking spaces or
outside elements of central air conditioning systems.
   C.   Building Groupings. For the purpose of the side yard regulation a group
of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall shall be
considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9871, effective 2-9-2022) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-
2025)
36-26   Projections From Buildings
   A.   Cornices, eaves, canopies, belt courses, sills, ornamental features,
and other similar architectural features may project not more than one (1) foot
into any required yard or into any required open space, except that eaves may
encroach three (3) feet into a yard when such yard is ten (10) feet or more in
width, provided that such required yard or open space meets the current minimum
yard standards.
   B.   Open, uncovered porches or terraces may extend three feet into any
required side yard, ten feet into any required front yard, and any distance
into any required rear yard. No railing or other barrier higher than 42 inches
shall be placed on such porch or terrace within five feet of any property line
except as provided within this ordinance. Any such porch or terrace located on
a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and an alley shall comply
with the provisions designed to insure proper sight distances as set forth in
this chapter for fences and hedges. A covered porch or terrace, not exceeding
sixty square feet, may extend a maximum of six feet into the required front or
rear yard, provided, such porch or terrace shall not be enclosed except by a
railing or other barrier as previously mentioned.
   C.   Provided further, that no railing or other barrier shall be placed
around such deck or porch in a rear yard or side yard and no such barrier which
interferes appreciably (more than twenty-five (25) percent) with the passage of
light or air shall be constructed within the required front yard or within five
(5) feet of any side or rear yard lot line. Any such deck or porch when located
on a lot at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and an alley, shall
comply with the provisions designed to ensure proper sight distances as set
forth in this code for fences and hedges. Any side yard on a corner lot when
such yard is twenty (20) feet or more in width, may be considered as a front
yard for purposes of determining permitted encroachments as provided herein.
   D.   Vertical supports shall meet the City’s Building Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9202, effective 02-15-2009)
36-27   Principal Buildings and Accessory Buildings And Uses
   
36.27.1   Principal Buildings
   
36.27.2   Accessory Buildings and Uses
   
36.27.21   Portable Storage Units
   
36.27.22   Number, Duration And Removal Of Portable Storage Units For On-Site
Storage
   
36.27.23   Placement
   
36.27.24   Signage
   
36.27.25   Placard
36.27.1   Principal Buildings
   Multiple detached buildings that do not exceed the density, coverage, and
setback requirements of the zoning district may be counted as a single
principal building.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.2   Accessory Buildings and Uses
   A.   Accessory buildings shall not be located within the required front yard
setback of the lot and or within an easement.
   B.   An accessory building on a corner lot shall have a setback from all
public streets equal to or greater than the requirement for the existing
principal building.
   C.   There shall be a minimum setback of six (6) feet between accessory
buildings.
   D.   If an accessory building has a door opening of over six (6) feet in
width on a side parallel to an alley, then such accessory building shall be
located not less than eight (8) feet from the lot line abutting the alley.
   E.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be allowed on more than 50% of
the allowable lot coverage and no single detached accessory building shall
exceed 35% of the allowable lot coverage (e.g. A 52.8' x 132' [6969.6 sq. ft.]
lot in an R2 zoning district [35% allowable coverage] could cover 2438.31 sq.
ft. of the lot with buildings. 1219.155 of that could be devoted to detached
accessory buildings with no single building exceeding 853.4085 sq. ft.)
   F.   Detached accessory buildings on parcels or lots with less than five (5)
buildable acres shall not exceed the height of the principal building by more
than 25% (e.g. a house with a peak height of 16 feet could have an accessory
building with a peak height of 20 feet.)
   G.   Detached accessory buildings on parcels or lots with five (5) or more
buildable acres shall be limited by the height regulations that apply to the
zoning district.
   H.   In Business and Manufacturing Zoning Districts.
      1.   Accessory buildings shall comply with all requirements of this code
for the principal building.
   I.   In Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts.
      1.   Accessory buildings shall be permitted only on the same platted lot
as the principal building.
      2.   Accessory buildings shall comply with all requirements of this code
for the principal building if located within fifteen (15) feet of the principal
building or when any part of the accessory building is located in the area
between the required front yard setback and a line extending from the back of
the principal building to the side lot line.
      3.   Accessory buildings on lots with a width of 100 feet or more shall
have a minimum side and rear yard of five feet.
      4.   Accessory buildings on lots with a width of less than 100 feet shall
have a minimum side and rear yard of two feet.
   J.   No accessory building shall be constructed prior to beginning
construction of the principal building. No accessory building shall be used
unless the main building is under construction; however, in no event shall such
building be used as a dwelling unless a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued for such use.
   K.   Regulation of accessory uses shall be as follows:
      1.   Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project
beyond a required yard line along any street.
      2.   Any accessory building built within fifteen (15) feet of the
principal structure shall meet all the requirements for the principal
structure.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9419, effective 02-15-2013) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.21   Portable Storage Units
   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   Definitions.
      Portable storage unit shall mean any container designed for the storage
of personal property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of
residential (single or multi-family) property for their temporary use and which
is delivered and removed by truck.
      Site shall mean a piece, parcel, tract, lot, or plot of land occupied or
to be occupied by one or more residential buildings or uses and their accessory
buildings and accessory uses which generally considered to be one unified
parcel.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.22   Number, Duration And Removal Of Portable Storage Units For On-Site
Storage
   There shall be no more than one portable storage unit per site no larger
than eight (8’) feet wide, twenty (20’) feet long and eight (8’) feet high. No
portable storage unit shall remain at a site in a residential district in
excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days.
   The building official may permit the placement of a portable storage
container on a residential property for more than twenty-one (21) days, subject
to the building setback requirements, provided that the property owner has a
valid building permit or had demonstrated that extenuating circumstances exist
to justify the extension. Extenuating circumstances shall include but not be
limited to, disaster such as tornado, flood or fire.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.23   Placement
   Portable storage units shall be placed only in the driveway or back yard and
be set back a minimum of ten (10’) feet from the front property line or five
(5’) feet from the rear property line.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.24   Signage
   Signs on any portable storage container shall not exceed two (2) in number
not more than six (6’) square feet each, not to exceed one (1) per side. In the
event that an extension of the twenty-one (21) day time limit for placement of
a portable storage container on a residential property is granted by the
building official, all signs must be removed or covered.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36.27.25   Placard
   All portable storage containers must include a “placard” not to exceed one
(1) square foot in area which is clearly visible from the right-of-way which
includes the container identification number, date of its placement on the
property, date that removal will be required, and a local or toll free
telephone number of the company.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36-28    Permitted Modifications Of Height Regulations
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to:
Belfries
Chimneys
Church Spires
Conveyors
Cooling Towers
Elevator Bulkheads
Fire Towers
Water Towers and Standpipes
Flag Poles
Mechanical Penthouses
Public Monuments
Ornamental Towers and Spires
Radio and Television
Towers less than 100 feet in height
Silos
Smoke Stacks
Stage Towers or Scenery Lots
Tanks
Air-Pollution Prevention Devices
Helistop, Heliports, Helipads
When permitted in a zoning district, public or semi-public service buildings,
hospitals, institutions, or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding
seventy-five (75) feet when each required yard line is increased by at least
one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of additional building height above the
height regulations for the zoning district in which the building is located.
36-29   Occupancy Of Basements And Cellars
No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the
remainder of the building has been substantially completed.
36-30   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Continuation
The lawful use of land or buildings existing on June 30, 1969, although such
does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued except as provided
herein, but if continuous operation is suspended, ceased or discontinued for a
period of twelve months, any further use of said land or buildings shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
36-31   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Repairs Or Alterations
No structural alterations shall be made to any building which will increase its
degree of nonconformity except as may be ordered or required by law, ordinance
or regulations. This shall not be construed to prohibit maintenance and repair
work necessary to keep a building in sound condition.
36-32   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Change Of Use
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be
changed to a different use if that use is more conforming in nature. No use or
building shall be permitted to increase the degree of nonconformity. The
principal permitted uses listed under a specific zoning district shall be
interpreted to have the same degree of nonconformity in applying this chapter.
A residential use located in an industrial zone shall be interpreted as having
a high degree of nonconformity.
36-33   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Destruction And Reconstruction
Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire, flood, wind, riot,
or any other cause to an extent of more than fifty percent of its replacement
value exclusive of land and foundation, at the time of such damage or
destruction, shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. If damage is less than fifty percent, it may be
restored and used as before, provided, that such restoration is commenced
within twelve months. If construction is not commenced within twelve months,
the use of such land or building shall thereafter conform with the provisions
of this chapter.
36-34   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Discontinuance Or Abandonment
A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the zoning district in
which it is located, which is, or hereafter becomes, vacant and remains
unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of twelve months, shall be
conclusively presumed to have been discontinued and abandoned as a
nonconforming use, and shall not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use
which conforms to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
36-35   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses; Extension Of Nonconforming Uses
The city council may, when it deems proper, permit repairs, alterations,
extensions, expansions, and the remodeling or rebuilding of such structures or
extensions or expansions of a land use in all cases where a refusal to do so
would bring hardship to the owner or occupants and in all cases where justice
requires the granting of the same. The city council may attach appropriate
conditions to the granting of any such relief. Whenever a use district shall be
hereafter changed, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district
may be continued or changed to a use permitted in that zoning district,
provided, all other regulations governing the new use are complied with.
36-36   Fees
All fees for any zoning or subdivision related action shall be required prior
to the issuance or investigation of any said permit request. Fees shall be as
set out in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.
Article 36-IV
Zoning Districts And Official Map
36-43   Zoning Districts
36-44   Provision For Official Zoning Map 
36-45   Annexation
36-46   Airport Approach And Turning Zones
36-43   Zoning Districts
In order to regulate and restrict the height, location, size and type of
buildings, structures and uses allowed on land in the City and the area within
two miles of the corporate boundaries, the City is hereby divided into zoning
districts.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9534, effective 05-01-2015)
36-44   Provision For Official Zoning Map
   A.   The City is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested
by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in §
36-44 of the Grand Island City Code".
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the
zoning district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after
the amendment has been approved by the City Council.
   B.   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may by Ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map.
The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions
in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect
of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment
thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the
following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map dated    and adopted by Resolution    on
   ."
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or
amendment.
36-45   Annexation
Any lands coming under the jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island as a result
of annexation or addition shall immediately become classified in conformance
with the zones noted herein and shall remain so zoned until an amendment to the
official zoning map or this chapter shall place such land in a different zone
or zones.
Equivalent Zones
Hall County Zone Merrick County Zone City of Grand Island Zone
Equivalent Zones
Hall County Zone Merrick County Zone City of Grand Island Zone
AG-1, AG-2       AG-1, AG-2          AG
TA-1, TA-2       TA                  TA
R1, R2           R1                  LLR
HC, LC           C3                  B2
L1               I-1                 M1
GI               I-2                 M2 (or M2-A)
RC               --                  TD
AG-SC, AG-SE     --                  AG-SC, AG-SE
AG-SI, SRC       --                  AG-SI, SRC
PUD              --                  CD-RD
 
36-46   Airport Approach And Turning Zones
   A.   Height Restrictions . Notwithstanding height restrictions specified for
any specific zone set forth herein, no building, vegetation, or use of land
shall be constructed, moved in, or permitted to grow to a height exceeding the
limits indicated on the zoning map entitled “Airport Approach and Turning Zone”
as shown on a zoning map prepared by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics,
Engineering Division, dated November 12, 1974, revised January 17, 1985 and as
amended July 17, 2002, by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics Engineering
Division for the Central Nebraska Regional Airport, Grand Island, Nebraska, and
on file with the city clerk, which is part of this ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9364, effective 03-01-2012)
Article 36-V
Zoning Districts
36-50   Zoning Districts; Use
36-51   Zoning Districts; Boundaries
36-52   Rules For Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries
36-53   Classification Of Zoning Districts And Conformance With The
Comprehensive Development Plan
36-54   (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zone
36-55    (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zone
36-56    (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zone
36-57   (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zone
36-58   (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zone 36-59 (SRC) Special
Recreation/Conservation Zone
36-60   (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zone
36-61   (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zone 36-62 (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone
36-63   (R-2) Low Density Residential Zone
36-64   (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zone
36-64.1 (R-3SL) Medium Density-Small Lot Residential Zone
36-65   (R-4) High Density Residential Zone
36-66   (RO) Residential Office Zone 36-67 (B-1) Light Business Zone
36-68   (B-2) General Business Zone
36-69   (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone
36-70   (B-3) Heavy Business Zone
36-71   (ME) Industrial Estates Zone
36-72   (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zone
36-73    (M-2) Heavy Manufacturing Zone
36-74    (M-3) Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone
36-75   (Reserved)
36-76   (CD) Commercial Development Zone
36-77   (TD) Travel Development Zone
36-78   (RD) Residential Development Zone
36-79   (A) Airport Zone
36-80    (GCO) Gateway Corridor Overlay District
36-81    -M And -MD Manufactured Home Overlay Zones
ZONING MATRIX
36-50   Zoning Districts; Use
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Grand Island and its extra-
territorial jurisdiction is hereby divided into 27 zoning districts, designated
as follows:
AG-1     Primary Agricultural Zone
AG-2     Secondary Agricultural Zone
AG-SC    Special Agricultural / Conservation Zone
AG-SE    Special Agricultural / Events Zone
AG-SI    Special Agricultural / Industrial Zone
SRC      Special Recreation / Conservation Zone
TA       Transitional Agricultural Zone
LLR      Large Lot Residential Zone
R-1      Suburban Residential Zone
R-2      Low Density Residential Zone
R-3      Medium Density Residential Zone
R3-SL    Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zone
R-4      High Density Residential Zone
RO       Residential Office Zone
B-1      Light Business Zone
B-2      General Business Zone
AC       Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone
B-3      Heavy Business Zone
ME       Industrial Estates Zone
M-1      Light Manufacturing Zone
M-2      Heavy Manufacturing Zone
M-3      Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone
CD       Commercial Development Zone
TD       Travel Development Zone
RD       Residential Development Zone
A        Airport Zone
GCO      Gateway Corridor Overlay District
M and MD Manufactured Home Overlay Zone
 
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018)
36-51   Zoning Districts; Boundaries
The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska." Said
map and all explanatory matters thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of
this chapter as if fully written herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, and attested by the City Clerk. No
changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map except as may be required by
amendments to this chapter. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the
Official Zoning Map with the ordinance number, nature of change, and date of
change noted on the map.
36-52   Rules For Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following such City limits;
   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks;
   E.   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
herein shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the
Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
   G.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered herein, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district
boundaries;
   H.   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership as of August 1, 2004, the Board of Adjustment may permit the
extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty
(50) feet beyond the zoning district line into the remaining portion of the
lot.
36-53   Classification Of Zoning Districts And Conformance With The
Comprehensive Development Plan
Areas annexed into the corporate limits of Grand Island shall be zoned to
conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan.
36-54    (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zone
Intent . The (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District regulations are
intended to provide for the preservation of lands best suited for agricultural
uses of all types including feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock
and accessory uses; to prevent encroachment of uses of land that could be
mutually incompatible and continue to provide for agricultural uses as a major
asset to the economy of the area of the use and conservation of agricultural
land, to protect the value of such land, and to protect it from indiscriminate
residential and urban development and other incompatible and conflicting land
uses. The (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District is also intended to
conserve and protect the value of open space, wooded areas, streams, mineral
deposits and other natural resources and to protect them from incompatible land
uses and to provide for their timely utilization. The zoning district intends
to provide for the location and to govern the establishment and operation of
land uses that are compatible with agriculture and are of such nature that
their location away from residential, commercial and industrial areas is most
desirable. In addition, to provide for the location and to govern the
establishment of residential uses which are accessory to and necessary for the
conduct of agriculture and to provide the location and to govern the
establishment and use of limited non-agricultural residential uses. Such non-
agricultural residential uses shall not be so located as to be detrimental to
or conflict with other uses that are named as permitted or conditional uses in
this zoning district and are appropriate to other property in the area.
The nature of the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District and the uses
allowed outright or by conditional use permit precludes the provision of
services, amenities and protection from other land uses which are afforded to
residential uses by the regulations of other zoning districts, and it is not
intended that the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District regulations
afford such services, amenities and protection to residential uses located
therein.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AG-1) Primary Agriculture Zoning District:
      1.   Agricultural operations, and the usual agricultural and farm
buildings and structures, including the residences of owners and their families
and any tenants and employees who are engaged in agricultural operations on the
premises.
         a.   State agencies shall govern all use of farm chemicals, including
application of pesticides and herbicides, and applicants using restricted-use
pesticides shall be required to be certified as required by law.
         b.   The spreading of manure by a "farming" operation (as defined in §
36-8 of this chapter)
         c.   Agricultural operations having up to 1,000 animal units are
considered a farm and are permitted by right, provided other requirements in
this district are met and submission of a no-fee livestock registration permit
to the Hall County Regional Planning Director is done.
         d.   Operations having more than 301 animal units and up to 1,000
animal units shall locate at least 1,320 feet from a platted residential area,
public park, recreational area, church, cemetery, religious area, school, and
residential district.
      2.   Ranch and farm dwellings, subject to §
36-54(e)
      3.   Recreational camps, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, country clubs,
tennis courts, riding academies and other similar recreational uses
      4.   Single family dwelling subject to §
36-54(e)
      5.   Utility substation, pumping station, water reservoir and telephone
exchange
      6.   Fire stations
      7.   Churches, seminary and convent
      8.   Public and parochial school; college
      9.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities such as
community centers, auditoriums, libraries, museums
      10.   Private kennels and facilities, provided that all buildings and
facilities be at least one hundred feet from the property line and three
hundred feet from any neighboring residence
      11.   Roadside stands offering agricultural products for sale on the
premises
      12.   Seed and feed sales, machine repair shop, livestock equipment
construction and sales, as a primary occupation in conjunction with an
agricultural operation and be operated on the premises
      13.   Farm and industrial equipment sales
      14.   Public and private riding academies provided that no stable,
building or structure in which horses or other animals are kept are no closer
than one hundred (100) feet from the property line
      15.   All other Permitted Uses as indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural
Zoning District:
      1.   Bed and breakfast residence subject to the following conditions in
addition to those imposed by the City Council
         a.   The bed and breakfast residence shall be within a conforming
single-family dwelling
         b.   Guest rooms shall be within the principal residential building
only and not within an accessory building
         c.   Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit plus one (1) off-street parking space for each sleeping room
designated for guests. Such parking areas shall not be within the required
front or side yards
         d.   One (1) identification sign on not more than four (4) square feet
of sign area shall be permitted
      2.   Publicly and privately owned dude ranches, forest and conservation
areas, and golf driving ranges, motorized cart tracks, or other outdoor
recreational areas such as gun clubs, and archery, trap and skeet ranges
      3.   Industrial uses as provided in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and provided the following minimum
conditions are met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      4.   Commercial uses as provided in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and provided the following minimum
conditions are met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      5.   All other Conditional Uses as indicated within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto], provided the following minimum conditions
are met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      6.   Radio, cellular and television towers and transmitters and subject
to the Supplementary Regulations herein.
      7.   Airports
      8.   Manufacture of light sheet metal products including heating and
ventilation equipment
      9.   Manufacture and/or processing of agricultural products including but
not limited to ethanol plants and mills
      10.   Truck and freight terminals
      11.   Commercial mining, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory
uses
      12.   Storage of trucks, tractors, and trailers engaged in the
transportation of explosives
      13.   Race tracks, drag strips and similar uses and associated accessory
uses
      14.   Wind Energy devices
      15.   Community sewage disposal facilities
      16.   Sanitary landfill siting or expansion conducted in a manner and
method approved by the City Council provided said landfill is not closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet to a municipal well and/or one mile to any village or
city limits or any subdivision, addition or residence. See Supplementary
Regulations herein.
      17.   Lawn and garden nurseries
      18.   Commercial kennels and facilities for the raising, breeding and
boarding of dogs and other small animals, including exotic, non-farm and non-
domestic animals, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one
hundred (100) feet from the property line and three hundred (300) feet from any
neighboring residence.
      19.   The spreading, stockpiling, or composting of dead livestock,
sludge, by-products from manufacturing or any processing plant, and/or paunch
manure on agricultural land by municipalities or operations inside or outside
of the Grand Island jurisdiction
      20.   The application of livestock manure within the jurisdiction of
Grand Island by operations located outside Hall County
      21.   Livestock feeding operations, subject to the licensure
requirements, waste disposal requirements and recommendations of the State of
Nebraska and the Land Use specifications of the Grand Island Comprehensive
Development Plan
      22.   Single wide manufactured homes may be permitted only when the land
is used or intended to be used only for agricultural operations. All single
wide manufactured homes require a conditional use permit which must be renewed
periodically and which shall be subject to the conditions of the permit in
districts where they are allowed. No single wide manufactured home on any type
of foundation nor a double wide manufactured home without a permanent
foundation shall constitute a farmstead that can be split from the large parcel
per §
36-54(e).
   C.   Standards for Livestock Feeding Operations: See Supplemental Regulation
Section 108
   D.   Accessory Uses. The following accessory buildings and uses are
permitted in the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District.
      1.   Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted and
conditional uses
      2.   Home occupation
      3.   Temporary buildings and uses incidental to construction work which
shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work
   E.   Lot Requirements and Intensity of Use . The following table lists the
minimum lot requirements and maximum building requirements in an (AG-1) Primary
Agricultural Zoning District. These requirements shall be followed unless
otherwise modified.
 
                            Setbacks
                     A      B      C      D      E
                                                                 Min. Lot
             Min.    Min.   Front  Rear   Side   Street          Area per Max.
Uses         Lot     Lot    Yard   Yard   Yard   Side   Max. Lot dwelling Building
             Area    Width  (feet) (feet) (feet) Yard   Coverage unit     Height
             (acres) (feet)                      (feet)          (sq.     (feet)
                                                                 ft.)
Permitted    20      100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
Conditional  20      100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
Agricultural 1       100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
 
1 For structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
2 The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within the
extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island. These requirements
are:
      1.   Any person or persons who:
         a.   owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80 acres
for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously
exercised on the large tract; and/or
         b.   owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling excluding a single-wide
manufactured home that is ten years old or more may sell a tract containing
such dwelling;
         c.   providing the following space limitations are complied with:
 
                       Setbacks
Min. Lot  Min. Lot     Front Yard  Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Lot Max. Building
Area (sq. Width (feet) (feet)      (feet)     (feet)     Coverage Height (feet)
ft.)
20,000    100          30          25         15         25%      351
 
1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
   F.   Prohibited Uses .
      1.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use,
conditional use or permitted accessory use.
   G.   Supplementary Regulations .
      1.   Residential dwelling units on non-agricultural land existing as of
August 1, 2004, may construct accessory structures, make repairs, replace,
remodel, rebuild, or replace the residential structure in case of damage
regardless of the percent of damage or extent of structural change provided the
use does not change.
      2.   All new and existing livestock feeding operations and farms with
livestock of 300 animal units or less shall require a no-fee livestock
registration permit. In addition, all new or expanded Livestock Feeding
Operations of over 1,000 animal units shall require a Conditional Use Permit as
subject to §
36-54(C).
         a.   New non-farm residences in the AG-1 or AG-2 districts shall be
located no less than at the following distances as those shown in Table 2: Non-
farm Residence Spacing and Distance, from an existing agricultural operation
having between 50 and 300 animal units and an LFO based upon the type of
operation.
TABLE 2: NON-FARM RESIDENCE SPACING AND DISTANCE (Distances given in feet)
 
                       SIZE OF EXISTING AGRICULTURAL OPERATION AND LFO IN A.U.
New Non-farm Residence 100-300 301-1,000 1,001-5,000 5,001-10,000 10,000+
                       0       1,980     3,960       3,960        5,940
 
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-55    (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zone
Intent . The (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District regulations are
intended to provide for the preservation of lands best suited for agricultural
uses of all types including feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock
to specific limits and accessory uses; to prevent encroachment of uses of land
that could be mutually incompatible and continue to provide for agricultural
uses as a major asset to the economy of the area of the use and conservation of
agricultural land, to protect the value of such land, and to protect it from
indiscriminate residential and urban development and other incompatible and
conflicting land uses. The (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District is
also intended to conserve and protect the value of open space, wooded areas,
streams, mineral deposits and other natural resources and to protect them from
incompatible land uses and to provide for their timely utilization. The zoning
district intends to provide for the location and to govern the establishment
and operation of land uses that are compatible with agriculture and are of such
nature that their location away from residential, commercial and industrial
areas is most desirable. In addition, to provide for the location and to govern
the establishment of residential uses which are accessory to and necessary for
the conduct of agriculture and to provide the location and to govern the
establishment and use of limited non-agricultural residential uses. Such non-
agricultural residential uses shall not be so located as to be detrimental to
or conflict with other uses that are named as permitted or conditional uses in
this zoning district and are appropriate to other property in the area.
The nature of the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District and the uses
allowed outright or by conditional use permit precludes the provision of
services, amenities and protection from other land uses which are afforded to
residential uses by the regulations of other zoning districts, and it is not
intended that the AG-2 Secondary Agricultural Zoning District regulations
afford such services, amenities and protection to residential uses located
therein.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AG-2) Secondary Agriculture Zoning District.
      1.   Agricultural operations, and the usual agricultural and farm
buildings and structures, including the residences of owners and their families
and any tenants and employees who are engaged in agricultural operations on the
premises
         a.   State agencies shall govern all use of farm chemicals, including
application of pesticides and herbicides, and applicants using restricted-use
pesticides shall be required to be certified as required by law
         b.   The spreading of manure by a "farming" operation (as defined in §
36-8 of this chapter)
         c.   Agricultural operations having up to 300 animal units are
considered a farm and are permitted by right, provided other requirements in
this zoning district are met and submission of a no-fee livestock registration
permit to the Hall County Regional Planning Director is done
         d.   Operations having up to 300 animal units shall locate at least
300 feet from a platted residential area, public park, recreational area,
church, cemetery, religious area, school, and residential district
      2.   Ranch and farm dwellings, subject to §
36-55(e)
      3.   Recreational camps, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, country clubs,
tennis courts, and other similar recreational uses
      4.   Single family dwelling subject to §
36-55(e)
      5.   Utility substation, pumping station, water reservoir and telephone
exchange
      6.   Fire stations
      7.   Churches, seminary and convent
      8.   Public and parochial school; college
      9.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities such as
community centers, auditoriums, libraries, museums
      10.   Private kennels and facilities, provided that all buildings and
facilities be at least one hundred feet from the property line and three
hundred feet from any neighboring residence
      11.   Roadside stands offering agricultural products for sale on the
premises
      12.   Seed and feed sales, machine repair shop, livestock equipment
construction and sales, as a primary occupation in conjunction with an
agricultural operation and be operated on the premises
      13.   Farm and industrial equipment sales
      14.   Public and private riding academies provided that no stable,
building or structure in which horses or other animals are kept are no closer
than one hundred (100) feet from the property line
      15.   All other Permitted Uses as indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural
Zoning District:
      1.   Bed and breakfast residence subject to the following conditions in
addition to those imposed by the City Council
         a.   The bed and breakfast residence shall be within a conforming
single-family dwelling
         b.   Guest rooms shall be within the principal residential building
only and not within an accessory building
         c.   Each room that is designated for guest occupancy must be provided
with a smoke detector which is kept in good working order
         d.   Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit plus one (1) off-street parking space for each sleeping room
designated for guests. Such parking areas shall not be within the required
front or side yards
         e.   One (1) identification sign on not more than four (4) square feet
of sign area shall be permitted
      2.   Publicly and privately owned dude ranches, forest and conservation
areas, and golf driving ranges, motorized cart tracks, or other outdoor
recreational areas such as gun clubs, and archery, trap and skeet ranges
      3.   Industrial uses as provided in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and the following minimum conditions are
met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      4.   Commercial uses as provided in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and the following minimum conditions are
met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      5.   All other Conditional Uses as indicated within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto], provided the following minimum conditions
are met:
         a.   Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter
         b.   Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by
this chapter
         c.   The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or
are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county
road or highway
      6.   Development of natural resources and the extraction of raw materials
such as rock, gravel, sand, etc., including gas and oil extraction and
exploration, and subject to the requirements of the Supplementary Regulations
herein
      7.   Radio, cellular and television towers and transmitters and subject
to the requirements of the Supplementary Regulations herein
      8.   Airports
      9.   Manufacture of light sheet metal products including heating and
ventilation equipment
      10.   Manufacture and/or processing of agricultural products including
but not limited to ethanol plants and mills
      11.   Truck and freight terminals
      12.   Commercial mining, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory
uses
      13.   Storage of trucks, tractors, and trailers engaged in the
transportation of explosives
      14.   Race tracks, drag strips and similar uses and associated accessory
uses
      15.   Wind Energy devices
      16.   Community sewage disposal facilities
      17.   Sanitary landfill siting or expansion conducted in a manner and
method approved by the City Council provided said landfill is not closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet to a municipal well and/or one mile to any village or
city limits or any subdivision, addition or residence. See the Supplementary
Regulations herein
      18.   Lawn and garden nurseries
      19.   Commercial kennels and facilities for the raising, breeding and
boarding of dogs and other small animals, including exotic, non-farm and non-
domestic animals, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one
hundred (100) feet from the property line and three hundred (300) feet from any
neighboring residence.
      20.   The spreading, stockpiling, or composting of dead livestock,
sludge, by-products from manufacturing or any processing plant, and/or paunch
manure on agricultural land by municipalities or operations inside or outside
of the Grand Island jurisdiction
      21.   The application of livestock manure within the jurisdiction of
Grand Island by operations located outside Hall County
      22.   Livestock feeding operations, subject to the licensure
requirements, waste disposal requirements and recommendations of the State of
Nebraska and the Land Use specifications of the Grand Island Comprehensive
Development Plan
      23.   Trailer Washout
   C.   Standards for Livestock Feeding Operations: See Supplemental Regulation
Section 108
   D.   Accessory Uses . The following accessory buildings and uses are
permitted in the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District.
      1.   Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted and
conditional uses
      2.   Home occupation
      3.   Temporary buildings and uses incidental to construction work which
shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work
   E.   Lot Requirements and Intensity of Use . The following table lists the
minimum lot requirements and maximum building requirements in an (AG-2)
Secondary Agricultural Zoning District. These requirements shall be followed
unless otherwise modified by this chapter.
 
                            Setbacks
                     A      B      C      D      E
                                                                 Min. Lot
             Min.    Min.   Front  Rear   Side   Street          Area per Max.
Uses         Lot     Lot    Yard   Yard   Yard   Side   Max. Lot dwelling Building
             Area    Width  (feet) (feet) (feet) Yard   Coverage unit     Height
             (acres) (feet)                      (feet)          (sq.     (feet)
                                                                 ft.)
Permitted    20      100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
Conditional  20      100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
Agricultural 1       100    35     35     20     20     10%      20,000   351
Uses
 
1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
2 The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within the
jurisdiction of Grand Island. These requirements are:
      1.   Any person or persons who:
         a.   owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80 acres
for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously
exercised on the large tract; and/or
         b.   owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling excluding a single-wide
manufactured home that is ten years old or more may sell a tract containing
such dwelling;
         c.   providing the following space limitations are complied with:
 
                       Setbacks
Min. Lot  Min. Lot     Front Yard  Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Lot Max. Building
Area (sq. Width (feet) (feet)      (feet)     (feet)     Coverage Height (feet)
ft.)
20,000    100          30          25         15         25%      351
 
1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
   F.   Prohibited Uses .
      1.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use,
conditional use or permitted accessory use.
   G.   Supplementary Regulations .
      1.   Residential dwelling units on non-agricultural land, may construct
accessory structures, make repairs, replace, remodel, rebuild, or replace the
residential structure in case of damage regardless of the percent of damage or
extent of structural change provided the use does not change.
      2.   All new and existing livestock feeding operations and farms with
livestock of 300 animal units or less shall require a no-fee livestock
registration permit. In addition, all new or expanded livestock feeding
operations of over 300 animal units shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
         a.   New non-farm residences in the AG-1 or AG-2 zoning districts
shall be located no less than at the following distances as those shown in
Table 4: Non-farm Residence Spacing and Distance, from an existing agricultural
operation having between 50 and 300 animal units and a livestock feeding
operation based upon the type of operation.
TABLE 4: NON-FARM RESIDENCE SPACING AND DISTANCE (Distances given in feet)
 
             Size of Existing Agricultural Operation and Livestock Feeding
             Operation in Animal Units
             100-300 301-1,000 1,001-5,000 5,001-10,000 10,000+
New Non-farm 0       1,980     3,960       3,960        5,940
Residence
 
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9881, effective 6-8-2022) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-56    (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zone
Intent. This special use zoning district is to maintain lands in a
predominately agricultural use, yet allow for limited, low impact recreational
uses associated with pedestrian and equestrian trails, in accordance with the
Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and
farm dwellings are not allowed due to Environmental Protection Agency issues
with the CAAP site.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zoning District.
      1.   Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of
livestock
      2.   Raising of field crops and horticulture
      3.   Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact
recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan
      4.   Groundwater treatment facilities, contaminated soil remediation
facilities
      5.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as Permitted with the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses. The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/
Conservation Zoning District.
      1.   Utility substations, communication towers
      2.   Flood control facilities/improvements
      3.   Stock yard, feed yards and accessory uses – See Supplemental
Regulation Section 108
      4.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use
   D.   Prohibited Uses .
      1.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use,
conditional use or permitted accessory use
      2.   Ranch and/or farm dwellings
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                               Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (acres) (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   20      100     35     -      -         -         30%      -
Uses
Conditional 20      100     35     -      -         -         30%      -
Uses
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as
required herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-57    (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zone
Intent . This special use zoning district is to allow for agricultural uses as
well as special agricultural demonstration events, expositions and trade shows
that require large land areas, in accordance with the Cornhusker Army
Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and farm dwellings are
not allowed due to Environmental Protection Agency issues with the CAAP site.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zoning District.
      1.   Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of
livestock
      2.   Raising field crops and horticulture
      3.   Agricultural related demonstration events, expositions and trade
shows
      4.   Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact
recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan
      5.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/
Events Zoning District
      1.   Utility substations, communication towers
      2.   Flood control facilities/improvements
      3.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use
   D.   Prohibited Uses .
      1.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use or
permitted accessory use
      2.   Ranch and/or farm dwellings
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                         Minimum Setbacks
                    A        B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimu m Front  Rear   Side   Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot      Yard   Yard   Yard   Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width    (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)    Coverage Height
            (acres) (feet)                                           (feet)
Permitted   20      100      35     -      -      -         65%      -
Uses
Conditional 20      100      35     -      -      -         65%      -
Uses
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as
required herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-58    (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zone
Intent. This special use zoning district is to allow for agricultural uses as
well as manufacturing, processing, fabrication, research, warehousing, storage
and wholesaling facilities in accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition
Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and farm dwellings are not allowed
due to the Environmental Protection Agency issues with the CAAP site.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zoning District.
      1.   Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of
livestock
      2.   Raising of field crop and horticulture
      3.   Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, research, warehousing,
storage and wholesaling facilities
      4.   Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact
recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan
      5.   Groundwater treatment facilities, contamination soil remediation
facilities
      6.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/
Industrial Zoning District.
      1.   Industrial uses with more significant health and safety concerns:
wrecking, scrap or garbage disposal/recycling yard; explosives manufacture or
storage; chemical, acid or petroleum refining or storage; meat packing plants;
milling and smelting of ores
      2.   Utility substations, communication towers
      3.   Flood control facilities/improvements
      4.   Stock yards, feed yards and accessory uses: See Supplemental
Regulation Section 108
      5.   All other Conditional Uses indicated conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use or conditional
use
   D.   Prohibited Uses .
      1.   Ranch and/or farm dwellings
      2.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use,
conditional use or permitted accessory use
   E.   Space Limitations.
 
Uses                         Minimum Setbacks
                     A       B      C      D      E
             Minimum Minimum Front  Rear   Side   Street    Maximum  Maximum
             Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Yard   Side Yard Ground   Building
             Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)    Coverage Height
             (acres) (feet)                                          (feet)
Agricultural 20      100     35     -      -      -         65%      -
Uses
Non
Agricultural 1       100     35     -      -      -         65%      -
Uses
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as
required herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-59    (SRC) Special Recreation/Conservation Zone
Intent . This zoning district use is to allow for special outdoor recreational
shooting facilities, recreational vehicle campgrounds as well as low impact
recreational uses associated with pedestrian and equestrian trails, in
accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse
Plan.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (SRC) Special Recreation/Conservation Zoning District.
      1.   Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of
livestock
      2.   Raising of field crops and horticulture
      3.   Low impact recreational uses associated with pedestrian and
equestrian trails, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan
      4.   Recreational vehicle campgrounds
      5.   Outdoor recreational shooting facilities
      6.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (SRC) Special Recreation/
Conservation Zoning District.
      1.   Caretaker dwelling associated with outdoor recreational shooting
facilities and recreational vehicle campgrounds
      2.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use or conditional
use
   D.   Prohibited Uses.
      1.   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use,
conditional use or permitted accessory use
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (acres) (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   20      100     35     35     20        20        30%      -
Uses
Conditional 20      100     35     35     20        20        30%      -
Uses
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as
required herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-60    (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zone
Intent . To provide for a transition from rural to urban uses, and is generally
located on the fringe of the urban area. This zoning district permits both farm
and non-farm dwellings, as well as other open space and recreational
activities. The intent of the zoning district also would allow the raising of
livestock to a limit and within certain density requirements.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Raising of field crops, and horticulture
      3.   Country clubs as defined in §
36-8 of this chapter
      4.   Recreational camps, public parks, and recreational areas
      5.   Greenhouses and the raising of trees and nursery stock
      6.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities) when located
according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and
having a ten foot landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall
be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties. Installation
shall not be subject to minimum area or width regulations.
      7.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
      8.   The raising of livestock up to 300 animals as defined in Section
5-18 of this code provided that the owner has one-half (1/2) acre for each
animal, and provided that the shelters, pens, enclosures for such animals are
located no closer than 300 feet to a neighboring residential structure. The
acres used for calculating the maximum number of animals must be capable of
supporting pasture for grazing said animal.
      9.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (TA) Transitional Agriculture
Zoning District.
      1.   Cemeteries, memorial parks, crematories, mausoleums, and
columbariums
      2.   Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses
      3.   Public and quasi-public buildings and uses of an administrative,
educational, religious, cultural, or public service facility, but not including
hospitals, sanitoriums or corrective institutions
      4.   Riding academies
      5.   Recreational Vehicle Parks
      6.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and
similar facilities
      7.   Towers
      8.   Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals
      9.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Guest building
      2.   Customary home occupations
      3.   Buildings, corrals, stables or pens in conjunction with the
permitted uses
      4.   Buildings for the display and sale of products grown or raised on
the premises, provided, the floor area does not exceed 500 square feet
      5.   Offices incidental to and necessary for a permitted use
      6.   Other buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
      7.   Landscape contractor business with limited retail sales when the
following conditions are met:
         a.   The business accessory to a farm, and located on a farm size
parcel (20 acres or more); and
         b.   A sod farm, greenhouse, and/or tree farm operation is located on
the site; and
         c.   Total retail floor area within a building on the site does not
exceed 1,000 square feet, and
         d.   Total outdoor retail storage area for items not grown on site
does not exceed 20,000 square feet, and
         e.   Signage for the business shall be regulated by the Grand Island
sign code for signs in a residential district, and
         f.   Offstreet parking spaces shall be provided on site in a manner
and number consistent with the requirements of the parking and loading
standards included in this chapter for retail establishments.
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (acres) (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   20      100     30     25     15        20        20%      351
Uses
Conditional 20      100     30     25     15        20        20%      351
Uses
 
1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein
      3.   The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within
the jurisdiction of Grand Island:
         a.   Any person or persons who:
            (1)   owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80
acres for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously
exercised on the large tract; and/or
            (2)   owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling that is ten years old
or more may sell a tract containing such dwelling;
            (3)   providing the following space limitations are complied with:
 
                       Setbacks
Min. Lot  Min. Lot     Front Yard  Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Lot Max. Building
Area (sq. Width (feet) (feet)      (feet)     (feet)     Coverage Height (feet)
ft.)
20,000    100          30          25         15         25%      351
 
1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-61    (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for a transition from rural to urban uses, and is generally
located on the fringe of the urban area. This zoning district permits
residential dwellings at a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre, as
well as other open space and recreational activities.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Raising of field crops and horticulture
      3.   Country clubs as defined herein
      4.   Public parks
      5.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities) when located
according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and
having a ten foot landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall
be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties. Installation
shall not be subject to minimum area or width regulations.
      6.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
      7.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      8.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement
of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (LLR) Large Lot Residential
Zoning District.
      1.   Greenhouses and the raising of trees and nursery stock
      2.   Cemeteries, memorial parks, crematories, mausoleums, and
columbariums
      3.   Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses
      4.   Riding academies
      5.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and
similar facilities
      6.   Towers
      7.   Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals
      8.   Private recreational areas subject to the following minimum
conditions:
         Size of property is at least 5.0 acres
         All buildings requiring a building permit are identified on the
application
         All services such as water, sewer, natural gas and electric are
identified on the application whether provide privately or publicly.
         Additions of services or buildings accessory to this approved use will
require an additional hearing for a conditional use permit to review the
proposed additions.
      9.   Keeping of Livestock subject to the following minimum conditions:
         Size of property is at least 5.0 acres
         All buildings requiring a building permit are identified on the
application
         All services such as water, sewer, natural gas and electric are
identified on the application whether provide privately or publicly.
         Number and/or type of animal is consistent with the limitations of the
Grand Island Animal Ordinance
Chapter 5 of the City Code.
         Additions of services or buildings accessory to this approved use will
require an additional hearing for a conditional use permit to review the
proposed additions.
      10.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Guest building
      2.   Customary home occupations
      3.   Buildings for the display and sale of products grown or raised on
the premises, provided, the floor area does not exceed 500 square feet
      4.   Offices incidental to and necessary for a permitted use
      5.   Other buildings or uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                 Minimum Setbacks
                             A       B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   20,000  20,000   100     30     25     15     20     25%      35
Uses
Conditional 20,000  20,000   100     30     25     15     20     25%      35
Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
      3.   The minimum lot area per dwelling unit is reduced to 9000 square
feet if the lot is connected to municipal sewer and water.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9790, effective 10-7-2020) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-
2025)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-62    (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for residential neighborhoods at a maximum density of four
to five dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      3.   Public parks and recreational areas
      4.   Country clubs as defined herein
      5.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college.
      6.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      7.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities, and other
general system facilities) when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a ten foot landscaped or masonry
barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to
harmonize with nearby properties.
      8.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      9.   Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities
      10.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within
the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of grounds in the (R-1) Suburban
Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and
similar facilities
      2.   Towers
      3.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious
worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet
of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      4.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Guest buildings
      2.   Customary home occupations
      3.   Other buildings or uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                 Minimum Setbacks
                             A       B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   9,000   9,000    70      25     20     10     12 1/2 30%      35
Uses
Conditional 9,000   9,000    70      25     20     10     12 1/2 30%      35
Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-63    (R-2) Low Density Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for residential neighborhoods at a maximum density of seven
dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (R-2) Low Density Residential Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      3.   Public parks and recreational areas
      4.   Country clubs as defined herein
      5.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college
      6.   Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      7.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities, and other
general system facilities when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties.
      8.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      9.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
      10.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within
the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-2) Low Density
Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes and
similar facilities
      2.   Towers
      3.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious
worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet
of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      4.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Customary home occupations
      2.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                              Minimum Setbacks
                          A       B      C      D      E
         Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
         Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
         Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
         (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                 Unit
Permitte 6,000   6,000    50      25     20     5      12 1/2 35%      35
d Uses
Conditio 6,000   6,000    50      25     20     5      12 1/2 35%      35
nal Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-64    (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of fourteen to
fifteen dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This
zoning district is sometimes used as a transitional zone between lower density
residential zones and higher density residential, office, business, or
manufacturing zones.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      3.   Public parks and recreational areas
      4.   Country clubs as defined herein
      5.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college.
      6.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature.
      7.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties.
      8.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      9.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-3) Medium Density
Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
other than those providing living accommodations
      2.   Driveways, parking lots, or buildings when directly associated with
or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.
      3.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and
similar facilities
      4.   Towers
      5.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious
worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet
of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      6.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Customary home occupations
      2.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                 Minimum Setbacks
                             A       B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   6,000   3,000    50      20     15     5      10     50%      35
Uses
Conditional 6,000   3,000    50      20     15     5      10     50%      35
Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-64.1   (R-3SL) Medium Density-Small Lot Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of fourteen to
fifteen dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This
zoning district is sometimes used as a transitional zone between lower density
residential zones and higher density residential, office, business, or
manufacturing zones. Specifically this zoned is intended to provide market
flexibility regarding lot size and housing configuration.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (R-3SL) Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      3.   Public parks and recreational areas
      4.   Country clubs as defined herein
      5.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college.
      6.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature.
      7.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties.
      8.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      9.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
      10.   Off street parking lots for residents and guests
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-3SL) Medium
Density Small Lot Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
other than those providing living accommodations
      2.   Driveways, parking lots, or buildings when directly associated with
or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.
      3.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and
similar facilities
      4.   Towers
      5.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious
worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet
of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      6.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Customary home occupations
      2.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                  Minimum Setbacks
                             A        B      C      D        E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                         Street            Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot      Front  Rear   Side     Side     Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width    Yard   Yard   Yard     Yard     Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)   (feet) (feet) (feet)   (feet)   Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   3,000   3,000    35       20*    15     5        10       50%      35
Uses
Conditional 3,000   3,000    35       20*    15     5        10       50%      35
Uses
Attached
Single
Family or                    34                     10       10
Duplex      2100    2100     exterior 20*    15     exterior exterior 50%      35
Dwelling (3                  24                     lot      lot
or more                      interior
attached
buildings)
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
      3.   Front yard setback may be reduced to 10 foot if paved access
easements and parking (garage counts as parking) is provide at the back of each
lot.
      4.   Sideyard setback for attached single family or duplex dwellings
shall be reduced to 0 feet on all lots with contiguous attached units.
(Added by Ordinance 9653, effective 10-11-2017) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9706,
effective 10-2-2018)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021 Amended by Ord. 9966 on 3/12/2024
36-65    (R-4) High Density Residential Zone
Intent . To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of forty-three
dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This zoning
district is also used as a transitional zone between lower density residential
zones and office, business, or manufacturing zones.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Dwelling Units
      2.   Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      3.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      4.   Public parks and recreational areas
      5.   Country clubs as defined herein
      6.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college.
      7.   Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious
worships and instruction of a quiet nature
      8.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in the section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such design as to harmonize with nearby
properties.
      9.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use.
      10.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or
facilities.
      11.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishment.
      12.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes and
similar facilities
      13.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within
the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-4) High Density
Residential Zoning District as approved by the City Council.
      1.   Driveways, parking lots or buildings when directly associated with
or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.
      2.   Towers
      3.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious
worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet
of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      4.   Group Care Home for less than eight (8) individuals
      5.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      6.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Customary home occupations
      2.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                 Minimum Setbacks
                             A       B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   6,000   1,000    50      10     10     5      10     60%      80
Uses
Conditional 6,000   1,000    50      10     10     5      10     60%      80
Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-66    (RO) Residential Office Zone
Intent . To provide the highest density of residential uses as well as for
various office, personal services and professional uses. This zoning district
is also used as a transitional zone between lower density residential zones and
business or manufacturing zones.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (RO) Residential Office Zoning District.
      1.   Dwelling units
      2.   Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      3.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      4.   Public parks and recreational areas
      5.   Country clubs as defined herein
      6.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level, and colleges offering courses of
general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the college.
      7.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      8.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but
not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties.
      9.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use.
      10.   Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities.
      11.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments.
      12.   Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes.
      13.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and
meeting halls
      14.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar uses.
      15.   Beauty parlors and barber shops.
      16.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal services
such as real estate, insurance, savings and loan associations, banks,
accountants, architects, engineers, photographers, doctors, dentists,
optometrists, chiropractors, podiatrists, etc.
      17.   Retail activities shall be permitted but limited to uses pertaining
to professional prescription services such as pharmacies, opticians, audiology,
medical supply shops or items clearly accessory with the service such as
picture frames to the photographer, shampoo and hair care items to the beauty
and barber shop where retail space is limited to 20% of the total floor area
      18.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels.
      19.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes,
and similar facilities.
      20.   Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals
      21.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      22.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within
the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (RO) Residential
Office Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Driveways, parking lots or buildings when directly associated with
or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.
      2.   Towers
      3.   Off-street parking areas for schools and places of worship/
instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the
principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.
      4.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Customary home occupations
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                                 Minimum Setbacks
                             A       B      C      D      E
            Minimum Minimum  Minimum                      Street          Maximum
            Parcel  Lot Area Lot     Front  Rear   Side   Side   Maximum  Building
            Area    per      Width   Yard   Yard   Yard   Yard   Ground   Height
            (feet)  Dwelling (feet)  (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) Coverage (feet)
                    Unit
Permitted   6,000   -        50      10     10     5      10     75%      150
Uses
Conditional 6,000   -        50      10     10     5      10     75%      150
Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-67    (B-1) Light Business Zone
Intent . To provide for neighborhood shopping and service facilities this will
serve the needs of the surrounding residential area. Residential uses are
permitted at the density of the (R-4) High Density Residential Zoning District.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (B-1) Light Business Zoning District.
      1.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      2.   Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      3.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      4.   Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same site as the college
      5.   Country clubs
      6.   Dwelling units
      7.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      8.   Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals
      9.   Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes
      10.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels
      11.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
      12.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal services
as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      13.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes,
and similar facilities
      14.   Public parks and recreational areas
      15.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum
equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level
      16.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      17.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and
meeting halls
      18.   Railroad right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities
      19.   Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all
activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except
that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      20.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      21.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility,
but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties
      22.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar uses
      23.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions in
this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of
said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-1) Light Business Zoning
District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Towers
      2.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                      Minimum Setbacks
                  A       B      C      D         E
          Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
          Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
          Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
          (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted 3,000   30      10     10     5         10        75%      35
Uses
Condition 3,000   30      10     10     5         10        75%      35
al Uses
 
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-68    (B-2) General Business Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the service,
retail and wholesale needs of the general community. This zoning district will
contain uses that have users and traffic from all areas of the community and
trade areas, and therefore will have close proximity to the major traffic
corridors of the City. Residential uses are permitted at the density of the (R-
4) High Density Residential Zoning District.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (B-2) General Business Zoning District.
      1.   Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all
activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except
that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      2.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal service as
found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      3.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      4.   Dwelling units
      5.   Board and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      6.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      7.   Public parks and recreational areas
      8.   Country clubs
      9.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent
to an elementary or higher educational level
      10.   Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same site as the college
      11.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      12.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility,
but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties
      13.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      14.   Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities
      15.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
      16.   Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes
      17.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and
meeting halls
      18.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar use
      19.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes,
and similar facilities
      20.   Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals
      21.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      22.   Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including
sale of used merchandise
      23.   Outdoor sales and rental lots for new and used automobiles, boats,
motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery,
etc.
      24.   Specific uses such as: archery range, billboards, drive-in theater,
golf driving range, storage yard (no junk, salvage or wrecking)
      25.   Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale
or retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is used
      26.   Parking Lots
      27.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-2) General
Business Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Recycling business
      2.   Towers
      3.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Building and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.
Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   3,000   30      10     01     02        10        100%     55
Uses
Conditional 3,000   30      10     01     02        10        100%     55
Uses
 
1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback
of 10 feet is required.
2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than five feet,
or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then
five feet. When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may
range from 0 feet to 5 feet.
3 Maximum building height may be increased by 1 foot for every 4 feet of
additional set back from the required minimum setbacks for a maximum building
height of 160 feet. For example, 40 feet of additional setback from the
required minimum setbacks would result in a maximum building height of 65 feet.
   A.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No
9151, effective 12-18-2007)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021 Amended by Ord. 9935 on 8/9/2023
36-69    (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide an overlay of the (B-
2) General Business Zoning District in order to require increased front
setbacks, landscaping, and the limitation of some uses within areas along
entrance corridors of the city. As the name implies, the overlay will be most
commonly used along an arterial street corridor.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay District.
      1.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix  [Attachment A hereto]
      2.   Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      3.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      4.   Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same site as the college
      5.   Country clubs
      6.   Dwelling units
      7.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      8.   Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals
      9.   Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes
      10.   Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale
or retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is so used
      11.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
      12.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal service
as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      13.   Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats,
motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery,
etc.
      14.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes,
and similar facilities
      15.   Public parks and recreational areas
      16.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum
equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level
      17.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      18.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and
meeting halls
      19.   Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities
      20.   Specific uses such as: archery range, drive-in theatre, golf
driving range
      21.   Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all
activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except
that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the
Zoning Matrix (Attachment A hereto)
      22.   Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including
sale of used merchandise.
      23.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      24.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility,
but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties
      25.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar uses
      26.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AC) Arterial
Commercial Overlay District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Towers
      2.   Campgrounds including those serving recreational vehicles subject to
following conditions:
         a.   Developer shall submit a diagram of the proposed camp ground
including a plot plan of the pads, landscaping plan, utility plan and interior
street plan with the application for a conditional use permit.
         b.   A minimum of one toilet and one lavatory shall be provided for
each sex up to the first 25 sites. An additional toilet and lavatory for each
sex shall be provided for each additional 25 sites or fraction thereof not
provided with sewer connections.
         c.   All RV pads shall be provided with a landscape buffer yard or
street yard as identified in the landscaping section of this code.
         d.   Pads shall not be accessible from any public way.
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
      2.   Automotive body repair may be accessory to new or used automotive
sales or rental, provided, no outside storage of parts shall be permitted.
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   5,000   50      20     01     02        10        80%      55
Uses
Conditional 5,000   50      20     01     02        10        80%      55
Uses
 
1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback
of 10 feet is required.
2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than 5 feet, or
unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5
feet.
   E.   Procedure .
      1.   An application for an amendment to the arterial commercial zone on
the Official Zoning Map shall follow all procedural requirements as set forth
in this Section.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
      3.   Landscaping shall be provided and maintained within the 20 foot
front yard setback. Landscaping shall mean lawn areas and may also include
trees, shrubs, and flowers. Crushed or lava rock, gravel, bark chips, etc.
shall not substitute for lawn area.
      4.   All improvements and uses shall be designed to direct primary
vehicular and pedestrian traffic to arterial street access and reduce such
traffic on adjacent non-arterial streets and alleys.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 01-05-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9202, effective 02-15-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9349, effective 01-31-
2012)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-70    (B-3) Heavy Business Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the multiple uses
within the central business district. Residential uses are permitted at the
density of the (RO) Residential Office Zone.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (B-3) Heavy Business Zoning District.
      1.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      2.   Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses
      3.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature
      4.   Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same site as the college
      5.   Dwelling units
      6.   Elderly Home, Assisted Living
      7.   Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals
      8.   Hotel and motel uses
      9.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels
      10.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
      11.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal services
as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      12.   Parking Lots
      13.   Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes,
and similar facilities
      14.   Public parks and recreational areas
      15.   Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum
equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level
      16.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      17.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and
meeting halls
      18.   Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities
      19.   Restaurants, Bars and Nightclubs
      20.   Stores and shops that conduct retail business, as per the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]. Outdoor retail activities and display of
goods may occupy not more than 10% of the lot area.
      21.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility,
but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties
      22.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar uses
      23.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-3) Heavy Business
Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale or
retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is so used
      2.   Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats,
motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery
      3.   Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including
sale of used merchandise.
      4.   Towers
      5.   Automobile body repair; subject to the following minimum standards:
No storage of parts or unlicensed vehicles outside of an enclosed building. The
facility shall meet or exceed all building and fire code requirements.
      6.   Other uses as indicated in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.
   D.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   3,000   30      0      01     02        0         100%
Uses
Conditional 3,000   30      0      01     02        0         100%
Uses
 
1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback
of 10 feet is required.
2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or
unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5
feet.
   E.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordnance No.
9166, effective 5-13-2008) (Amended by Ordnance No. 9738, effective 7-10-2019)
(Amended by Ordnance No. 9832, effective 7-7-2021)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-71    (ME) Industrial Estates Zone
Intent. The intent of this zoning district is to provide for a variety of
manufacturing, truck, trailer, and truck/trailer parts retailing, truck,
trailer, and truck/trailer parts wholesaling, warehousing, administrative and
research uses within an area of comparatively high visibility and having
quality standards to promote an industrial park atmosphere.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (ME) Industrial Estates Zoning District.
      1.   Any industrial/manufacturing use found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] shall be permitted within this zoning
district, provided, such use is in compliance with miscellaneous provisions and
performance standards listed in this section, or unless specifically excluded,
or a conditional use as listed below.
      2.   Administrative offices for the wholesale distribution of propane
when bottles are filled from bulk propane tanks not to exceed 70,000 gallons
and when such tanks are installed to provide a source of heat for a building on
the lot.
      3.   Bus Garaging and Equipment Maintenance, Truck and Trailer Storage,
Motor Freight Terminals
      4.   Other uses found in
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (ME) Industrial
Estates Zoning District as approved by the City Council.
      1.   Explosives manufacturing
      2.   Towers (radio, television, satellite, etc.)
      3.   Gravel, sand or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or
distribution and batching plant
      4.   Trade and vocational schools
      5.   Commercial Recreational Vehicle Storage
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses or
approved permitted conditional uses.
   D.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Automotive wrecking or salvage yards
      2.   Billboards
      3.   Churches, schools, institutions and other similar public and semi-
public uses except for trade and vocational schools
      4.   Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plants
      5.   Contractor's storage yard or plant
      6.   Milling or smelting of ores
      7.   Petroleum refining
      8.   Residential uses, any
      9.   Stock or feed yards and auction houses for livestock
      10.   Storage, dump, or yard for the collection, salvage or bailing of
scrap paper, bottles, iron, rags, junk, or any other materials
      11.   Storage of explosives
      12.   Storage tanks or facilities for fuel oils, petroleum, acids,
flammable liquids and chemicals
      13.   Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Hei ght
            (acres) (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   2.5     250     50     20     20        50        50%      50
Uses
Conditional 2.5     250     50     20     20        50        50%      50
Uses
 
Through Lots shall require that the Front Yard Setback be met on both sides
adjacent to streets.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Landscaping shall be provided in the entire area of all required
front yards except for necessary paving of walkways and of driveways to reach
parking and loading areas in the side or rear yards, provided, that any
driveways in the front yard shall not be wider than thirty (30) feet.
Landscaping shall include, but is not limited to, screen plantings, lawn area,
pools, trees, shrubs, fences, and walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips,
etc., shall not substitute for lawn area.
      2.   Any outside storage of inoperable or unassembled parts or equipment
shall be visually screened from the surrounding area by fences, walls,
plantings, earth berm or other barrier and such screening shall be opaque.
      3.   No loading facilities shall be located within a required front yard.
Loading facilities located between a building and an adjacent street or
residential district shall be visually screened to the same standards as any
outside storage.
      4.   No galvanized or other raw metal sheeting shall be used for the
exterior construction of any principal or accessory building.
      5.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      6.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9047, effective 06-07-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9154, effective 01-08-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-
2011) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9295, effective 07-05-2011)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-72    (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide for light
fabrication, service, warehousing, administrative and research uses within a
zoning district having generally limited public contact and requiring some
minimal landscaping standards.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zoning District.
      1.   Administrative, executive, professional, research and similar office
use having limited contact with the public
      2.   Agriculture, including the raising of field crops, tree and bush
crops, animals and fowls, but not including feed lots, poultry farms, fur
farms, and commercial kennels
      3.   Buildings and installations for public utilities; facilities shall
observe yard space requirements but shall not be subject to minimum area or
width requirements
      4.   Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities
      5.   Radio and television stations, private clubs, and meeting halls
      6.   Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication or storage of non-
hazardous products and materials
      7.   Parking Lot
      8.   Other uses found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (M-1) Light
Manufacturing Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Gravel, sand, or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or
distribution, and batching plant
      2.   Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plant.
      3.   Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including
maintenance facilities
      4.   Contractor's storage yard or plant
      5.   Motels and hotels
      6.   Towers
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Sales of new merchandise when same is manufactured, processed,
assembled, fabricated or stored on the premises
      2.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
      3.   A single dwelling unit occupying not more than 50% of the space
located within the permitted principal structure on the property and not to
exceed 750 square feet. Building shall conform to all building and life safety
codes necessary for the mix of uses.
   D.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Residences as a principal use
      2.   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
      3.   Churches, schools, institutions and other public and semi-public
uses except for trade and vocational schools
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   20,000  100     351    20     10        10        50%      50
Uses
Conditional 20,000  100     351    20     10        10        50%      50
Uses
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9256, effective 4-7-2010) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021 Amended by Ord. 9923 on 3/28/2023
36-73    (M-2) Heavy Manufacturing Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the greatest
amount of manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling and business uses.
Conditional use permits are required for those uses with more significant
health and safety concerns.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Administrative, executive, professional, research and similar office
use having limited contact with the public
      2.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      3.   Agriculture, including the raising of field crops, tree and bush
crops, animals and fowl, but not including feed lots, poultry farms, and fur
farms
      4.   Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plant
      5.   Contractors storage yard or plant
      6.   Gravel, sand or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or
distribution, and batching plant
      7.   Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication and/or storage of
non-hazardous products and materials
      8.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels
      9.   Parking Lot
      10.   Office and office buildings for professional and personal services
as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      11.   Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats,
motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery
      12.   Radio and television stations, private clubs and meeting halls
      13.   Railway right-of-way, including yards and facilities
      14.   Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all
activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except
that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      15.   Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including
sale of used merchandise
      16.   Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale
at retail of such products on the premises
      17.   Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including
maintenance facilities
      18.   Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility,
but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other
general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set
forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier
on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with
nearby properties
      19.   Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music
schools and conservatories, and other similar uses
      20.   Other uses found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (M-2) Heavy
Manufacturing Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Automobile wrecking yard
      2.   Acid or acid by-products manufacture
      3.   Ammonia bleaching powder, chlorine, perozylin or celluloid
manufacture
      4.   Explosives manufacture or storage
      5.   Garbage, refuse, offal or dead animal reduction or disposal area
      6.   Glue manufacture, fat rendering, distillation of bones or by-
products
      7.   Meat packing plants, including poultry and animal slaughterhouses
and abattoirs
      8.   Milling or smelting of ores
      9.   Petroleum refining
      10.   Motels and hotels
      11.   Petroleum refining
      12.   Stock or feed yards
      13.   Salvage yard
      14.   Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins
      15.   Towers
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
      2.   A single dwelling unit occupying not more than 50% of the space
located within the permitted principal structure on the property and not to
exceed 750 square feet. Building shall conform to all building and life safety
codes necessary for the mix of uses.
   D.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Residences as a principal use
      2.   Manufactured homes, and manufactured home parks
      3.   Churches, schools, institutions and other public and semi-public
uses except for trade and vocational schools
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   6,000   50      10     01     02        10        65%      -
Uses
Conditional 6,000   50      10     01     02        10        65%      -
Uses
 
1 None when bounded by an alley, otherwise 10 feet
2 No required Side Yard Setback, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or
unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5
feet. When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may range
from 0 feet to 5 feet.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9256, effective 4-7-2010) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-74    (M-3) Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone
Intent . To provide for a mix of light manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling,
retail, and residential uses. This zoning district is reflective of the mix of
uses historically present along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks through the
central city.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Churches
      2.   Residential dwellings at the same density as the (R-4) High Density
Residential Zoning District
      3.   Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including
maintenance facilities
      4.   Animal hospital and veterinary clinic
      5.   Arena or athletic field or track
      6.   Automobile body repair
      7.   Automobile service station
      8.   Bakery
      9.   Bottling plant
      10.   Blueprinting
      11.   Brewery or distillery
      12.   Café or restaurant
      13.   Cannery
      14.   Carpenter or woodworking shop
      15.   Carpet cleaning
      16.   Casting of lightweight or nonferrous metals
      17.   Crating and hauling depot
      18.   Dairy products distribution
      19.   Dry cleaning and laundry plant
      20.   Feed and seed processing and storage
      21.   Furniture repair and warehousing
      22.   Garage
      23.   Laboratories
      24.   Lapidary
      25.   Parking Lots
      26.   Printer
      27.   Publisher or lithographer
      28.   Sign painting or manufacture
      29.   Stone and monument works
      30.   Storage yards or buildings for lumber, gas, oil and similar
materials; but not explosives, vitreous ware, pottery and porcelain manufacture
      31.   Warehouse
      32.   Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication or storage of
products and materials similar to the above
      33.   Railway right-of-way, including yards and facilities
      34.   Other uses as permitted in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses may be permitted, if approved by
the city council, in accordance with procedures set forth in
Article VI of this chapter.
      1.   Salvage yards except those dealing primarily with hazardous or
regulated waste
      2.   Towers
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses
   D.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Manufactured home parks
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   6,000   50      101    02     03        10        65%      -
Uses
Conditional 6,000   50      101    02     03        10        65%      -
Uses
 
1 Shall be zero when located in Central Business District and Fourth Street
Business District
2 None when bounded by an alley, otherwise 10 feet
3 No required Side Yard Setback, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or
unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5
feet. When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may range
from 0 feet to 5 feet.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      2.   Only one (1) principal building shall be permitted on each zoning
lot except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9151, effective 12-18-2007)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-75   (Reserved)
36-76   (CD) Commercial Development Zone
   A.   Intent. The intent of this zoning district is to permit a more flexible
regulation of land use so as to more fully implement comprehensive planning for
large parcels of land proposed for commercial use.
   B.   Boundaries . The boundaries of the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning
District shall be fixed by amendment of the Official Zoning Map, at such times
in the future as such district is applied to properties within the City's
zoning jurisdiction.
   C.   Limitations .
      1.   In a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District, there shall be
provided a minimum size of 1.5 acres
      2.   Any proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan of development.
      3.   Any proposed plan of development shall be designed as a single
architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping.
      4.   Adequate parking space shall be provided for all employees',
visitors', and users' vehicles, and such parking, loading or service areas that
shall be used for motor vehicles shall be located within the boundary lines of
the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District and shall be physically
separated from any public street, right-of-way or property line by a buffer
strip of not less than 30 feet along the exterior of the (CD) Commercial
Development Zone. The buffer strip is not required if such public street,
right-of-way or property line is also adjacent to other properties zoned either
(CD) Commercial Development Zone or (RD) Residential Development Zone. Setbacks
from property lines will be review with the development plan and plat.
      5.   5. No building or other permanent structure, nor parking lot, shall
be located within 30 feet of any public street, right-of-way, or property line
along the exterior of the (CD) Commercial Development Zone. Trees shrubs, and
other plantings may be included in the buffer strip. The number of trees and
shrubs shall not be regulated by the landscaping section of this code. The
buffer strip is not required if such public street, right-of-way or property
line is also adjacent to other properties zoned either (CD) Commercial
Development Zone or (RD) Residential Development Zone. Landscaping plans will
be reviewed with the development plan and plat. Setbacks from property lines
will be reviewed with the development plan and plat.
      6.   The maximum ground coverage shall not exceed 50% of each site within
the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District.
      7.   The minimum off-street parking requirement shall be provided as
defined in this chapter of the city code.
   D.   Ownership . A (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District shall require
a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control,
or which is under single designated control by a common ownership at the time
it is certified as a (CD) Commercial Development Zone.
   E.   Permitted Uses .
      1.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use
      2.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
      3.   Radio and television stations (no antennae), and meeting halls
      4.   Offices and office buildings
      5.   Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business, provided, all
activities and displays of goods are carried on within an enclosed building
except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open.
      6.   Retail uses as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      7.   Agencies as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      8.   Shops as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
      9.   Motel and hotel uses.
      10.   Residential uses with the largest percentage at least 75% above the
ground level.
      11.   Other uses as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   F.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (CD) Commercial
Development Zoning District as approved by City Council.
      1.   Towers
   G.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.
   H.   Procedure .
      1.   An application to amend the Official Zoning Map to establish a CD-
Commercial Development Zone shall be initiated in the manner prescribed in
Article X of this chapter.
      2.   Said application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as
shall be required by the city council, and shall be accompanied by the
following information:
         a.   Site plan showing preliminary location and dimensions of all
building areas, recreation, green or landscaped areas, parking and loading
facilities, walkways or malls, screen walls, or plantings, waste disposal
areas, illumination facilities, signs, curb cuts, utilities and service,
private or dedicated drives or streets, etc.
         b.   Preliminary drawings or renderings in sufficient detail so that
the character of the development may be so determined.
         c.   Evidence as to the methods of retaining, maintaining, and
protecting the open space, green areas, recreational facilities, etc.
         d.   Development schedule as to construction phases of buildings, open
space, recreational areas, parking facilities, etc., and estimated completion
time.
         e.   Evidence of ownership or control of the entire parcel to be used
as a planned unit development by a single person, association, firm, etc., as
defined herein.
         f.   Evidence of economic feasibility: a copy of such application and
supplementary information shall then be forwarded by the city clerk to the
Planning Commission for review, hearing, and recommendation.
      3.   In reviewing the application for amendment, the Planning Commission
shall determine the following factors:
         a.   That the proposed development will be in the public interest, in
harmony with the purpose of this chapter and with comprehensive development
plans for the City and will not adversely affect nearby property.
         b.   That adequate, safe, and convenient pedestrian and vehicular
trafficways and facilities are provided.
         c.   That the development to be permitted shall be for the purpose of
developing an integrated site plan in conformity with the regulations for a CD-
Commercial Development Zone.
      4.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment and shall transmit its recommendation to the city council; a copy of
the recommendation shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be
retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.
      5.   Procedure and action by the city council shall be the same as
considering an amendment to a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District as in
Article X of this chapter.
   I.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   It is intended that plans required for review and approval must be
in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations for
both the preliminary and final plat and that approval for plans and plats be
considered simultaneously.
      2.   The approved and filed final plan and plat shall be the basis for
issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith; the initial building
permit shall include as a minimum 50% of the main building or structure; free-
standing subordinate buildings shall not be included in the initial permit and
shall not receive a permit until the initial permit phase is over 50%
constructed; plan changes which increase the number of buildings, increase
building height or bulk, or change the location of buildings or other features
which materially affect the basic design of the development shall require
resubmission of the amendment. Minor adjustments in orientation, height or bulk
of buildings, or decrease in number of buildings shall be approved by the
Planning Director.
      3.   Should any successful applicant for an amendment hereunder fail to
have completed the construction of the footings and foundations for the initial
building permit within eighteen (18) months after the city council shall
approve a rezoning to a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District, the area
in its entirety shall be reverted to its former zoning classification by
appropriate action of the city council, provided, that the city council shall
have the power to extend said period by six (6) months in the event of special
and unique hardships and circumstances.
      4.   Control of the development following completion:
         a.   The chief building official shall issue a certificate certifying
the completion of the planned development, and shall note the issuance of the
certificate on the final development plan.
         b.   After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of
land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District will be
governed by the approved final development plan exclusively.
         c.   After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes
may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to
the appropriate agency under the procedures provided below:
            (1)   Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of
existing buildings or structures shall be authorized by the Planning Director
if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan; no
change authorized by this subsection may increase the density of any building
or structure by more than ten percent.
            (2)   A building or structure that is totally or substantially
destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development
plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under
subsection (3) hereof.
            (3)   All other changes in the final development plan as approved
by the city council must be made by the city council under the procedures
authorized under Article X for amendment of the Official Zoning Map; no changes
may be made in the final development plan unless they are found by the city
council to be required for the continued successful functioning of the
commercial development, or unless they are found by the city council to be
required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was
improved or by changes in the comprehensive planning and development policy of
the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9871, effective 02-9-2022)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021 Amended by Ord. 9923 on 3/28/2023
36-77   (TD) Travel Development Zone
Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to provide for only those trade
and service uses in connection with federal interstate highway interchanges as
are needed and considered appropriate to the location.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Motels and/or hotels
      2.   Restaurants and cafes, with or without drive-in facilities
      3.   Lounges and/or taverns
      4.   Automobile service stations and truck service centers
      5.   Automobile and truck wash
      6.   Billboards
      7.   Other uses as found in the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   B.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (TD) Travel
Development Zone as approved by City Council.
      1.   Utility substations
      2.   Motor home and travel trailer parks and camping facilities
      3.   Recreational uses such as amusement parks, miniature golf courses,
exhibition halls and centers, recreation centers and sports fields
      4.   Towers
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
   D.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Any residential use except quarters for management within the
principal building
   E.   Space Limitations .
 
Uses                        Minimum Setbacks
                    A       B      C      D         E
            Minimum Minimum Front  Rear             Street    Maximum  Maximum
            Parcel  Lot     Yard   Yard   Side Yard Side Yard Ground   Building
            Area    Width   (feet) (feet) (feet)    (feet)    Coverage Height
            (feet)  (feet)                                             (feet)
Permitted   40,000  200     50     20     10        50        60%      50
Uses
Conditional 40,000  200     50     20     10        50        60%      50
Uses
 
1with 15 feet adjacent to a street landscaped to satisfaction of the zoning
official.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Landscaping shall be provided in the entire area of all required
front yards except for necessary paving of walkways and of driveways to reach
parking and loading areas in the side or rear yards, provided, that any
driveways in the front yard shall not be wider than 30 feet. Landscaping shall
include but is not limited to screen plantings, lawn area, pools, trees,
shrubs, fences, and walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips shall not
substitute for lawn area. Landscaping shall be provided within two years of
issuance of the occupancy permit for the principal structure and thereafter be
properly maintained.
      2.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
      3.   Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot,
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9871, effective 02-9-2022)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-78   (RD) Residential Development Zone
   A.   Intent . The intent of this zoning district is to permit a more
flexible regulation of land use, and so as to more fully implement
comprehensive planning for large parcels of land proposed predominantly for
residential use.
   B.   Boundaries . The boundaries of RD-Residential Development Zone shall be
fixed by amendment of the Official Zoning Map at such times in the future as
such zoning district is applied to properties within the City's zoning
jurisdiction.
   C.   Limitations .
      1.   In a (RD) Residential Development Zone there shall be provided a
minimum size of 1.5 acres.
      2.   Any proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan of development.
      3.   Any proposed plan of development shall be designed as a single
architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping.
      4.   Adequate parking space shall be provided for all residential units
and for all employee's, visitor's, and user's vehicles, and such parking,
loading, or service areas that shall be used for motor vehicles, and shall be
located within the boundary lines of the (RD) Residential Development Zone, and
shall be physically separated from any public street, right-of-way, or property
line by a buffer strip of not less than 30 feet along the exterior of the (RD)
Residential Development Zone. The buffer strip is not required if such public
street, right-of-way or property line is also adjacent to other properties
zoned either (CD) Commercial Development Zone or (RD) Residential Development
Zone. Setbacks from property lines will be review with the development plan and
plat.
      5.   No residential building or other permanent residential structure,
nor parking lot, shall be located within 30 feet of any public street, right-
of-way, or property line along the exterior of the (RD) Residential Development
Zone. The buffer strip is not required if such public street, right-of-way or
property line is also adjacent to other properties zoned either (CD) Commercial
Development Zone or (RD) Residential Development Zone. Setbacks from property
lines will be review with the development plan and plat.
      6.   The maximum ground coverage shall not exceed 30 percent of the
property within the (RD) Residential Development Zone.
      7.   The minimum off-street parking requirement shall be two parking
spaces for every dwelling unit, plus one for each full-time employee.
      8.   In the alternative to complying with the 30 foot buffer strip or
setback as identified in subsections (C)(4) and (C)(5) above, a ten (10) foot
wide landscaped buffer with plantings of at least 2 understory or ornamental
trees and 3 shrubs per 100 foot or fraction thereof of exterior street frontage
or property line approved as part of the development plan.
   D.   Ownership . A (RD) Residential Development Zone shall require a tract
of land which is developed as a unit under single designated control by a
common ownership at the time it is certified as an (RD) Residential Development
Zone.
   E.   Permitted Principal Uses . The following principal uses are permitted
in the (RD) Residential Development Zone.
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted principal uses of the (LLR) Large Lot
Residential Zone, (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone, (R-2) Low Density
Residential Zone, (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zone, (R3-SL) Medium Density
Small Lot Residential Zone, and (R-4) High Density Residential Zone except as
listed under specifically excluded uses.
      2.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
other than those providing living accommodations.
      3.   All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto].
   F.   Conditional Uses . The following uses are subject to any conditions
listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the
placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (RD) Residential
Development Zone as approved by City Council.
      1.   Towers
      2.   Nursing, convalescent & rest home services
      3.   Residential assisted living, retirement or assisted living
      4.   All other Conditional Uses indicated as permitted within the
Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
   G.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use
   H.   Specifically Excluded Uses .
      1.   Railway right-of-way, including railway yards or facilities.
      2.   Truck, bush, and tree farming.
      3.   Boarding and lodging housing.
      4.   Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments
providing living accommodations.
      5.   Nonresidential uses.
   I.   Procedure .
      1.   An application to establish a (RD) Residential Development Zone
shall be initiated in the manner prescribed in
Article X of this chapter.
      2.   Said application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as
shall be required by the city council and shall be accompanied by the following
information:
         a.   Site plan showing preliminary location and dimensions of all
building areas, recreation, green or landscaped areas, parking and loading
facilities, walkways or malls, screen walls, or plantings, waste disposal
areas, illumination facilities, signs, curb cuts, utilities and services,
private or dedicated drives or streets, etc.
         b.   Preliminary drawings or renderings in sufficient detail so that
the character of the development may be determined.
         c.   Evidence as to the methods of retaining, maintaining, and
protecting the open space, green areas, recreational facilities, etc.
         d.   Development schedule as to construction phases of buildings, open
space, recreational areas, parking facilities, etc., and estimated completion
time.
         e.   Evidence of ownership or control of the entire parcel to be used
as a planned unit development by a single person, association, firm, etc., as
defined herein.
         f.   Evidence of economic feasibility. A copy of such application and
supplementary information shall then be forwarded by the city clerk to the
Planning Commission for review, hearing, and recommendation.
      3.   In reviewing the application for amendment herein, the Planning
Commission shall determine the following factors.
         a.   That the proposed development will be in the public interest, in
harmony with the purpose of this chapter and with comprehensive plans for the
City, and will not adversely affect nearby property.
         b.   That adequate, safe, and convenient pedestrian and vehicular
trafficways and facilities are provided.
         c.   That the development to be permitted shall be for the purpose of
developing an integrated site plan in conformity with the regulations for a
(RD) Residential Development Zone.
      4.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment and shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. A copy of
the recommendation shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be
retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.
      5.   Procedure and action by the city council shall be the same in
considering an amendment to the (RD) Residential Development Zone as in
Article X of this chapter.
   J.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   It is intended that plans required for review and approval must be
in a form that will satisfy the requirements of
Chapter 33 of this code for both the preliminary and final plat, and that
approval for plans and plats be considered simultaneously.
      2.   The approved and filed final plan and plat shall be the basis for
issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith. Plan changes which
increase the number of buildings, increase building height or bulk, or change
the location of buildings or other features which materially affect the basic
design of the development shall require resubmission of the amendment. Minor
adjustments in orientation, height or bulk of buildings, or decrease in the
number of buildings may be approved by the Planning Director.
      3.   Should any successful applicant for an amendment hereunder fail to
have completed the construction of the footings and foundations for the initial
building permit within eighteen (18) months after the city council shall
approve a rezoning to a (RD) Residential Development Zone, the area in its
entirety shall be reverted to its former zoning classification by appropriate
action of the city council, provided, that the city council shall have the
power to extend said period by six months in the event of special and unique
hardships and circumstances.
      4.   Control of the development following completion:
         a.   The chief building official shall issue a certificate certifying
the completion of the planned development, and shall note the issuance of the
certificate on the final development plan.
         b.   After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of
land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the residential development will be governed by the approved
final development plan exclusively.
         c.   After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes
may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to
the appropriate agency under the procedures provided below.
            (1)   Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of
existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning Director if
they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change
authorized by this subsection may increase the density of any building or
structure by more than ten percent.
            (2)   A building or structure that is totally or substantially
destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development
plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under
subsection (3) hereof.
            (3)   All other changes in the final development plan as approved
by the city council must be made by the city council under the procedures
authorized under
Article X of this chapter. No changes may be made in the final development plan
unless they are found by the city council to be required for the continued
successful functioning of the residential development, or unless they are found
by the city council to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred
since the final plan was approved or by changes in the comprehensive planning
and development policy of the City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9294, effective 05-31-2011) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9871, effective 02-9-
2022)
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
36-79   (A) Airport Zone
Intent . The intent of the zoning district is to provide an overlay zone to
permit landing fields for all types of aircraft. This overlay zone may be
applied to any base zone upon final approval. Appropriate airport approach and
turning zones must be identified.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in the zone or zones
underlying the Airport Zone indication.
      2.   Landing fields for all types of aircraft, either private or
commercial.
   B.   Conditional Uses .
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted conditional uses in the zone or zones
underlying the Airport Zone indication.
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted accessory uses in the zone or zones
underlying the Airport Zone indication.
      2.   Facilities accessory to the normal and continual operation of an
airfield, but not to include general repair depots and other commercial or
industrial operations normally found at all such airfields unless permitted in
the underlying zone or zones.
   D.   Space Limitations .
      1.   Same as listed under space limitations in the zone or zones
underlying the Airport Zone indication.
   E.   Procedure .
      1.   An application for an amendment for an Airport Zone to the Official
Zoning Map shall follow as procedure requirements for amendment as set forth in
Article X of this chapter, and in addition, shall include the following
information:
         a.   Site plan showing precise location and dimensions of all runways
and facilities, buildings, and service areas, ramps and aprons, etc.
         b.   Diagram of all approach and clear zones, glide paths, etc.
         c.   A report from the Federal Aviation Agency on the proposed airport
usage and approval of the intended location.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Same as listed under miscellaneous provisions in the zone or zones
underlying the Airport Zone indication.
36-80   (GCO) Gateway Corridor Overlay District
Intent . The City of Grand Island has established basic site and building
development criteria to be implemented within the boundaries of this overlay
district. These criteria include, but are not limited to the following:
landscaping, building material selection, lighting, and interior street
development. The purpose for regulating these issues is to provide for a
cohesive and properly developed entrance into the City of Grand Island from the
Interstate corridor. Guiding development in this manner promotes the general
health, safety and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of
the City, by providing quality design and construction that will also aid in
the protection of past and future investment in the corridor.
Purpose . The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those
items that affect the physical aspect of Grand Island's environment. Pertinent
to appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, planting,
signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by
the public.
The criteria contained herein are not intended to restrict imagination,
innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles
that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual
appearance within the city, preserve taxable values, and promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
   A.   Geographic Area . The Gateway Corridor Overlay District extends
generally to Wood River Road or the southern portion of the Grand Island
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. The overlay districts generally are one-half
mile wide and centered along U.S. Highway 281 south of Schimmer Drive and South
Locust Street south of U.S. Highway 34.
If a site is partially covered by said overlay district, and then the entire
portion of the site facing the Gateway Corridor is to be covered by these
regulations. For a graphically defined area, see the Official Zoning Map.
   B.   Criteria For Application .
      1.   All commercial developments consisting of more than one principal
building, mixed-uses, multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required
to meet the zoning requirements for a Commercial Development Zone or the Travel
Development Zone. The Commercial Development Zone or Travel Development Zone
process and rezoning shall be in conjunction with preliminary and final plat
review and approval. The design criteria of this section shall be met as part
of the subdivision approval.
      2.   All industrial developments consisting of more than one principal
building, mixed-uses, multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required
to meet the zoning requirements of the Industrial Estates Zone. The design
criteria of this section shall be met as part of the subdivision approval.
      3.   All commercial or industrial developments consisting of one
principal building with single or mixed uses in an existing zone shall comply
with the design criteria of this section. This would include additions and
exterior remodeling of existing structures.
      4.   All residential subdivisions shall be required to meet the landscape
and site treatment criteria whenever the proposed development is adjacent to an
arterial or frontage road. The criteria shall be implemented for the entire
frontage, including entrances into the development.
EXCEPTIONS: Single-family dwelling units within this overlay on property zoned
for Agricultural or Transition Agriculture shall be exempted from these
criteria.
   C.   Criteria for Appearance .
      1.   Relationship of Buildings to Site . The site shall be planned to
accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for
adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas.
         a.   Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of
standard commercial zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting
relationship between buildings.
         b.   Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building
wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to screen
parking areas from view from public ways.
         c.   Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable
zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with
its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
         d.   Newly installed utility services, and service revisions
necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
      2.   Relationship of Buildings and Site to Adjoining Area (Outside of
Subdivision) .
         a.   Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be
made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials.
         b.   Attractive landscape transitions shall be designed to be
compatible to adjoining properties.
         c.   Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall
be avoided.
      3.   Landscape and Site Treatment . Landscape elements included in these
criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock
groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except building and
utilitarian structures.
         a.   Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to
beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed.
Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good site
design and development.
         b.   Grades of walk, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas
shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is
provided, for sitting.
         c.   Landscape treatments shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and important axis, and provide shade. Spectacular
effects shall be reserved for special locations only.
         d.   Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant
varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments.
         e.   Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure,
texture, color, and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the
area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design and of good
appearance shall be used.
         f.   Site must be serviced by an underground or approved irrigation
system and all plant material shall be kept in good health and maintained. If
plant material dies, it shall be replaced.
         g.   Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped
spaces containing trees or tree groupings.
         h.   Use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of those shall
accomplish screening of service yards and other places that tend to be
unsightly. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer.
         i.   Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design
and the adjoining landscape. Building fixtures shall be of a design and size
compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained
in design and excessive brightness avoided. Lighting shall be designed to a
standard that does not impact adjoining properties, especially residential
areas.
         j.   All fencing within this Overlay District shall be defined
including height, type and materials within the development plan.
         k.   Fencing within the Overlay District and as part of an Industrial
Development may be required to be a solid fence.
         l.   All signs shall meet the Sign Design Criteria within
Chapter 31 of this code.
      4.   Building Design .
         a.   Architectural design and style are not restricted, however
architectural style should be consistent throughout the subdivision. Evaluation
of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and
relationship to surroundings.
         b.   Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance
with permanent neighboring development.
         c.   The primary building material for all portions of the structures
shall be negotiated with the City. However, sample materials shall include but
not be limited to materials of high quality, such as brick (clay), stucco,
wood, glass, split faced concrete masonry units (CMU) with integrated color
pigmentation, pre-engineered structures provided the exterior skin meets the
criteria for appearance for the area as defined in the subdivision agreement or
approved by the site design and review committee, and stone material native to
Nebraska. The materials shall be similar and compatible throughout the entire
development. The City of Grand Island staff and/or design review architect may
allow other primary building designs (of good architectural character, i.e.
CMU, poured-in-place concrete) for portions of the building not visible from
public areas. Other secondary building materials shall have good architectural
character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining
buildings.
         d.   Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same
materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building
walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from
public ways.
         e.   Materials shall be of durable quality.
         f.   In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view,
the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious
with their surroundings.
         g.   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets,
shall have good proportions and relationships to one another.
         h.   Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.
         i.   Colors shall be of low reflectance and shall not be of high-
intensity or metallic colors unless the colors are true to the materials being
used.
         j.   Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground,
or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with
the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public
ways.
         k.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with
building design.
         l.   Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using
materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.
         m.   The style and material of the signs shall be included within the
development plan.
         n.   Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall
be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide
visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual
buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance.
         o.   Building orientation shall be toward an arterial street, unless
it is demonstrated that this would not be feasible.
   D.   Factors for Evaluation . The following factors and characteristics,
which affect the appearance of a development, will govern the evaluation of a
design submission:
      1.   Conformance with city code regulations and the Building Design
Criteria.
      2.   Logic of design
      3.   Exterior space utilization
      4.   Architectural character
      5.   Attractiveness of the material selection
      6.   Harmony and compatibility
      7.   Circulation-vehicular and pedestrian
      8.   Maintenance aspects
   E.   Process .
      1.   Commercial Development Zone Application . All general commercial
developments on property not already zoned for commercial uses within the
Gateway Corridor Overlay District shall be required to apply for rezoning under
the criteria in §
36-76 of this chapter.
      2.   Industrial Development Zone Application . All industrial
developments within the Gateway Corridor District shall be required to apply
for rezoning to ME-Industrial Estates zone.
      3.   Individual commercial or industrial buildings and additions or
exterior remodeling of existing buildings shall be subject to site plan and
design review by a committee consisting of the Hall County Regional Planning
Director, the Grand Island Building Department Director, one (1) planning
commission member representing the City of Grand Island, and if appointed, a
design review architect representing the City of Grand Island. This committee
can request additional input from surrounding property owners and near-by
business improvement districts as ex-officio members of the design review
committee.
      4.   Subdivision Approval . All new commercial buildings or developments
within the Gateway Corridor Overlay shall be on properly subdivided lots. As a
condition of subdivision approval, all said commercial and/or industrial
buildings or developments shall comply with the provisions of the Gateway
Corridor Overlay District. The developer shall place maintenance provisions
required by this section within all restrictive covenants.
      5.   Pre-application Conference . A pre-application conference with city
staff to give the applicant an opportunity to discuss plans before a great deal
of time or money is expended.
      6.   Application for Design Review . The applicant needs to fill out the
"Application for Certificate Approval" and submit it along with the required
submittals. See Administrative Forms for a listing of required submittals.
      7.   Certificate of Approval . Upon a successful review, the City of
Grand Island will issue to the applicant a Certificate of Approval. A copy of
this will need to be included with the Building Permit documents in order to
receive a Building Permit.
      8.   Appeals . In the event, where the Applicant, City staff and/or a
design review architect representing the City, or the site plan and design
review committee cannot come to an agreement, the Applicant may appeal the
decision by requesting an amendment to the subdivision agreement from the Grand
Island City Council.
      9.   Certificate of Occupancy Permit . After the building permit is
issued, all design requirements must be completed as approved in order for a
Certificate of Occupancy to be issued.
      10.   Maintenance of Design Requirements . The applicant needs to
maintain the design requirements for the life of the project. In the event that
they fail to do so, the City may revoke the Occupancy Permit.
      11.   Fees . Fees may apply to each individual step as established by
separate regulation.
36-81   -M And -MD Manufactured Home Overlay Zones
Purpose . To provide for overlay zones which will permit the placement of
single or double wide manufactured homes within either a manufactured home park
or manufactured home subdivision, whichever the case may be, as approved for
the overlay zones. Site built dwelling units and modular homes are also
permitted within the overlay zones. A variety of densities is possible
depending upon the base zone to which the overlay zones are applied.
   A.   Permitted Principal Uses .
      1.   Within the -M Zone.
         a.   Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in the zone or
zones underlying the -M Manufactured Home Zone designation.
         b.   Manufactured single wide, double wide, or sectional homes;
provided, that skirting shall be required for all units.
      2.   Within the -MD Zone.
         a.   Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in zone or zones
underlying the -MD Manufactured Home designation.
         b.   Manufactured double wide or sectional homes only, provided:
            (1)   minimum width of the main body of the manufactured home as
assembled shall not be less than twenty-two (22) feet;
            (2)   minimum pitch of the main roof shall not be less than 2.5
inches of rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run (2.5/12 pitch);
            (3)   exterior finish on walls shall appear to be as wood, masonry,
or other materials generally acceptable for site built housing and applied in a
manner similar in appearance; provided, that reflection from such exterior
shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior
enamel;
            (4)   roofing material shall be of any material that is generally
acceptable for site-built housing; provided, it is applied in such a manner
similar in appearance;
            (5)   skirting shall be required and shall have a similar
appearance of foundation for site-built housing.
   B.   Permitted Accessory Uses .
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted accessory uses in the zone or zones
underlying the Manufactured Home Zone designation.
   C.   Permitted Conditional Uses . The following uses may be permitted, if
approved by the city council, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article VIII of this chapter:
      1.   Uses as listed under permitted conditional uses in the zone or zones
underlying the Manufactured Home designation.
   D.   Space Limitations .
      1.   Minimum zoning area per manufactured home: Same as underlying zone
but in no event less than 3,000 square feet
      2.   Minimum zoning lot: Same as underlying zone but in no event less
than 6,000 square feet
      3.   Minimum lot width: Same as underlying zone
      4.   Minimum front yard: Same as underlying zone
      5.   Minimum rear yard: Same as underlying zone
      6.   Minimum side yard: Same as underlying zone but in no event less than
10 feet for manufactured homes
      7.   Maximum ground coverage: Same as underlying zone
   E.   Procedure .
      1.   An application for an amendment for the Manufactured Home Zone to
the zoning map shall follow all procedural requirements for amendments as set
forth herein, and, in addition, shall include the following information:
         a.   Site plan showing precise number, locations, and dimensions of
all manufactured home lots, public or private drive or streets, illumination
facilities, recreation or green areas, utilities, etc. Such site plan, if
approved, shall form the basis for the issuance of a manufactured home park
permit or as a preliminary subdivision study, whichever is the intention of the
owner.
         b.   Data as may be requested by the chief building official to
determine that the proposed manufactured home development will comply with all
legal requirements.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions .
      1.   Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
ZONING MATRIX
Land Use
Categories
(as of
June 2021)
           AG- AG- AG- AG- AG- SRC TA LLR R- R- R- R- RO RM RD B- B- AC B- CD TD ME M- M- M-
           1   2   SC  SE  SI             1  2  3  4           1  2     3           1  2  3
Land Use Categories
(as of June 2021)
                     AG- AG- AG- AG- AG- SRC TA LLR R- R- R- R- RO RM RD B- B- AC B- CD TD ME M- M- M-
                     1   2   SC  SE  SI             1  2  3  4           1  2     3           1  2  3
A
Abrasive, asbestos,
& miscellaneous non-
metallic mineral                     P                                                     C     P
products -
manufacturing
Abstracting services                                            P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
Accounting &                                                    P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
bookkeeping services
Accounting,
computing & office                                                                            P  P  P
machines -
manufacturing
Advertising displays
& signs -                                                                                  C  P  P  P
manufacturing
Advertising
services, direct                                                P           P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
mail
Advertising                                                     P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
services, general
Agricultural,
business and
personal credit                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
services including
credit union
Agricultural
chemicals &          C   C           P                                                           C
fertilizers -
manufacturing
Agricultural
chemical &           C   C           P                                      C                    P
fertilizers -
wholesale
Agricultural
fertilizers,                                                             P  P  P     P        P  P
hazardous & non
hazardous - retail
Agricultural         P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
operations
Air conditioning,
heating & plumbing                                                       P  P  P              P  P  P
contracting services
Air conditioning,
refrigerated                         P                                                     P  P  P  P
equipment & supplies
- wholesale
Aircraft &                           P                                                           P
accessories - retail
Aircraft storage &
equipment                                                                                        P
maintenance
Airports & flying                                                                                P
fields
Alcoholic beverages,
beer & wine -                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
wholesale
Alteration, pressing
& garment repair                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Ambulance services                                                          P  P              P  P  P
Ammunition
manufacturing &
complete assembly of                 P                                                     P     P
guided missiles &
space vehicles
Ammunition, small                    P                                                     P     P
arms - manufacturing
Amphitheaters                                                            C           C           C
Amusement, athletic
& sporting goods &                   P                                                     P  P  P  P
toys - manufacturing
Animal & marine fats
& oils including
grease & tallow,                     C                                                           C
rendering -
manufacturing
Animal hospital      C   C                   C  C                        P  P  P     P        P  P  P
services
Antiques - retail                                                        P  P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P
Apiary farms &       P   P   P   P   P       P
processing
Apparel &
accessories -                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Apparel &                                                                P  P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P
accessories - retail
Apparel &
accessories -                        P                                            P           P  P  P
wholesale
Apparel belts -                                                                                     P
manufacturing
Apparel findings &
related products -                   P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Appliances
(household) -                        P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Appliances                                                               P  P  P  P  P           P  P
(household) - retail
Appliances
(electrical),
television                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
phonographs, tape
players, radio sets
- wholesale
Appliance repair                                                         P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
services
Aquariums                                P                                           P  P
Arboretums &                             P                                           P
botanical gardens
Architectural,
engineering &
planning -                           P                          P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
professional
services
Arenas & fieldhouses C                   C                                  C                    C
Armateur rewinding                                                          C                    P  P
services
Armed forces reserve                                                        C                    P
center
Art galleries,                           P                                  P        P  P           P
publicly owned
Artists - painters,
sculptors,           P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
composers, & authors
Asbestos, abrasive &
miscellaneous non-
metallic mineral                     P                                                     C     P
products -
manufacturing
Asphalt felts &
coating -                            P                                                           P
manufacturing
Asphalt mixing       C   C           C                                                           C
plants
Athletic, amusement
& sporting goods &                   P                                                     P  P  P  P
toys - manufacturing
Athletic field or    C   C   C   C   C   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  C  P  P  P
playfield
Auditing, accounting
& bookkeeping                                                   P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
services
Auditoriums, public                      P                               P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
Automatic
temperature controls                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
- manufacturing
Automobile & other
motor vehicle &                      P                                                        P  P
equipment -
manufacturing
Automobile & other
motor vehicle repair                                                     P  P  P  C     P        P  P
services
Automobile & other
motor vehicles -                                                            P  P  C              P  P
retail
Automobile & other
motor vehicles -                                                                                 C
wholesale
Automobile & truck                                                          P  P                 P  P
rental services
Automobile equipment                                                        P                    P  P
- wholesale
Automobile parts &                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
supplies - retail
Automobile wash                                                          P  P  P  C  P  P     P  P  P
services
B
Bags except textile                  P                                                           P  P
bags - manufacturing
Bait shops                                                               P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Bakeries non-
manufacturing -                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Banking services                                                P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Bar or Nightclub                                                         P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Barber services                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Batch Plants -       C   C           P                                      C              C     P
temporary
Beauty services                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Bed and breakfast                               C   C  C  C  C  P        P  P  P                    P
residence
Beer, wine &
alcoholic beverages                                                         P              P  P  P  P
- wholesale
Bicycles - retail                                                        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
Biological products                  P                                                     C     P
- manufacturing
Blacksmith & welding                                                                             P  P
services
Blankbooks, loose
leaf binders &                       P                                                     P     P  P
devices-manuf. of
Blast furnaces,
steel works &                        C                                                           C
rolling of ferrous
metals
Blueprinting &
photocopying                                                             P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Boarding & rooming                                        C  P  P        P  P     P                 P
houses
Boat building &                      P                                                     P     P  P
repair services
Boat sales, service                                                         P  P                 P  P
and rentals
Boat building &                      P                                                     P     P  P
repair, fiberglass
Bookbinding & misc.
related work -                       P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Bookkeeping,
auditing &                                                      P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
accounting services
Books, magazines &
newspapers                           P                                      P  P  P        P     P  P
distributing -
wholesale
Books - publishing &                 P                                      P              P  P  P  P
printing
Books - retail                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Boot & shoe cut
stock & findings -                   P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Botanical gardens &                      P                            P              P
arboretums
Bottled gas - retail                                                     P  P  P  P  P  P        P
Bottling & canning
soft drinks &                        P                                                     P     P  P
carbonated waters
Bowling alleys                                                           P  P  P  C  P           P  P
Boxes and paperboard
containers -                         P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Brandy, brandy
spirits & wine -     C   C   C   C   P       C                                                   P  P
manufacturing
Brick & structural
clay tile                            P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Brooms & brushes -                   P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Building
construction -                                                                                   P  P
general contracting
services
Building materials -                                                        P  P     P           P  P
retail
Building materials &                                                        P        P           P  P
lumber - wholesale
Building paper &
building board -                     P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Bulk petroleum
stations & terminals                 C                                                           C
- wholesale
Bus garaging &
equipment                                                                                  P        P
maintenance
Business &
management                                                      P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
consulting services
Business offices not                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
elsewhere listed
Business
associations
Business forms -
manufacturing
Butter -                             P                                      P              P     P  P
manufacturing
C
Cabinet making -                     P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Cable TV maintenance                                                        C                    P
yard
Cameras &
photographic                                                             P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
supplies - retail
Camp grounds,        C   C               P   C                              C           C        C
general
Camp grounds, group  C   C               P   C                              C           C        C
Candy & other
confectionery                        P                                                     P     P  P
products -
manufacturing
Candy, nut, &
confectionery -                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Canes, parasols &
umbrellas -                          P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Canning & preserving
of fruits,
vegetables &                         P                                                           P
seafood's -
manufacturing
Canvas products -                    P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Carbon black -                       C                                                           C
manufacturing
Cardboard,
paperboard & die-cut                 P                                                     P     P
paper -
manufacturing
Carpentry & wood                                                            P  P  P  P           P  P
flooring services
Carpet & rug
cleaning & repair                                               P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
service
Carpet & rug -                       P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Cement (hydraulic) -                 C                                                           P
manufacturing
Cemeteries                                   P  P                                                P
Ceramic wall & floor                 P                                                     P     P  P
tile - manufacturing
Cereal preparations                  P                                                     P     P  P
- manufacturing
Charitable & welfare                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Cheese (natural &
processed) -                         P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Chemicals &
fertilizers -mining
Chemicals,
agricultural,        C   C           C                                                     C  C  C
nonhazardous,
wholesale
Chemicals,
industrial,                          C                                                        C  C
nonhazardous,
wholesale
Chemicals,
industrial organic &                 C                                                     C     C
inorganic -
manufacturing
Chiropractors,
optometrists, &                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
other similar health
services
Churches ,           C   C                   C  P   P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P  P  P              P
synagogues & temples
Cigarettes & cigars                  P                                                     P     P  P
- manufacturing
Civic, social &
fraternal                                                       C        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
associations
Civil Defense &                                                                                     P
related activities
Clay, ceramic &
refractory minerals  C   C   C   C   C       C                                                   C
- mining
Clay refractories -                  P                                                           P
manufacturing
Clock, watch &
jewelry repair                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Clocks, watches,
clockwork operated                   P                                                     P     P  P
devices & parts -
manufacturing
Commercial &
industrial
machinery, equipment                                                        P              P     P  P
& supplies -
wholesale
Commodity &
securities brokers,                                             P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
dealers & exchanges
& services
Communication
equipment -                          P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Composting plants                    C
Concrete brick &
block -                              P                                                           P
manufacturing
Concrete products -                  P                                                           P
manufacturing
Concrete, ready-mix                  P                                                           P
plants
Concrete
construction &                       P                                                           P
paving services
Confectionery, nut &                                                     P  P  P  P  P           P  P
candy - retail
Confectionery -                      P                                                     P  P  P  P
wholesale
Construction &
lumber materials -                                                          P        P     P     P  P
wholesale
Construction,
mining, & materials
handling machinery &                 P                                                     P     P
equipment -
manufacturing
Construction                                                                   P           P     P
equipment - retail
Construction                         C                          C        C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
services - temporary
Convalescent,,
nursing & rest home                                       C  C  P     P  P  P  P     P
services
Convents                                        P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Convenience store                                                     P  P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Cosmetics, perfumes,
& other toiletries -                 P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Cottage services
Country club                                 P  P   P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P     P
Crating & packing                    P                                                     P     P  P
services
Credit reporting,
adjustment &                                                    P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
collection services
Credit unions &
agricultural,                                                   P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
business & personal
credit services
Crematory, funeral &                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P
mortuary services
Curtains, draperies
& upholstery -                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Cut stone & stone
products -                           P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
D
Dairy products -                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Dairy products -                     P                                      P                    P  P
wholesale
Day care centers                             C  C   C  C  C  P  P  C  C  P  P  P  P  P           C  P
Dental equipment &
supplies -                           P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Dental laboratory                    P                                   P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
services
Dental services                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Department stores -                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Detective &                                                     P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
protective services
Diaper services                                                                               P  P  P
Direct mail                                                              P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
advertising services
Direct selling
organizations -                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Discount & variety                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
stores - retail
Disinfecting &
exterminating                                                               P  P  P              P  P
services
Disposal site -
commercial           C   C           C                                                           C
construction
Disposal site -                      C                                                           C
hazardous waste
Disposal site -                      C
nuclear waste
Distilling,
rectifying, &                        P                                                           P
blending liquors
Dormitories, college                            P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Draperies, curtains
& upholstery -                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Drawing, rolling &
extrusion of non-                    P                                                           P
ferrous metals -
manufacturing
Drug & proprietary -                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Drugs, drug
proprietaries, &                                                                              P  P  P
druggist sundries -
wholesale
Dry cleaning &
laundering pickup                                                                             P  P  P
services
Dry cleaning &
laundering, self                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
service
Dry cleaning,
laundering & dyeing                                                      P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
services, except
rugs
Dry goods & general                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
merchandise - retail
Dry goods & notions                                                         P     P           P  P  P
- wholesale
Dude ranches         C   C                   C
Duplicating,
mailing, &                                                               P  P  P  P  P           P  P
stenographic
services
Dwelling, elderly                               P
Dwelling, mobile
home not on                                                        P
permanent foundation
Dwelling, mobile
home on permanent                                                  P
foundation
Dwelling, multi-                                P   P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P  P                 P
family
Dwelling, single-    P   P                   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                 P
family
Dwelling, two-family                            P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                 P
Dyeing & finishing                   P                                                     P     P  P
of textiles
Dyeing, dry cleaning
& laundry services,                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
except rugs
E
Earthenware, table &
kitchen articles -                   P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Educational &
scientific research                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
services
Egg & poultry -                                                             P                    P
retail
Electrical apparatus
& equipment, wiring
supplies, &                                                                 P                    P  P
construction
materials -
wholesale
Electrical                                                                  P                 P  P  P
contractor services
Electrical
appliances,
phonographs,                                                                P                    P  P
televisions, tape
players & radio sets
- wholesale
Electrical
industrial apparatus                 P                                                     P     P  P
- manufacturing
Electrical repair
services, except                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
radio & television
Electrical supplies                                                         P     P              P  P
- retail
Electrical
transmission &
distribution                         P                                                     P     P  P
equipment -
manufacturing
Electric generation  C   C   C   C   C                                                           C
plants
Electric utility                                                                                 P  P
maintenance yard
Electricity
regulating           P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
substations
Electric lighting &
wiring equipment -                   P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Electrometallurgical
products &                           P                                                           P
processing -
manufacturing
Electronic
components &                         P                                                     P     P  P
accessories -
manufacturing
Electronic parts &
equipment -                          P                                                           P  P
wholesale
Electrotyping and                    P                                                           P  P
stereotyping
Employment services                                             P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Engineering,
planning
architectural                                                   P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
professional
services
Engineering,
laboratory, &
scientific &
research instruments                 P                                                     P     P  P
& associated
equipment -
manufactured
Engines & turbines -                 P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Envelope -                           P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Equipment & supplies
for service                          P                                      P              P  P  P  P
establishments -
wholesale
Equipment rental &                                                          P              P     P  P
leasing services
Ethanol plants &     C   C           C                                                           C
mills
Exhibition halls                                                            P  P  P  P           P  P
Explosives -                         C                                                     C     C
manufacturing
Exterminating                                                               P  P              P  P  P
Extracts & flavoring
syrups -                             P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Extrusion, drawing,
& rolling of non-                    P                                                     P     P
ferrous metals -
manufacturing
F
Fabricated
structural metal                     P                                                     P     P
products -
manufacturing
Fabricated wire
products -                           P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Fairgrounds          C   C       P                                          P                    P
Farm machinery &                                                            P              P     P
equipment - retail
Farm machinery &
equipment -                          P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Farm machinery &
equipment -                                                                                P  P  P
wholesale
Farm products
warehousing &
storage excluding                                                           P              P  P  P  P
stockyards -
nonhazardous
Farm supplies -                                                             P                    P  P
retail
Farms & ranches -    P   P   P   P   P       P
livestock
Farms, commercial    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
forestry
Farms, grain crops   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Farms, hay & alfalfa P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Farms, fiber crops   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Farms, fruits, nuts  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
or vegetables
Farms, nursery stock P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Feeding operation -  C   C   C   C   C       C
confined
Feed preparation for                 P                                                           P
animals & fowls
Feeds, grains & hay                  P                                      P                    P
- retail
Felt goods -                         P                                                           P
manufacturing
Fertilizers,
agricultural                                                                                     P
hazardous - retail
Fertilizers,
agricultural                                                                P                    P
nonhazardous -
retail
Fertilizers &        C   C   C   C   C
chemicals - mining
Fieldhouses & arenas                     P                                  C                    C
Fire protection &                                                           P                 P  P  P
related activities
Fish & seafood's -                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Fish & seafood's -                                                          P                    P  P
wholesale
Fish farms           P   P   P   P           P
Fish hatcheries      P   P   P   P           P
Fishing & hunting    P   P   P   P       P   P
clubs
Flat glass -                         P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Floor covering -                                                            P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Florists - retail                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Flour & other grain
mill products -                      P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Flour blending &
preparing -                          P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Food lockers &                                                           P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
storage services
Foundries, iron &
steel -                              P                                                           P
manufacturing
Foundries,
nonferrous metals -                  P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Fraternal, civic &                                              C        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
social associations
Fraternity &                                                    P     C  P  P  P  P
sorority houses
Freight forwarding                   P                                                        P  P  P
services
Frozen desserts &
ice cream -                          P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Fruits & vegetables                  P                                      P                 P  P  P
(fresh) - wholesale
Fruits & vegetables                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
- retail
Fuel, except fuel
oil & bottled gas -                                                      P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
retail
Fuel oil - retail                                                           P                 P  P
Funeral, mortuary &                                             P        P  P  P  P  P           P
crematory services
Fur dressing &
dyeing -                             P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Fur goods -                          P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Fur repair & storage                                                        P  P  P  P        P  P  P
services
Furniture & home
furnishings -                                                               P              P  P  P  P
wholesale
Furniture
(household) -                        P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Furniture - retail                                                          P  P  P  P           P  P
Furniture repair &
reupholstery                                                             P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Furies & fur apparel                                                        P  P  P  P           P  P
- retail
Furs (raw), hides &                  P                                                           P
skins - wholesale
G
Garden supplies &
landscape nursery -                                                         P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Garment repair,
alteration &                                                             P  P  P  P  P           P  P
pressing services
Gas & petroleum      C   C   C   C   C
(crude) drilling
Gas & petroleum
(crude) field                        P                                                           P
services
Gasoline service                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
stations - retail
Gas pressure control
stations
Gas & ethanol                        C
production plants
Gas storage &
distribution points
Gas utility                                                                                      P
maintenance yard
Gelatin & glue -                     C                                                           C
manufacturing
General contracting
& building                           P                                                           P  P
construction
services
General stores -                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Gifts, novelties &                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
souvenirs - retail
Glass & glassware,
pressed or blown -                   P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Glass containers -                   P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Glass, flat -                        P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Glass, paint &                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
wallpaper - retail
Glue & gelatin -                     C                                                           C
manufacturing
Go-cart tracks                           C   C                                       C           C
Golf courses, public                         P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Golf driving ranges                                                            P  P              P
Gravel & sand        C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C                                          C  C  C
quarrying
Grain - wholesale                    P                                                     P     P  P
Grains, feeds & hay                                                         P  P  P  P           P
- retail
Grain mill products
& flour -                            P                                                           P
manufacturing
Greases &
lubricating oils -                   P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Green houses         P   P   P   P   P       P  C                           P  P     P           P  P
Greeting card -                      P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Grist milling                        P                                                     P     P  P
services
Groceries - retail                                                       P  P  P  P  P              P
Groceries -                          P                                         P                 P  P
wholesale
Group Home-(Small)                              P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                 P
Group Home-(Medium)                                 C  C  C  C  P     P  C  P  P  P                 P
Group Home-(Large)                                              P     P  C  P  P  P                 P
Group care home                                 C   C  C  C  P  P     C     P  P  P
Gum and wood
chemicals -                          C                                                           C
manufacturing
Guns, howitzers,
mortars & re.                        C                                                           C
equipment -
manufacturing
Gymnasiums &                                                                P  P     P              P
athletic clubs
Gypsum products -                    P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
H
Handbags & other
personal leather                     P                                                     P     P  P
goods -
manufacturing
Hardware - retail                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Hardware - wholesale                 P                                      P                    P  P
Hardwood dimension &
flooring -                           P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Harvesting services  P   P   P   P           P
Hats, caps, &
millinery -                          P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Hay, grains & feeds                                                         P                    P
- retail
Health resorts                                                  C           P  P  P     P     C  C  P
Health & exercise                                                        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
spas
Hearing aids,
optical goods,
orthopedic                                                      P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
appliances & other
similar devices -
retail
Heating, air
conditioning &                                                              P                 P  P  P
plumbing contracting
services
Heating & plumbing
equipment & supplies                                                        P     P  P           P  P
- retail
Heating apparatus
(except electrical)
and plumbing                         P                                                     P  P  P  P
fixtures -
manufacturing
Heliport pads                                                                                    P
Hides, skins, & raw                  P                                                           P
furs - wholesale
Hobby supplies -                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
Holding & investment                                            P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
services
Hospital services                                               P           P  P     P
Hotels, tourist                                                             P  P  P  P  P     C  C  P
courts, & motels
House Furnishings,
textile (except
curtains &                           P                                                     P     P  P
draperies) -
manufacturing
Household appliances                                                        P  P  P  P           P  P
- retail
Hunting & fishing                        P
clubs
I
Ice cream & frozen
desserts -                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Ice - manufacturing                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
Ice - retail                                                             P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Ice skating rinks,                       P                                  P        P           P  P
indoor
Industrial laundry &                 P                                                        P  P  P
lien supply services
Industrial leather
belting & packing -                  P                                                     P     P  P
manufacturing
Industrial &
commercial
machinery, equipment                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
& supplies -
wholesale
Industrial machinery
equipment -                          P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Industrial waste                     C                                                           C
disposal
Instruments for
mechanical measuring
& controlling except                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
automatic
temperature controls
- manufacturing
Insurance agents &                                              P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
brokers services
Insurance carriers                                              P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Internet service                                                P        P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
Investment & holding                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
J
Janitorial services                                                         P     P              P  P
Jewelry & precious
metals -                             P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Jewelry - retail                                                            P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Jewelry, watch &
clock repair                                                                P  P  P  P  P        P  P
services
K
Kennels-commercial                                                                               P
Kennels-private                                                                                  P
Knit goods -                         P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Kennels-animal
shelter non-                                                                                  P  P
commercial
L
Labor unions &
similar labor                                                   P           P  P  P  P        P  P  P
organizations
Lace goods -                         P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Lamp shades -                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Landscape                            P                                      P        P           P
contracting services
Landscape nursery &
garden supplies -                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P
retail
Lapidary work                                                            P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Laundering & dry
cleaning pickup                                                                               P  P  P
service
Laundering & dry
cleaning, self-                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
service
Laundering, dry
cleaning & dyeing                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services, except
rugs
Lawn care - services                                                        P  P              P  P  P
Leather & fleece
lined clothing -                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Leather gloves &
mittens -                            P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Leather tanning &
finishing -                          C                                                           C
manufacturing
Legal services                                                  P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Libraries                                       P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Lime products -                      C                                                           C
manufacturing
Linen supply &
industrial laundry                   P                                                        P  P  P
services
Linoleum, asphalt-
felt-base, and other
hard surface floor                   P                                                           P
cover -
manufacturing
Liquid petroleum gas                 P                                                           P
- wholesale
Liquor - retail                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Livestock feeding    C   C   C   C   C       C
operations
Livestock-wholesale                                                                              C
Locksmith services                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Lubricating oils &
greases -                            P                                                           C
manufacturing
Luggage -                            P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Lumber & building
materials -                                                                 P                    P  P
wholesale
Lumber yards -                                                              P  P  P  P           P  P
retail
M
Machine shop -                       P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Magazines &                                                              P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
newspapers - retail
Magazines, books, &
newspapers                                                                     P  P        P  P  P  P
distributing -
wholesale
Mail order houses -                                                                              P  P
retail
Mailing,
duplicating, &                                                              P  P  P  P           P  P
stenographic
services
Malt liquors -                       P                                                           P
manufacturing
Management &
business consulting                                             P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Masonry, stonework,
tile setting &                                                              P  P  P  P           P  P
plastering services
Massage services                                                            P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Matches -                            C                                                           C
manufacturing
Mausoleums
Meat & meat packing                                                         P     P              P
products - wholesale
Meat packing -                       C                                                           C
manufacturing
Meats - retail                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Medical & surgical
instruments &                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
apparatus -
manufacturing
Medical clinics,                                                P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
out-patient services
Medical laboratory                                                          P              P  P  P  P
services
Medical chemicals -                  C                                                           C
manufacturing
Metal cans -                         P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Metal coating,
engraving, and                       P                                                     P     P
allied services -
manufacturing
Metal mining                                                                                     P
services
Metal ore mining     C   C   C                                                                   C
Metal products,
fabricated                           P                                                     P  P  P
structural -
manufacturing
Metals & minerals,
except petroleum                     P                                                     P     P
products & scrap -
wholesale
Metals, nonferrous,
rolling, drawing, &                  P                                                     P     P
extrusion -
manufacturing
Metal stamping -                     P                                                     P     P
manufacturing
Metal working
machinery &                          P                                                     P     P  P
equipment -
manufacturing
Millwork -                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Milk processing,                                                                                 P
fluid only
Miniature golf                                                              P  P  P  P  P        P
Mining               C   C   C               C  C                                             C  C
Mobile home parks                                                  P
Mobile homes -                       P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Mobile homes not on                                                P
permanent foundation
Manufactured homes
on permanent         P   P                   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                 P
foundation
Mobile homes &                                                              P                    P
accessories - retail
Monasteries                                     P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Monuments - retail                                                       P  P                    P  P
Mortician's goods -                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Motels, hotels, &                                                           P  P  P  P  P     C  C  P
tourist courts
Motion picture
distribution                         P                                         P     P     P  P  P  P
services
Motion picture                       P                                         P           P  P  P  P
production studios
Motorcycle & bicycle
sales, rental &                                                             P  P  P  P  P        P  P
service
Motor freight
garaging & equipment                 P                                                           P  P
maintenance
Motor freight                                                                              P     P  P
terminals
Mortuary, funeral &                                             P        P  P  P  P  P           P
crematory services
Museums                                  P   C                  P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Musical instruments                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
& supplies - retail
Musical instruments
& parts -                                                                                  P  P  P  P
manufacturing
N
Newspaper &                                                              P  P  P  P  P           P  P
magazines - retail
Newspapers, books &
magazines                                                                   P     P        P  P  P  P
distribution -
wholesale
Newspapers
publishing &                                                                P     P        P  P  P  P
printing
Nightclub or Bar                                                         P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
News syndicate                                                  P           P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
services
Nonmetallic mining,
except fuel -                        P                                                           P
services
Noodles, macaroni,
spaghetti &                          P                                                     P  P  P  P
vermicelli -
manufacturing
Notions, dry goods -                 P                                      P              P  P  P  P
wholesale
Novelties, gifts &                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
souvenirs - reail
Nursery stock farms  P   P   P   P   P       P  P   P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Nursing,
convalescent & rest                                       C  C  P     C  P  P  P     C
home services
Nuts, bolts, screws,
rivets, & washers, &
screw machine                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
products -
manufacturing
O
Office & store
fixtures,
partitions,                          P                                                     P  P  P  P
shelving, & lockers
- manufacturing
Office, computing &
accounting machines                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
- manufacturing
Office furniture -                   P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Oilcloth, plastic
fabric & vinyl                       C                                                           C
products -
manufacturing
Ophthalmic goods -                   P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Optical goods,
hearing aids,
orthopedic                                                      P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
appliances & other
similar devices -
retail
Optical instruments
& lenses -                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Optometrists,
chiropractors &                                                 P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
other similar health
services
Ornamental iron
works -                              P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Orphanages                                             C  C  P  P        P  P     P
Orthopedic,
prosthetic &
surgical appliances                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
& supplies -
manufacturing
Outdoor advertising                                                         P           P     P  P  P
services
P
Packing & crating                    P                                                     P     P  P
services
Padding & upholstery
filling -                            P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Paint, glass, &                                                          P  P  P  P  P           P  P
wallpaper - retail
Painting & paper                                                            P  P  P              P  P
hanging services
Paints, varnishes,
lacquers, enamels,                   C                                                           C
and allied products
- manufactured
Paper & paper                        P                                      P              P  P  P  P
products - wholesale
Paperbound
containers & boxes -                 P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Paperboard -                         P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Paper coating &
glazing -                            P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Paper, except
building paper -                     P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Paper hanging &                                                             P  P  P              P  P
painting services
Parasols, umbrellas
& canes -                            P                                                              P
manufacturing
Parks, public        P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Partitions,
shelving, lockers &
office & store                       P                                                     P  P  P  P
fixtures -
manufacturing
Paunch manure -
application,
incorporation,       C       C   C   C
stockpiling,
disposal
Periodicals,
publishing &                         P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
printing
Petroleum bulk
stations & terminal                  C                                                           C
- wholesale
Petroleum pipeline   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
R/W
Petroleum pressure
control stations
Petroleum (crude) &                  P                                                           P
gas field services
Petroleum (crude) &  C   C   C       C                                                           C
natural gas drilling
Petroleum refining                   C                                                           C
Pets & pet grooming                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
- retail
Pharmaceutical
preparations -                       P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Photocopying & blue                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
printing services
Photoengraving                                                              P  P  P              P  P
Photofinishing                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Photographic
equipment & supplies                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
- manufacturing
Photographic studios                                                     P  P  P  P  P           P  P
& services
Photographic
supplies & cameras -                                                     P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
retail
Physicians' services                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Planetarium                                                                 P  P     P  P  P     P  P
Planing mills,
general -                            P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Planning,
architectural &
engineering                                                     P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
professional
services
Plastering, masonry,
stone work & tile                                                           P  P  P  P           P  P
setting services
Plastic fabric,
vinyl products &                     P                                                     P  P  P
oilcloth -
manufacturing
Plastic materials &
synthetic resins,
synthetic rubber,                    C                                                           C
synthetic & other
manmad materials -
manufacturing
Plastic products -                   P                                                           P
manufacturing
Playfields &         C   C   C   C   C   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  C  P  P  P
athletic fields
Playgrounds                              P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P           P
Play lot or tot lot                      P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P           P
Pleating, decorative
& novelty stitching
& tucking for the                    P                                                     P  P  P  P
trade -
manufacturing
Plumbing & heating
equipment & supplies                                                        P     P  P           P  P
- retail
Plumbing fixtures &
heating apparatus                    P                                                     P  P  P  P
(except electrical)
- manufacturing
Plumbing, heating, &
air conditioning                                                            P                 P  P  P
contracting services
Plywood & veneer -                   P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Porcelain electrical
supplies -                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Pottery -                            P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Poultry & eggs -                                                               P     P           P
retail
Poultry & poultry                                                              P              P  P
products - wholesale
Poultry & small game                 P                                      C                    P
dressing & packing
Poultry hatchery                 P   P                                                           P
services
Prefabricating
wooden buildings &                                                                         P  P  P  P
structural members -
manufacturing
Preserving & canning
of fruits,
vegetables &                         P                                                     P  P  P
seafood's -
manufacturing
Pressed & molded
pulp goods -                         P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Pressing, alteration
& garment repair                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Primary smelting &
refining of                          C                                                           C
nonferrous metals -
manufacturing
Printing ink -                       P                                                           P  P
manufacturing
Printing, commercial                                                        P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
Printing &                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
publishing of books
Printing &
publishing of                        P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
newspapers
Printing &
publishing of                        P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
periodicals
Private Prisons                      C                                                           C
Private clubs                                C  C                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Processing waste &
recovering fibers &                  C                                                           C
flock -
manufacturing
Professional
equipment & supplies                                                        P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
- wholesale
Professional
membership                                                      P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
organizations
Professional offices                                            P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
not elsewhere listed
Pulp - manufacturing                 P                                                     P  P  P
Q
Quarrying, gravel,   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C                        C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
sand & dirt
Quarrying, stone     C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
R
Race tracks &                                                               P                    P
courses - animals
Race tracks &        C           C       C                                                       C
courses - vehicle
Radioactive
materials processing                 C                                                           C
& storage -
manufacturing
Radioactive waste                    C
materials disposal
Radio broadcasting                                              P        P  P  P  P  P        P  P  P
studios
Radios, television,
phonographs,
recorders & tape                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
players -
manufacturing
Radios, televisions,
phonographs,
recorders, & tape                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
players repair
services
Radios, televisions,
phonographs,                                                             P  P  P  P  P              P
recorders & tape
players - retail
Radio transmitting   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
stations & towers
Railroad equipment &                 P                                                           P
maintenance yard
Railroad - equipment                 P                                                           P
- manufacturing
Railroad freight                     P                                            P              P  P
terminals
Railroad passenger                   P                                            P              P
terminals
Railroad right-of-   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
way
Railroad switching                   P                                                           P  P
yards
Raincoats & other
waterproof outer                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
garments -
manufacturing
Real estate agents,
brokers & management                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Reclaiming rubber                    C                                                           C
Recreational
vehicles & equipment                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
- manufacturing
Recreational
vehicles & equipment                 P                                      P        P           P
- retail
Recreation centers                       P                      P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Rectories                                       P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Recycling center                     C                                                           C  C
Refining & smelting
(primary) of                         C                                                           C
nonferrous metals
Refining of                                                                                      C
petroleum
Refrigerated
warehousing (except                  P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
food lockers)
Refuse incineration                  C                                                           C
Religious camps &    C   C               C   C  C
retreats
Research,
development &                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
testing services
Resorts (general)    C   C                   C  C                           P  P  P              C
Rest, nursing, &
convalescent home                                         C  C  P     C  P  P  P     C
services
Restaurants                                                              P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Restaurants, drive-                                                      P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
in
Retirement homes                                          C  C  P     C  P  P  P  P  C
Reupholstery &
furniture repair                     P                                      P  P  P  P        P  P
services
Rice milling                         P                                                           P
Riding stables &     C   C               C   C  C                                       C        C
acadamies
Roadside stands
offering
agricultural         P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P
products for sale on
the premises
Roller skating rinks                                                     P  P  P  P  P           P  P
- indoor
Rolling, drawing, &
extrusion of                         P                                                     P  P  P
nonferrous metals -
manufacturing
Rolling of ferrous
metals, blast                        C                                                     C  C  C
furnaces & steel
works
Roofing & sheet
metal contracting                    P                                      P                 P  P  P
services
Rooming & boarding                                           C  P     C  P  P  P  P                 P
houses
Rubber footwear -                    P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Rug & carpet
cleaning & repair                                                        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Rug & carpet -                       P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
S
Salvage yard                                                                                     C  C
Sand & gravel        C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C                                          C  C  C
quarrying
Sanitary landfill                    C                                                           C
Sanitary paper
products -                           P                                                           P
manufacturing
Sausages & other
prepared meat                                                               P                 P  P
products -
manufacturing
Savings & loan                                                  P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
associations
Sawmills, general -  C               P                                                           P
manufacturing
Schools, art                                                    P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, barber                                                 P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, beauty                                                 P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, business                                               P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, colleges                                               P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, computer                                               P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools,                                                        P           P  P  P  P              P
correspondence
Schools, dancing                                                P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, day care                                            P  P     C     P  P  P  P     C  C  C  P
Schools, driving                                                P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, junior                                                 P           P  P  P  P              P
college
Schools, music                                                  P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, nursery                                             P  P     C     P  P  P  P              P
Schools, pre-primary C   C                   C  C   C  C  C  P  P     P  P  P  P  P  P              P
Schools, primary     P   P                   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P              P
Schools,                                                     P  P           P  P  P  P              P
professional
Schools, secondary                           P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P              P
Schools,                                                        P           P  P  P  P              P
stenographic
Schools, technical                                              P           P  P  P  P              P
Schools, trade                                                              P  P  P  P           P  P
Schools,                                                        P           P  P  P  P              P
universities
Schools, vocational                                                         P  P  P  P           P  P
Scientific &
educational research                                                        P  P  P  P     P  P  P  P
services
Scrap & waste
materials,                           C                                                           C
nonmetallic -
wholesale
Screw machine
products & bolts,
nuts, screws,                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
rivets, & washers -
manufacturing
Secondary smelting &
refining of                          C                                                           C
nonferrous metals -
manufacturing
Second hand                                                              P  P  P  P  P           P  P
merchandise - retail
Seed treating        P               P                                                           P
Seed and feed sales                                                         P  P  P  P           P
Sewage sludge drying                 C                                                           P
beds
Sewage treatment                                                                           C  C  P
facilities
Shades & venetian
blinds -                             P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Sheet metal &
roofing contracting                                                         P                 P  P  P
services
Shelving,
partitions, lockers,
& office & store                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
fixture -
manufacturing
Shoe repair, shoe
shining, & hat                                                           P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
cleaning services
Shoes -                              P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Shoes - retail                                                           P  P  P  P  P              P
Shoes - wholesale                    P                                      P  P  P        P  P  P  P
Shortening, table
oils, margarine, &                   P                                                     P  P  P
other edible fats &
oils - manufacturing
Signs & advertising
displays -                           P                                                        P  P  P
manufacturing
Silverware & plated                  P                                                        P  P  P
ware - manufacturing
Skeet & trap         C   C               P   C                                                   C
shooting ranges
Sludge, municipal
waste - application,
incorporation,       C   C   C   C   C   C   C                                                   C
stockpiling,
disposal
Smelting & refining
(primary) of                         C                                                           C
nonferrous metals
Smelting & refining
(secondary) of                       C                                                           C
nonferrous metals
Soaps & detergents
(except specialty                    P                                                        P  P
cleaners) -
manufacturing
Social, civic &
fraternal                                       C               P     C  P  P  P  P  P  P     P  P  P
associations
Social correctional,
treatment &                          P                          P     C     P  P  P  P  P        P  P
counseling services
Solid waste transfer C   C           C       C                                                   C
stations
Sorority &                                                   P  P     C  P  P  P  P
fraternity houses
Souvenirs, gifts,                                                        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
novelties - retail
Soybean oil milling                  P                                                     P  P  P
Sporting, toys,
amusement & athletic                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
goods -
manufacturing
Sporting goods -                                                         P  P  P  P  P              P
retail
Stadiums                                                                    C        C     C     P
Stationery - retail                                                      P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Steel pipe & tubes -                 P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Steel wire drawing,
steel nails & spikes                 P                                                     P  P  P
- manufacturing
Steel works, blast
furnaces & the                       C                                                           C
rolling of ferrous
metals
Stenographic,
duplicating, &                                                              P  P  P  P           P  P
mailing services
Stock yards          C   C   C   C   C       C                                                   C
Stone products & cut
stone -                              P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Stone - quarrying    C   C   C   C   C       C                                             C  C  C
Stone work, masonry,
title setting, &                                                            P  P  P  P           P  P
plastering services
Storage - mini                                                              P  P  P  P        P  P  P
Storage &
warehousing of                       P                                      P  P  P        P  P  P  P
nonhazardous
products
Storage &
warehousing of                       C                                                     C  C  C
hazardous products
Storage &
warehousing of                       P                                      P  P  P        P  P  P  P
household goods
Store & office
fixtures, lockers,
partitions &                         P                                                     P  P  P  P
shelving -
manufacturing
Sugar refining -                     C                                                           C
manufacturing
Surgical & medical
instruments &                        P                                                     P  P  P  P
apparatus -
manufacturing
Swimming clubs                                                              P  P  P  P           P
Synagogues,          C   C                   C  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P              P
churches, & temples
Synthetic, resins,
synthetic rubber,
plastic materials,
synthetic & other                    C                                                        C  C
manmade fibers
(except glass) -
manufacturing
T
Tailoring (custom)                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
Taverns                                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Taxcicab dispatch                                                           P  P  P           P  P  P
Taxicab garaging &                                                             P  P              P  P
maintenance
Telegraph                                                       P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
communications
Telephone business                                              P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
office
Telephone exchange                                                          P     P           P  P  P
stations
Telephone                                                                   P     P              P  P
maintenance yard
Telephone relay      C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
towers (microwave)
Television                                                                  P  P  P  P           P  P
broadcasting studios
Television, radios,
phonographs,
recorders & tape                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
players -
manufacturing
Television, radios,
phonographs,
recorders & tape                                                         P  P  P  P  P           P  P
players repair
services
Television, radios,
phonographs,                                                             P  P  P  P  P           P  P
recorders, & tape
players - retail
Television
transmitting         C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
stations & relay
towers
Temples, churches, & C   C                   C  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P              P
synagogues
Tennis clubs                             P                                  P  P                 P
Textile bags -                       P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Testing, research, &                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
development services
Theaters, legitimate                                                     P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
Theaters, motion                                                         P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
picture, indoor
Theaters, motion                             C                           P                       P  P
picture, outdoor
Threads & yarns -                    P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Tile setting,
masonry, plastering                                                         P  P  P  P           P  P
& stone work
services
Tire cord & fabric -                 P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Tire & inner tubes -                 C                                                     C  C  C
manufacturing
Tires & inner tubes                  P                                      P  P  P  P     P  P  P
- wholesale
Title abstracting                                               P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Tobacco & tobacco                                                           P     P        P  P  P  P
products - wholesale
Tobacco & snuff -                    P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Tobacco leaf -                       P                                                        P  P
wholesale
Tobacco stemming &                   C                                                           C
redrying
Tot lot or play lot                      P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P           P
Tourist courts,                                                             P  P  P  P  P     C  C  P
hotels, & motels
Toys, amusement,
sporting & athletic                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
goods -
manufacturing
Transportation
equipment and                                                                                       P
supplies (except
motor vehicles)
Trap & skeet         C   C               P   C                                                   C
shooting ranges
Travel arranging                                                P        P  P  P  P  P  P        P  P
services
Truck & automobile                                                          P  P  P  P  P        P  P
rental services
Truck wash services                  P                                                  P  P  P  P  P
Turbines & engines -                 P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
U
Utility substations,
pumping station,     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
water reservoir &
telephone exchange
Upholstery,
draperies, &                                                                P  P  P  P           P  P
curtains - retail
Upholstery filling &
padding -                            P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
V
Variety & discount                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
stores - retail
Vegetable oil
milling (except                      P                                                     P  P  P
cottonseed &
soybean)
Veneer & plywood -                   P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Vending machine                                                             P  P  P  P        P  P  P
operations - retail
Venetian blinds &
shades -                             P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Veterinarian         C   C           C       C  C               P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Vinyl products,
plastic fabric &                     P                                                     P  P  P
oilcloth -
manufacturing
Vitreous china
plumbing fixtures,
china, earthward                     P                                                     P  P  P  P
fillings & bathroom
accessories -
manufacturing
Vitreous china,
table & kitchen                      P                                                     P  P  P  P
articles -
manufacturing
W
Wallpaper -                          P                                                     P  P  P  P
manufacturing
Wallpaper, paint &                                                       P  P  P  P  P           P  P
glass - retail
Warehousing &
storage of hazardous                 C                                                     C  C  C
products
Warehousing &
storage of                           P                                                     P  P  P  P
nonhazardous
products
Warehousing &
storage of household                 P                                      P     P  P     P  P  P  P
goods
Watch, clock, &
jewelry repair                                                           P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Watches, clocks,
clock work operated                  P                                                     P  P  P  P
devices & parts -
manufacturing
Water well drilling                  P                                      P              P  P  P  P
services
Welding & blacksmith                 P                                      P                    P  P
services
Welfare & charitable                                            P        P  P  P  P  P           P  P
services
Wet corn milling                     P                                                     P  P  P
Wind energy              C                                                                 C  C  C
installation
Wine, beer, &
alcoholic beverages                  P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
- wholesale
Wine, brandy, &
brandy spirits -                     P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Wire products
(fabricated) -                       P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Wooden containers -                  P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Wool preserving -
manufacturing
Wool & mohair -                      P                                      P     P        P  P  P  P
wholesale
Worm farms           P   P   P   P   P       P  P
Y
Yarn & threads -                     P                                                     P  P  P
manufacturing
Z
Zoos                                     P                                           P  P
ADDITIONAL LAND USE
CATEGORIES
 
HISTORY
Recorded by Other Matrix on 6/1/2021
Article 36-VI
Conditional Use Permits
36-88   Conditional Uses; Application 
36-89   Authorized Conditional Uses 
36-90   Conditional Uses; Procedure 
36-91   Fees
36-88   Conditional Uses; Application
An application for a conditional use, signed by the property owner or by a
purchaser thereof under contract in writing duly executed by both buyer and
seller, or by agent of any of the foregoing duly authorized to do so in
writing, shall be submitted to the city clerk. The application shall state the
location of the proposed conditional use, the specific conditional use
requested as permitted by this chapter and shall be accompanied by such other
material as necessary to explain the proposal. The city council may request
additional information as it deems proper.
36-89   Authorized Conditional Uses
The following uses may be granted by the city council as a permitted
conditional use in accordance with the procedure as set forth in this article:
   A.   To permit uses as listed under the permitted conditional uses within
the respective zoning districts as specified in this chapter;
   B.   To permit the appropriate use of a lot less in area by not more than
ten percent of the area required by this chapter;
   C.   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities
required by not more than two parking spaces or one loading berth or twenty
percent of the required number, whichever is greater;
   D.   To permit the same off-street parking facilities to qualify as required
spaces for two or more uses, provided, the substantial use of such spaces by
each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days
of the week;
   E.   To permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two
years in undeveloped areas of the City, and for periods not to exceed six (6)
months in developed areas;
   F.   To permit the placement and operation of wind turbines, solar energy
collectors, or other energy saving devices that would not be in conformance
with the space limitations as specified in this chapter.
   G.   To permit the construction and operation of a private wastewater
treatment system for any use within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of
Grand Island, excepting those small systems consisting of a septic tank and
drainfield having a design capacity of less than 2,000 gallons per day. The
design capacity shall be based on the table of estimated waste/sewerage flow
rates in
Chapter 30 of this code.
   H.   To permit the keeping of livestock on residential property with less
than a half acre of outdoor enclosure area per animal for periods not to exceed
three (3) years in accordance with requirements set out in §
5-16 of this code.
   I.   To permit operation of a salvage yard where allowed under the permitted
conditional uses within the respective districts; provided, that salvage
operations conducted entirely within a building as an accessory use to a
permitted principal use of land shall not require compliance with this article.
36-90   Conditional Uses; Procedure
After receipt of a conditional use application and application fee, the city
clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council to consider such
application. Notice of such application shall be placed in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least one time ten days prior to such
hearing. In addition to the publication, the city clerk shall cause a notice to
be posted in a conspicuous place on the property on which action is pending.
Such notice shall not be less than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four
inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less
than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed
upon the premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same
and shall be so posted at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. It
shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such
posted notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. The hearing shall be held at which all interested parties
shall be heard.
The city council may grant, grant with any conditions or safeguards upon the
property benefitted by a conditional use, or deny the application. Violation of
any such conditions or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a misdemeanor. No conditional
use permitting the erection or alteration of a building or other use shall be
valid for a period longer than one year unless the building is erected or
altered or the use established within that period.
The city administrator or any department director having a personal knowledge
of any violation of a permitted conditional use or a condition or safeguard
which is made part of the terms under which a conditional use is granted, may
deliver a written request to the building department director asking that the
director issue a notice of violation and demand for compliance to the person
owning the property subject to the permitted conditional use. Upon receipt of
said written request, the building department director shall investigate the
alleged violation and if it is determined that a violation exists, the building
department director shall send a notice of violation and demand for compliance
to the last known address of said person, one copy each, by ordinary first
class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, demanding that the
premises be brought into compliance with the conditional use by a date certain
and advising said person that in the event violations continue after said date,
that a request for revocation of the conditional use will be forwarded to the
city council for a public hearing and determination. The written notice shall
include a description of the violations and the underlying facts supporting
such allegations.
If the violations stated in the foregoing notice and demand are not eliminated
and the property brought into compliance with the city code and the permitted
conditional use by the date certain, the building department director shall
send such person a notice of hearing before the city council to consider
revocation of the conditional use permit. The public hearing shall be conducted
formally. The building department director, city attorney or their respective
designees shall present oral or written statements or reasons supporting
revocation of the permitted conditional use. The property owner(s) or designee
(s) shall present oral or written statements or reasons opposing the revocation
of the permitted conditional use. Statements by each side shall be limited to a
total time of one hour or less. Any interested person may be heard following
presentations on behalf of the city and the property owner. Upon conclusion of
the hearing, the city council may affirm, revoke, or modify the permitted
existing use.
36-91   Fees
At the time of filing of an application for a conditional use permit with the
city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing fee, as
provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which shall not be
refundable.
Article 36-VII
Supplemental Regulations
36-96   Off-Street Parking Requirements
36-97   Schedule Of Minimum Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements
36-98   Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
36-99   Home Occupations
36-100   Fences And Hedges; Corner Visibility
36-101   Performance Standards For Industrial Uses
36-102   Landscaping Requirements
36-103   Wind Energy Conversion Systems
36-104   Vehicle Sales And Rental Businesses In Existence On December 15, 2002;
Minimum Improvements Requirement
36-105   Vehicle Sales And Rental Businesses; New Businesses And Businesses
Relocating Or Expanding; Minimum Improvement Requirements
36-106   Conditional Uses; Salvage Yards
36-107   Public Facilities
36-108   Livestock Feeding Operations
36-96   Off-Street Parking Requirements
   A.   Purposes .
      1.   It is the intent of this section that all buildings and uses shall
provide off-street parking and loading facilities in a minimum amount as
required herein to meet the needs of such buildings and uses on private
property and under the same ownership as such buildings or uses. The
accommodations may consist of lots, garages, or other buildings, and
accessories; they may be surface facilities or facilities above or under the
ground.
      2.   It is the further intent of this section that all off-street parking
and loading spaces and facilities shall be sited and built according to the
requirements contained in this section, and shall require an application for
and issuance of a building permit pursuant to §
8-22.
   B.   Application . Each building or use hereafter constructed, and each
addition to or altered building or use shall be provided with off-street
parking and loading spaces as required herein. Each off-street parking space or
loading facility and space hereafter constructed, upon proper application and
permit being granted shall be sited and constructed pursuant to the
requirements of this section. No application for a building permit for such
building, addition, alteration, or use shall be approved unless accompanied by
a plot plan showing the location and amount of off-street parking and loading
spaces as required herein for the existing or proposed building or use and
including all such additions or alterations. No occupancy or use permit shall
be issued unless the required parking and loading facilities shall have been
provided in accordance with the approved plot plan. Requirements shall be
applicable to all zones and districts but not to include the following business
districts or tracts of land as identified below:
      1.   Central Business District . Beginning at the intersection of
Sycamore Street and First Street; thence westerly on First Street to Pine
Street; thence southerly on Pine Street to the southerly boundary of Courthouse
Addition; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition
to Locust Street; thence westerly on Division Street to Walnut Street; thence
northerly on Walnut Street to the alley between Division Street and First
Street; thence westerly on said alley to Cedar Street; thence northerly on
Cedar Street to the alley between Second Street and Third Street; thence
westerly on said alley to Elm Street; thence northerly on Elm Street to a point
40 feet north of the southerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad;
thence easterly parallel to and 40 feet from said right-of-way line to Walnut
Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to a point 100 feet north of the
northerly right-of-way line of South Front Street; thence easterly parallel to
and 100 feet from said right-of-way line to Kimball Avenue extended; thence
southerly on Kimball Avenue extended and Kimball Avenue to the alley between
Third Street and Second Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to the
point of beginning.
      2.   Fourth Street Business District . Beginning at the intersection of
Eddy Street and the alley in the block between Fourth and Fifth Streets; thence
easterly on the alley to the intersection of the alley with Sycamore Street;
thence southerly on Sycamore Street to 100 feet south of the south right-of-way
line of North Front Street; thence westerly on the aforesaid line to its
intersection with Eddy Street; thence northerly on Eddy Street to the point of
beginning.
      3.   Tracts of land ten acres or more used for seasonal events (one event
every three months) of not more than fourteen consecutive days in duration and
a minimum of fourteen days between events.
   C.   Area and Computation . An off-street parking space shall be of
appropriate dimensions of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access or
maneuvering area, ramps, columns, etc., and shall have a vertical clearance of
not less than seven feet. An off-street loading space shall be of appropriate
dimensions of not less than 360 square feet exclusive of access or maneuvering
area, ramps, columns, etc., and shall have a vertical clearance of not less
than fourteen feet. When determination of the number of off-street parking or
loading spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a
fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
   D.   Location . All off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot as
the building or within 300 feet of the lot. Permanent off-street parking spaces
shall not be permitted within the required front yard setback, provided,
however, that for a building containing three dwelling units or less, one space
per unit may be placed within the front yard setback if such space is not
directly in front of the building excluding garages or carports.
   E.   Collective Facilities . Off-street parking facilities for separate or
mixed buildings or uses may be provided collectively so long as the total
number of spaces is not less than the sum of the separate required spaces
except as provided below, and provided further, that the requirement concerning
location of such facility with respect to distance from the building or use
served shall be complied with. In order to eliminate a multiplicity of
entrances and exits and diminish traffic hazards to conserve space where space
is at a premium and to promote orderly development generally, the city council
is hereby authorized to plan and group parking facilities collectively for a
number of businesses in a given area, and especially in the central business
district, in such a manner as to obtain a maximum of efficiency and capacity in
parking and traffic movement.
EXCEPTIONS:
The total number of commercial parking spaces in a collective lot may be
reduced by 25% at the time of construction if the following qualifications are
met:
The overall development is planned for at least 20 acres and the commercial
property is primarily intended to serve the neighborhood and occupies no more
than 25% of the development not to exceed 10 acres.
All spaces required for residential units must be provided at the time of
occupancy.
Provisions are made in the development for hike/bike trails through the
development with connections to the commercial node.
Adequate property exists to within the parking area to add the required spaces
if it is determined that they are needed in the future.
   F.   Employee Parking . Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty on the premises at any one
time.
   G.   Design Standards. All off-street parking and loading facilities shall
be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley and
contain adequate and safe maneuvering areas. Detailed plans shall be submitted
to the public works director for approval of all curb cuts or driveway openings
before a permit may be obtained therefor. No signs shall be displayed except
such signs as required for the orderly use of the facilities. All facilities
shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface meaning asphaltic
cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick.
All parking lots containing five or more parking spaces, which are within 30
feet of property occupied by a residential use in a Large Lot Residential
Zoning District or of property within a Suburban Residential Zoning District,
Low Density Residential Zoning District, Medium Density Residential Zoning
District, High Density Residential Zoning District or Residential Development
Zoning District, shall provide a sight-obscuring fence or screen not less than
six feet nor more than eight feet in height along the boundary of the parking
lot adjacent to such districts. No fence or screen shall be required between
abutting parking lots or adjacent to an alley. The height of any fence or
screen shall be subject to other restrictions provided by the City Code.
   H.   Maintenance . The parking and loading facilities required by this
section shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the
facilities are designed to serve. Reasonable precautions must be taken by the
owners of particular uses to assure the use of the parking facilities only by
the employees or the social or business visitors of the premises for which the
facilities are provided. The facilities must be so designed and maintained as
not to constitute a nuisance at any time and must not be used in such a manner
as to constitute a hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
   I.   Reduction of Number of Spaces . Off-street parking or loading
facilities shall not be reduced in total extent, after their provision required
hereunder, except upon the approval of the Board of Adjustment, and then only
after proof that the parking or loading spaces are no longer required by reason
of a change in use of the premises of which the facilities are adjunct.
   J.   Requirement for Uses Not Listed . For any use not listed, the Board of
Adjustment shall determine the proper requirement by classifying the proposed
use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment.
   K.   Administration and Enforcement . The off-street parking and loading
provisions of this section shall be administered by the zoning official and
enforced by the chief building official, who shall also serve in advisory
capacity to the city council on matters relative to any phase of such
provisions.
   L.   Penalty for Violation . The provisions of parking and loading
facilities as required by this section shall be a continuing obligation of the
owner or sponsor of a given building or use so long as the building or use is
in existence and so long as parking and loading facilities are required
hereunder in connection therewith, and it shall be unlawful to discontinue,
change, or dispense with such facilities without establishing alternate
facilities that meet the requirements herein. Penalty provisions applicable to
this chapter as a whole shall apply to the violations of these provisions. In
addition, at such time as the facilities required hereunder shall fail to
continue to be available for the purpose, the building permit for the
structures to which the facilities are adjunct and the use or occupancy permits
issued for the premises shall be canceled and become null and void.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9151, effective 12-18-2007) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 09-09-
2009) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9574, effective 03-15-2016) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9689, effective 06-12-2018) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9720,
effective 02-06-2019) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9797, effective 11-11-2020)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9871, effective 02-09-2022)
36-97   Schedule Of Minimum Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements
Uses Parking Requirements Loading Requirements
Uses                       Parking Requirements       Loading Requirements
Adult entertainment        One (1) space per 4        None required
establishments             persons of DOL
Bowling Alleys             Two (2) spaces per alley   One (1) space per
                                                      establishment
Churches, Synagogues, and  One (1) space per 8 seats  None required
Temples                    in main worship area
Clubs, including fraternal One (1) space per 1000     None required
organizations              s.f. of gross floor area
                           One (1) space per every
College/University         four (4) students of       Two (2) spaces per
                           occupancy plus one (1) per structure
                           employee.
Commercial Uses                                       
Agricultural Sales /       One (1) space per 5000     One (1) per establishment
Service                    s.f. of gross floor area
Automotive Rental / Sales  One (1) space per 1000     One (1) per establishment
                           s.f. of gross floor area
Automotive Servicing       Three (3) spaces per       None required
                           repair stall
Bars, Taverns, Nightclubs  Parking equal to 20% of    Two (2) spaces per
                           DOL                        establishment
Body Repair                Four (4) spaces per repair None required
                           stall
Equipment Rental / Sales   One (1) space per 1000     One (1) Space
                           s.f. of gross floor area
Campground                 One (1) space per camping  None required
                           unit
Commercial Recreation      One (1) space per 4         
                           persons of DOL
Communication Services     One (1) space per 1000     One (1) per establishment
                           s.f. of gross floor area
Construction Sales /       One (1) space per 1000     One (1) per establishment
Service                    s.f. of gross floor area
Food Sales (limited)       One (1) space per 600 s.f. One (1) per establishment
                           of gross floor area
Food Sales (general)       One (1) space per 400 s.f. Two (2) per establishment
                           of gross floor area
Furniture Sales            One (1) space per 1000     Two (2) per establishment
                           s.f. of gross floor area
General Retail Sales       One (1) space per 400 s.f. One (1) per establishment
establishments             of gross floor area
Laundry Services           One (1) space per 400 s.f. None required
                           of gross floor area
Restaurants (General)      Parking equal to 2 of      Two (2) spaces per
                           every 7 seats              establishment
Convalescent and Nursing   One (1) space per 5 beds   Two (2) space per
Home Services              plus 1 per employee on the structure
                           largest shift
                           One (1) space per employee
Day Care                   plus 1 space or loading    None required
                           stall per each 10 persons
                           of licensed capacity
Educational Uses, Primary  Two (2) spaces per         Two (2) spaces per
facilities                 classroom                  structure
Educational Uses,          Eight (8) spaces per       Two (2) spaces per
Secondary facilities       classroom plus 1 space per structure
                           employee on largest shift
Funeral Homes and Chapels  Eight (8) spaces per       Two (2) spaces per
                           reposing room              establishment
Group Care Facility        One (1) space per 4        Two (2) space per
                           persons of DOL             structure
                           One (1) space per 4        Two (2) space per
Group Home                 persons of licensed        structure
                           capacity
Guidance Services          One (1) space per 600 s.f. None required
                           of gross floor area
                           One and one-half (1 1/2)
                           spaces per 2 licensed
Hospitals                  beds; plus, .75 times the  Three (3) spaces per
                           maximum number of          structure
                           employees during the
                           largest shift.
Hotels and Motels          One (1) space per rental   One (1) space per
                           unit                       establishment
Housing                                               
                           One (1) space per two
Assisted-living facilities dwelling unit plus 1 space One (1) per structure
                           per employee on the
                           largest shift
Duplex                     Two (2) spaces per         None required
                           dwelling unit
Independent (restricted)   One (1) space per dwelling None required
facilities                 unit
                           Two (2) spaces per
                           dwelling unit for two (2)
                           or more bedrooms
Multi-family / Apartments  One and one-half (1.5)     None required
                           spaces per dwelling unit
                           for one (1) bedroom and
                           efficiency units
Single-family, attached &  Two (2) spaces per         None required
detached                   dwelling unit
                           .75 times the maximum      Two (2) spaces per
Industrial Uses            number of employees during establishment
                           the largest shift
Libraries                  One (1) space 1000 s.f. of One (1) per structure
                           gross floor area
Boarding Houses / Bed and  One (1) space per rental   None required
Breakfasts                 units
                           Three (3) spaces per staff
Medical Clinics            doctor, dentist,           None required
                           chiropractor
Manufactured Home Park     Two (2) per dwelling unit  None required
Offices and Office         One (1) space per 400 s.f. None required
Buildings                  of gross floor area
Roadside stands            Two (2) spaces per         None required
                           establishment
Service Oriented           One (1) space per 400 s.f. One (1) per establishment
Establishments             of gross floor area
Theaters, Auditoriums, and One (1) space per 4        One (1) space per
Places of Assembly         persons of DOL             establishment
Veterinary Establishments  Three (3) spaces per staff None required
                           doctor
Wholesaling / Distribution One (1) space per 2        Two (2) spaces per
Operations                 employees on the largest   establishment
                           shift
 
Design Occupant Load (DOL)
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No.
8976, effective 6-8-2005) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,001, effective 11-19-
2024) (Amended by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
36-98   Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
   A.   Standard parking stall dimensions shall not be less than 9 feet by 20
feet or 10 feet by 18 feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and
out of the space. Where the end of the parking space abuts a curbed area at
least 5 feet in width (with landscaping and sidewalk), an overhang may be
permitted which would reduce the length of the parking space by 2 feet. Such
overhang shall be measured from the face of the curb. For standard parking
lots, minimum dimensions shall be as follows:
Parking Configuration
 90-degree 60-degree 45-degree
Parking Configuration
                             90-degree 60-degree 45-degree
Aisle Width (A)
One-way traffic              -----     18 feet   14 feet
Two-way traffic              24 feet   20 feet   20 feet
End Parking Bay Width (B)
Without overhang             18 feet   20 feet   19 feet
With overhang                16 feet   18 feet   17 feet
Center Parking Bay Width (C) 18 feet   18 feet   16 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d2d1cce0f34f560dc979feb6a482dca982b5a456/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4355.png]
 
   B.   Minimum dimensions for a parallel parking space shall be 9 feet by 23
feet
   C.   Minimum parking dimensions for other configurations or for parking lots
with compact car spaces shall be determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
36-99   Home Occupations
The following are the minimum standards required for a Home Occupation:
   A.   There shall be no external or externally visible evidence of the home
occupation, business or profession whatsoever. There shall be no signage or
advertising, linking the residential property with the home occupation.
   B.   There shall be no machinery other than that normally found in a home.
   C.   There shall be no contact at the premises with customers or clients
other than by telephone or mail, except as detailed below:
      1.   Music, cultural, art, or dance instruction may be given to up to
four pupils at one time on any residential property and that number can be
increased to 8 pupils on residential properties with at least 3 additional
paved off street parking spaces for the first additional pupil and one
additional paved parking space for each of the next three allowable pupils.
      2.   Children may be dropped off at an In Home Daycare.
   D.   No one other than the resident(s) can work from that site except that
up to two non-resident employees may be present on the site for In Home Daycare
operations as permitted and defined by the State of Nebraska.
   E.   No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental sales
related to services provided.
   F.   No exterior storage (including storage within detached buildings/
garage) is permitted.
   G.   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
The above listed characteristics of a home occupation shall not be construed to
restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises, provided, this
exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or
nursery.
All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in
accordance with Neb. R.R.S. 1943, Sec. §71-1902.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9923 on 3/28/2023
Amended by Ord. 9976 on 5/21/2024
Amended by Ord. 10,025 on 7/9/2025
36-100   Fences And Hedges; Corner Visibility
   A.   There shall be no fences, hedges, or other continuous foliage higher
than 36 inches above roadway surface except that trees of a greater height may
be permitted if all foliage is removed to a height of five feet above the base
of such tree within the sight triangle.
   B.   Fences and Hedges; Other Visibility . On portions of a lot not covered
by the corner visibility restriction, the height of fences, hedges, and
foliage, continuous five feet or more, shall be limited in the following
manner:
      1.   Maximum front yard fence height of thirty-six (36) inches for solid
fences (including picket, palisade, fabric weave chain link, "good neighbor",
solid planking fencing styles).
      2.   Maximum front yard fence height of forty-eight (48) inches for open
fences (including chain link, split rail, or wrought iron, where spacing/
thickness of fence construction materials allows for an essentially
unobstructed view.
      3.   Maximum front yard hedge/foliage height of thirty-six (36) inches.
      4.   On all other portions of lot lines, fences, hedges and other
foliage, barriers may not exceed a height of ninety-six (96) inches.
   C.   Fences and Hedges; Height . Fences, hedges, and other continuous
foliage erected within the building portions of a zoning lot may conform with
the height limits of such buildings but shall be subject to any building code
provisions which may be applicable for buildings.
   D.   Fences and Hedges; Measurement . Height of fences, hedges or other
continuous foliage shall be measured from the nearest top of roadway surface or
the official established grade thereof, whichever is the higher.
   E.   Fences and Hedges; Exceptions . The city council may direct as a
condition for granting a conditional use that fences, hedges, or other
continuous foliage of a height and location in excess of these regulations be
placed; provided, that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing
corner visibility as provided for herein.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-101   Performance Standards For Industrial Uses
The following standards shall be met unless there are greater standards
required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality.
   A.   Physical Appearance . All operations shall be carried on within an
enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition
may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be
stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily
visible from a street. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the storage of
vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, manufactured homes, or similar
equipment when in operable condition.
   B.   Fire Hazard . No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable
gasses, acid, liquids, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels,
motor fuels and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other
regulations of the City of Grand Island.
   C.   Noise . No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess
of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily
peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line and
when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the
natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include
breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges.
   D.   Sewage and Liquid Wastes . No operation shall be carried on which
involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground, liquid waste
of any radioactive or poisonous nature or chemical waste which are detrimental
to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and
installations.
   E.   Air Contaminants .
      1.   Air Contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number
One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for
one four minute period in each one-half hour. Light colored contaminants of
such a capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or
greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
      2.   Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by
any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two tenths
(0.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees
Fahrenheit, except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which
time it may equal but not exceed six tenths (0.6) grains per cubic foot as
corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
      3.   Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot
reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied
the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever
such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to
cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of
persons or to the public in general; or to endanger the comfort, repose,
health, or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public
in general, or to cause, or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage
to business, vegetation, or property.
      4.   Odor . The emission of odors that are generally agreed to be
obnoxious to any considerable numbers of persons, shall be prohibited.
Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment
causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that
strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that
such odors as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall
not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of this regulation.
      5.   Gasses . The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not
exceed five (5) parts per million, carbon monoxide shall not exceed five (5)
parts per million. All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot line.
      6.   Vibration . All machines including punch presses and stamping
machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such
vibration exceed a displacement of three thousands (0.003) of an inch measured
at the zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be
permitted in this zone.
      7.   Glare and heat . All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces
shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line.
No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot
line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than
five (5) degrees Fahrenheit.
   F.   Physical Appearance . Salvage yards and other similar operations shall
be effectively enclosed or shielded from adjacent properties on all sides by
means of a sight-obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet in height, in good
repair, and constructed of conventional fence building materials and techniques
as approved by the chief building official. No inventory or salvage materials
of any nature may be stacked within fifty (50.0) feet of the fence to a height
greater than said fence.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007)
36-102   Landscaping Requirements
   A.   Purpose . The landscaping and screening regulations are intended to
improve the physical appearance of the community; to improve the environmental
performance of new development by contributing to the abatement of heat, noise,
glare, wind and dust; to promote natural percolation of storm water and
improvement of air quality; to buffer potentially incompatible uses from one
another; and, to protect and enhance the value of property and neighborhoods
within the city.
   B.   Applicability .
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to the following zones:
Medium Density Residential Zone, Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zone,
High Density Residential Zone, Residential Office Zone, Light Business Zone,
General Business Zone, Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone, Heavy Business Zone,
Industrial Estates Zone, Light Manufacturing Zone, Heavy Manufacturing Zone,
Commercial Development Zone, Residential Development Zone and Travel
Development Zone. Landscaping of lands within districts such as the Central
Business District and Fourth Street Business District, as defined elsewhere in
this code and/or below, shall be exempt from this section. Properties subject
to Streetscape Improvement Projects supported by Business Improvement Districts
created for the purpose of establishing and/or maintaining district wide
landscaping plans shall be exempt from this section as long as the Business
Improvement District is in effect.
         a.   Old Potash Highway District: COMMENCING AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER
OF SECTION 13, TOWNSHIP 11 NORTH, RANGE 10 WEST OF THE 6TH P.M., CITY OF GRAND
ISLAND, HALL COUNTY, NEBRASKA, SAID POINT ALSO BEING THE POINT OF BEGINNING;
THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE EAST OF THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER OF SAID SECTION 13;
THENCE EASTERLY ALONG A LINE BEING 100' NORTH OF AND PARALLEL TO THE SOUTH LINE
OF SAID SECTION 13 TO A POINT ON THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION 13; THENCE
SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID EAST LINE TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SECTION 13;
THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SECTION 24, TOWNSHIP 11 NORTH, RANGE 10
WEST OF THE 6TH P.M., CITY OF GRAND ISLAND, HALL COUNTY, NEBRASKA; THENCE
WESTERLY ALONG A LINE BEING 100' SOUTH OF AND PARALLEL TO THE NORTH LINE OF
SAID SECTION 24 TO A POINT ON THE WEST LINE OF WESTGATE INDUSTRIAL PARK
SUBDIVISION IN THE CITY GRAND ISLAND, HALL COUNTY, NEBRASKA; THENCE NORTHERLY
ALONG SAID WEST LINE TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID SUBDIVISION, SAID POINT
ALSO BEING ON THE NORTH LINE OF SAID SECTION 24; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID
NORTH LINE TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall apply to the Airport Overlay
Zone with the exception that three shrubs may be substituted for each required
shade or ornamental tree to conform to standards of wildlife management
required near an airport.
      3.   The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development,
including surface parking, on each lot or site upon application for a building
permit, except as follows:
         a.   Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or
structure.
         b.   Remodeling, rehabilitation or improvements to existing uses or
structures which do not substantially change the location or building footprint
of existing structures, or the location and design of parking facilities or
other site improvements. However, additions or enlargements of existing uses or
structures, which increase floor area or impervious coverage by more than 25%
adjacent to the existing street frontage, shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, which shall only apply to that portion of the lot or site where
the new development or use occurs.
         c.   Residential structures containing three dwelling units on a
single lot, or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
      4.   Landscaping which exists on any property shall not be altered or
reduced below the minimum requirements of this section, unless suitable
substitutions are made which meet the requirements of this section, pursuant to
a site plan approved by the city.
      5.   Any conflict between this section and another section of this
chapter shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive provision.
   C.   Nonconforming Status . Any property or use of property, which as of
August 1, 2004 or any amendment hereto is lawfully nonconforming only as to the
regulations relating to landscaping, may be continued in the same manner as if
the landscaping were conforming.
   D.   Definitions . The following definitions shall be used for terms
contained within this section:
Buffer yard. A landscaped area provided to separate and significantly obstruct
the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
Canopy tree . A deciduous tree having a minimum mature height of 30 feet and a
minimum caliper of 1 inch at the time of planting. One canopy tree equals two
understory/ornamental or evergreen trees.
Evergreen tree . An evergreen or conifer tree having a minimum mature height of
20 feet and a minimum 2 gallon container size or bare root/ball equivalent at
the time of planting.
Landscaped area . That area within the boundaries of a given lot consisting
primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs,
flowers, vines, groundcover and other organic plant materials (this does not
include plant materials typically used as a cash crop). Tall varieties of
native and ornamental grasses may be planted and left in their natural state in
selective and limited locations, deemed appropriate by the city. Inorganic
materials such as brick, stones, aggregate, ponds or fountains may be used
within landscaped areas, provided that such materials comprise no more than 35
percent of the required landscaped area. Flat concrete or asphalt, other than
walkways five feet or less in width, may not be used within a required
landscaped area.
Minimum equivalent street landscaping . The minimum landscaped area which must
be provided in a street yard, expressed as a percent of the total area
contained within that street yard.
Shrub . A deciduous or evergreen plant having a minimum height of 18 inches at
the time of planting, with a maximum mature height of less than 10 feet.
Street yard .
      1.   The area of a lot or parcel which lies between any street property
line and the fronting walls of any building or buildings on the parcel. The
street yard shall follow all irregularities or indentations in the front wall
of the building, excluding minor projections or indentations such as steps or
unenclosed porches. For the purposes of defining the street yard area, the
front wall shall be extended from the outermost corners of the building,
parallel with the fronting street, until intersecting with the side property
line [see Attachment B hereto]. Street yard depth shall not exceed 100 feet for
the purposes of calculating the minimum equivalent street landscaping area
requirement.
      2.   On lots or parcels with multiple buildings, the street yard area
shall be defined by all building front walls having direct, visual frontage
onto the street. Any space between buildings equal to 15 percent of the length
of such frontage, but in no case more than 100 feet, shall be considered an
extension of the continuous building front wall for the purpose of delineating
the street yard.
Understory/ornamental tree . A flowering or non-flowering deciduous tree having
a maximum mature height of 30 feet and a minimum caliper of 2 inch at the time
of planting.
   E.   Street Yard Landscaping Standards .
      1.   Street yard landscaping shall be provided adjacent to each street
property line and within street yards, as set forth below, in accordance with
an approved site landscaping plan.
      2.   Minimum equivalent street landscaping area:
Minimum Equivalent Street Landscaping Area
Zoning District Percent of Street Yard (%) Minimum Landscaping Depth of Street
                                           Yard*** (ft.)
Minimum Equivalent Street Landscaping Area
Zoning District Percent of Street Yard (%) Minimum Landscaping Depth of Street
                                           Yard*** (ft.)
R3SL            65                         20
R3              65                         20
R4              60                         10
RO              30                         10
B1              25                         10
B2              20*                        10*
AC              20                         20*
B3              0                          0
ME              20                         20
M1              20                         20
M2              20                         10
M3              20                         10
TD              30                         30
CD              **                         30
RD              **                         10 or 30
 
*Unless otherwise established in an approved Streetscape Improvement Project.
**As determined by approved plan
      3.   When a lot contains more than one street frontage, the area of all
street yards and the proposed street yard landscaped areas may be combined for
the purposes of determining compliance with this section.
      4.   Any required street yard landscaping shall include the following
minimum shrub and tree plantings (or an appropriate equivalent as determined by
the city) for every 100 feet (any fraction of .5 or less rounded to the next
lowest number; any fraction exceeding .5 rounded to the next highest number) of
property line adjacent to a public street right-of-way: 1 canopy tree; 1
understory/ornamental or evergreen tree; 3 shrubs. Existing trees or shrubs
approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this
provision.
   F.   Buffer Yard and Parking Landscaping Screening Standards .
      1.   Buffer yard landscaping shall be installed and maintained adjacent
to the affected common side or rear property line(s), when a use is established
in a more intensive zoning district located adjacent to a less intensive zoning
district, as set forth below:
 
More Intensive Zoning  Required Buffer Yard Width  Less Intensive Zoning
District               (ft.)*                      District
RO, B1, B2, AC, CD, TD 10                          TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R3SL,
                                                   R4, RD
                                                   TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R3SL,
ME, M1, M2, M3         20                          R4, RO, RD, CD, TD, B1, B2,
                                                   B2, AC, B3
 
*When an alley, street or railroad R.O.W. separates adjacent districts
requiring a buffer yard, the buffer yard width shall be halved.
      2.   Buffer yard landscaping is intended to provide screening of loading
docks, refuse collection points, truck/equipment parking, sources of noise,
glare, light, dust, or other negative impacts. Buffer yard landscaping shall
include hedges or screens of evergreen or approved deciduous plant material,
capable of providing a substantial opaque barrier, and attaining a minimum
height of 6 feet within three years of planting. Opaque fencing may also
supplement the vegetative plantings, but shall be installed no closer to the
property line than the width of the required buffer yard.
      3.   Buffer yard landscaping and parking landscaping screening strips
shall not be placed on an easement.
      4.   A parking landscaping screening strip, having a Minimum Landscaping
Depth of Street Yard as identified above, shall be installed along any parking
area adjacent to a public street right-of-way. No parking area shall contain
more than 100 spaces except as allowed within these regulations. If a greater
number of parking spaces is required, separate parking areas shall be provided,
and shall be separated from other parking areas by landscaped dividing strips,
having a minimum width of 6 feet. These strips shall include trees, shrubs,
grasses and other vegetative coverings for a creative aesthetic appearance. A
parking landscaping screening strip shall also count towards meeting any
requirements associated with minimum equivalent street or buffer yard
landscaping.
Alternate plans for parking lots with more than 500 spaces may submitted for
approval by a committee comprised of the Planning Director, Building Department
Director and Public Works Director with recommendations from other appropriate
city staff. The Committee shall establish criteria for the review and approval
of larger parking lots based on but not limited to the following areas of
concern: overall area and types of landscaping provided shall not be less than
would be required under the conventional regulations, provision for storm water
management and filtering using best available practices, provisions for
adequate lighting, fire protection and security throughout the lot, provisions
for pedestrian access through and around the lot, and provisions for pedestrian
access to the site requiring said parking lot.
      5.   A development may continue to comply with the buffer yard
landscaping requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its initial
building permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or property is rezoned
to a less restrictive zoning district which requires additional buffer yard
landscaping.
   G.   Site Plan Requirements .
      1.   A site plan showing the required street yard, buffer yard and/or
parking screening landscaping shall be submitted to the city for review and
approval as part of the application for a building permit. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
         a.   Location of proposed landscaping drawn to scale.
         b.   Location, size, type and condition of proposed plant and non-
plant landscaping materials including fences, walks, ponds, fountains, benches,
lighting and irrigation systems.
         c.   Estimated date of completion of the installation of all plantings
and finishing materials.
   H.   Installation and Maintenance Requirements .
      1.   Required landscaping areas shall be installed and maintained in a
neat, clean, orderly and healthful condition. Maintenance shall include proper
pruning of trees and shrubs, mowing of lawn and grass areas, weeding, removal
of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants consistent with this section when
necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings.
      2.   The installation of landscaping shall be completed prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit for buildings on the property, or commencement
of the intended use of the property.
      3.   If, at the time of commencement of the intended use of the property
or application for a certificate of occupancy, any required landscaping has not
been installed or completed due to seasonal or climatic conditions or plant
material being unavailable, the developer or owner of the property shall submit
the following to the Building Department:
         a.   A request for extension of the proposed completion date for
installation of the required landscaping, stating the reason for the request,
the property owner's current mailing address, and a commitment to complete the
installation of the landscaping by a date certain, not to exceed six months
from the building completion date.
         b.   A drawing showing the plan and layout of the landscaping areas.
         c.   A cost estimate for the installation of the landscaping area.
         d.   A bond, certificate of deposit, letter of credit, cash or other
financial surety as may be approved by the City Attorney guaranteeing faithful
performance of the owner or developer's commitment to complete installation of
the required landscaping and payable to the City of Grand Island in the event
that the developer fails to carry out the commitments described in sub-
paragraph (H)(3)(a) above.
Upon approval of the foregoing request for extension of time to complete the
landscaping installation, the owner or developer shall be issued a conditional
certificate of occupancy or a conditional letter authorizing commencement of
use of the property by the Building Department. The owner or developer shall
complete the installation of the landscaping in accordance with the commitments
made pursuant to sub-paragraph (H)(3)(a) above, and, upon inspection and
approval by the Building Department, a certificate of occupancy or commencement
of use letter shall be issued. All limitations on the use of the property
relating to landscaping are deemed to be of no force or effect at that time,
and the City shall release the surety or other security submitted by the owner
or developer.
      4.   If the owner or developer has not installed the required landscaping
with the commitments made pursuant to sub-paragraph (H)(3)(a) above, the owner
or developer shall be deemed to have granted the City or its officers,
employees, agents or representatives permission to enter upon the property to
install the required landscaping in accordance with the plan submitted pursuant
to sub-paragraph (H)(3)(c) above using the surety or security filed by the
owner or developer as payment for said installation. The Building Department
shall send the owner or developer written notice of default and intention to
enter onto the property to install required landscaping by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and ordinary first class mail sent to the last known
address of said owner or developer at least five (5) business days prior to
making such entry.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9256, effective 04-07-2010) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9419, effective 02-15-2013) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9422, effective 04-02-
2013) (Amended by Ordinance No. 9738, effective 07-10-2019) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 9766, effective 04-08-2020)
36-103   Wind Energy Conversion Systems
   A.   Definitions . The following are defined for the specific use of this
section.
      1.   Aggregate Project shall mean projects that are developed and
operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately
owning one or more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated
infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility
may be owned by a separate entity but are also part of the aggregated project.
      2.   Commercial WECS shall mean a wind energy conversion system of equal
to or greater than 100 kW in total name plate generating capacity.
      3.   Connector Line shall mean any power conductor that carries
electrical power from one or more wind turbines to the point of interconnection
with the distribution system.
      4.   Hub Height shall mean the distance from ground level as measured to
the centerline of the rotor.
      5.   Meteorological Tower shall mean, for purposes of this regulation, a
tower which is erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus
other data relevant to siting a Wind Energy Conversion System. Meteorological
towers do not include towers and equipment used by airports, the Nebraska
Department of Roads, or other applications to monitor weather conditions.
      6.   Micro Wind Energy Conversion System (MWECS) shall mean a wind energy
conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control
or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 5 kW and
which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Rotor Diameter shall not exceed 7 feet.
      7.   Property Line shall mean the boundary line of the area over which
the entity applying for a Wind Energy Conversion System permit has legal
control for the purpose of installing, maintaining and operating a Wind Energy
Conversion System.
      8.   Public Conservation lands shall mean land owned in fee title by
State or Federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes,
including but not limited to State Wildlife Management Areas, State Parks,
federal Wildlife Refuges and Waterfowl Production Areas. For purposes of this
regulation, public conservation lands will also include lands owned in fee
title by non-profit conservation organizations, Public conservation lands will
also include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to
public agencies or non-profit conservation organizations.
      9.   Rotor Diameter shall mean the diameter of the circle described by
the moving rotor blades.
      10.   Small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) shall mean a wind
energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated
control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity not less than 5
kW and not more than 100 kW or has a rated capacity of not more than 5 kW and a
rotor diameter of greater than 7 feet and which is intended to primarily reduce
on-site consumption of utility power.
      11.   Substations shall mean any electrical facility to convert
electricity produced by wind turbines to a higher or lower voltage for
interconnection with transmission lines.
      12.   Total Height shall mean the highest point, above ground level,
reached by a rotor tip or any other part of the Wind Energy Conversion System.
      13.   Tower shall mean the vertical structures, including the foundation
that supports the electrical generator, rotor blades, or meteorological
equipment.
      14.   Tower Height (Ground Mounted) shall mean the total height of the
Wind Energy Conversion System, between the ground level at the base of the
tower and the top of the tower, exclusive of the rotor blades.
      15.   Tower Height (Roof Mounted) shall mean the total height of the Wind
Energy Conversion System, between the roof level at the base of the tower and
the top of the tower, exclusive of the rotor blades.
      16.   Transmission Line shall mean the electrical power lines that carry
voltages of at least 69,000 volts (69 KV) and are primarily used to carry
electric energy over medium to long distances rather than directly
interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail customers.
      17.   Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) shall mean an electrical
generating facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory
facilities, including but not limited to: power lines, transformers,
substations and meteorological towers that operate by converting the kinetic
energy of wind into electrical energy, which may be used on-site or distributed
into the electrical grid.
      18.   Wind Turbines shall mean any piece of electrical generating
equipment that converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical
energy using airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
      19.   Vertical Axis Wind Turbine. A wind energy conversion system design
where the rotating shaft is perpendicular to the ground and the cups or blades
rotate parallel to the ground.
   B.   Micro Wind Energy Conversion Systems .
Purpose. It is the purpose of this wind energy regulation to; promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of wind energy and to encourage the development of
residential scale generation systems as they become affordable as determined by
the residents of Grand Island and Hall County.
Requirements. Residential wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted as
an Accessory Use within any zoning district. Certain requirements as set forth
below shall be met:
      1.   Tower Height.
         a.   Shall be limited by the size of the property. Tower height shall
not exceed the fall zone for the property.
      2.   Minimum Lot Size.
         a.   Towers shall be permitted on all lots or parcels with a permitted
principal use.
      3.   Fall Zone.
         a.   Fall Zone is the total height and any underlying setbacks for
ground mounted MWCES.
         b.   Fall Zone is the 125% of the tower height and any underlying
setbacks for roof mounted MWCES.
      4.   Setbacks.
         a.   No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors,
may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site;
tower must meet required underlying setbacks.
      5.   Noise.
         a.   MWCES shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closet
neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.
         b.   The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as
utility outages and/or severe wind storms, wind speeds of greater than 50 miles
per hour.
      6.   Approved Wind Turbines.
         a.   MWCES must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies
program of the California Energy Commission or any other small certification
program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.
      7.   Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes.
         a.   Applications for MWCES shall be accomplished by standard drawings
of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and footings.
         b.   An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with
official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and
certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
      8.   Compliance with FAA Regulations.
         a.   MWCES must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations within the airport approach zone.
         b.   No MWCES shall be installed within the regulated airport approach
zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport
has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a MWECS. A copy of a
certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional
Airport informing them of the owners’ intent to install the MWCES must be
submitted with the building permit application.
      9.   Compliance with National Electrical Code.
         a.   Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code and the National Electric Safety Code.
      10.   Utility Notification.
         a.   No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
         b.   Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
Setbacks. Minimum setbacks from all property lines shall be equal to the Fall
Zone as defining in (B)(3) above.
   C.   Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective
and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site
consumption of utility supplied electricity.
Requirements. Small wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted as an
Accessory Use within any district. Certain requirements as set forth below
shall be met:
      1.   Tower Height.
         a.   Shall be limited by the size of the property. Tower height shall
not exceed the fall zone for the property.
      2.   Minimum Lot Size.
         a.   Towers shall be permitted on all lots or parcels with a permitted
principal use.
      3.   Fall Zone.
         a.   Fall Zone is the total height and any underlying setbacks for
ground mounted SWCES.
         b.   Fall Zone is the 150% of the tower height and any underlying
setbacks for roof mounted SWCES.
      4.   Setbacks.
         a.   No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors,
may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site;
tower must meet required underlying setbacks.
      5.   Noise.
         a.   SWCES shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closet
neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.
         b.   The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as
utility outages and/or severe wind storms, wind speeds of greater than 50 miles
per hour.
      6.   Approved Wind Turbines.
         a.   SWCES must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies
program of the California Energy Commission or any other small certification
program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.
      7.   Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes.
         a.   Applications for SWCES shall be accomplished by standard drawings
of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and footings.
         b.   An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with
official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and
certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
      8.   Compliance with FAA Regulations.
         a.   Small wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable
FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations within the
airport approach zones.
         b.   No SWCES shall be installed within the regulated airport approach
zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport
has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a SWECS. A copy of a
certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional
Airport informing them of the owners’ intent to install the SWCES must be
submitted with the building permit application.
      9.   Compliance with National Electrical Code.
         a.   Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code and the National Electric Safety Code.
      10.   Utility Notification.
         a.   No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
         b.   Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
Setbacks. Minimum setbacks from all property lines shall be equal to the Fall
Zone as defining in (C)(3) above.
   D.   Commercial/Utility Grade Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective
and efficient use of commercial/utility grade wind energy conversion systems
within the City of Grand Island and its Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction.
Requirements. Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy systems shall be a
Conditional Use within the AG-2 Secondary Agricultural District, the TA
Transitional Agriculture District, the AG-SI Special Agriculture/Industrial
Zone, AG-SE Special Agriculture District/Events Zone, and the AG-SC Special
Agriculture District/Conservation Zone. The following requirements and
information shall be met and supplied:
      1.   The name(s) of project applicant.
      2.   The name of the project owner.
      3.   The legal description and address of the project.
      4.   A description of the project including: Number, type, name plate
generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all wind
turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
      5.   Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind
turbines, feeder lines, and all related accessory structures. This site layout
shall include distances and be drawn to scale.
      6.   Certification by an Engineer competent in disciplines of WEC’s.
      7.   Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
      8.   The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines; included
with this shall be an area or zone in close proximity that meets all setbacks;
where actual WEC will be considered.
      9.   A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property
and surrounding area, including any other Wind Energy Conversion System, within
10 rotor distances of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System not owned by
the applicant.
      10.   Location of migratory waterfowl flyways, wetlands, scenic, and
natural areas within 1,320 feet of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
      11.   An Acoustical Analysis that certifies that the noise requirements
within this regulation can be met
      12.   The applicant shall supply the emergency management agency and/or
fire departments with a basic emergency response plan.
      13.   FAA and FCC permit, if necessary.
         a.   Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy conversion systems must
comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations within the airport zone.
         b.   No WEC shall be installed within the regulated airport approach
zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport
has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a SWECS. A copy of a
certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional
Airport informing them of the owners intent to install the SWCES must be
submitted with the building permit application.
      14.   Evidence that there will be no inference with any commercial and/or
public safety communication towers.
      15.   Decommissioning Plan as required by this regulation.
Setbacks. All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following
table:
 Wind Turbine-           Meteorological Towers
 Commercial/Utility WECS
                           Wind Turbine-            Meteorological Towers
                           Commercial/Utility WECS
                           150 feet from property
                           lines; however, the
Property Lines             setback may be less when One times the tower height.
                           two adjoining property
                           owners are within the
                           aggregate project.
Neighboring Dwelling Units 1,000 feet               One times the tower height.
Road Rights-of-Way*        One-half the rotor       One times the tower height.
                           diameter.
Other Rights-of-Way        NA                       NA
Wildlife Management Areas
and State Recreational     600 feet                 600 feet
Areas
Wetlands, USFW Types III,  600 feet                 600 feet
IV, and V
Other structures and       One-half the rotor
cemeteries adjacent to the diameter.                One times the tower height.
applicant's sites
Other existing WECS not    NA                       NA
owned by the applicant.
 
* The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned
change or expanded Right-of-Way is known.
   E.   Special Safety and Design Standards . All towers shall adhere to the
following safety and design standards:
      1.   Clearance of rotor blades or airfoils must maintain a minimum of 12
feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
      2.   All Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a sign or signs posted on the
tower, transformer and substation, warning of high voltage. Other signs shall
be posted on the tower base or perimeter fencing with emergency contact
information.
      3.   All wind turbines, which are a part of a commercial/utility WECS,
shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.
      4.   Consideration shall be given to painted aviation warnings on all
towers less than 200 feet.
      5.   Color and finish . All wind turbines and towers that are part of a
commercial/utility WECS shall be white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color.
Blades may be black in order to facilitate deicing. Finishes shall be matte or
non-reflective.
      6.   Lighting . Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of
strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA
permits and regulations. Red strobe lights shall be used during nighttime
illumination to reduce impacts on neighboring uses and migratory birds. Red
pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.
      7.   Other signage . All other signage shall comply with the sign
regulations found in the City Code.
      8.   Feeder Lines . All communications and connector lines associated
with the project distribution system installed as part of a WECS shall be
buried. Where obstacles to the buried lines create a need to go above ground,
these lines may be placed above ground only to miss the obstacle.
      9.   Waste Disposal . Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not
limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used
oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
      10.   Discontinuation and Decommissioning . A WECS shall be considered a
discontinued use after one year without energy production, unless a plan is
developed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator outlining the steps and
schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and accessory facilities
shall be completely removed to twelve feet below ground level within 180 days
of the discontinuation of use. The 180 days may be extended if proof of weather
delays is provided.
Each Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining the
anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable
life or upon use being discontinued. The cost estimates shall be made by a
competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of
decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with
decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will
be available to pay for decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory
facilities. The initial plan shall be submitted with the application. An
updated plan shall be filed with the City every 5 years.
      11.   Noise . No Commercial/Utility WECS shall exceed 50 dBA at the
nearest structure or use occupied by humans.
      12.   Interference . The applicant shall not cause interference with
power quality of area utility feeder circuits and shall not introduce noise to
the connected electric distribution system. WECS shall not cause interference
with any commercial or public safety electromagnetic communications, such as
radio, telephone, microwaves, or television signals. The applicant shall notify
all electric utilities and communication tower operators within five miles of
the proposed WECS location upon application for permits.
      13.   Environmental Permits . The developer shall present evidence the
project meets the environmental permitting requirements of all applicable state
and federal agencies if such permits are required.
      14.   Drainage System . The applicant shall be responsible for immediate
repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction,
operation or maintenance of the WECS.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9210, effective 04-08-2009) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9261, effective 06-09-2010)
36-104   Vehicle Sales And Rental Businesses In Existence On December 15, 2002;
Minimum Improvements Requirement
Improvements Requirement. All businesses engaged in automotive/truck/
recreational vehicle sales and/or rentals on or after December 15, 2002 shall
have the following minimum improvements and equipment:
   A.   All areas on which vehicles are displayed and offered for sale and/or
rental shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as
asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick. The Grand
Island City Council may, upon application for and approval of a conditional use
permit, waive this requirement for businesses that were operating at the same
location prior to March 9, 1999.
   B.   Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have a
principal building which complies with the Grand Island City Code and all
applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes.
   C.   Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have space
within the principal building or an accessory building for storage of all
vehicle parts, new or used. All such parts must be stored within said space.
   D.   All hazardous materials, regulated waste and used vehicle fluids shall
be stored and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the
rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the
Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. Tank storage of fluids and wastes
must be situated within a suitable overflow enclosure.
36-105   Vehicle Sales And Rental Businesses; New Businesses And Businesses
Relocating Or Expanding; Minimum Improvement Requirements
Beginning December 15, 2002, all new, relocating or expanding businesses
engaged in automotive/truck/recreational vehicle sales and/or rentals shall
have the following minimum improvements and equipment:
   A.   All areas on which vehicles are displayed and offered for sale and/or
rental shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as
asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick.
   B.   Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have a
principal building which complies with the Grand Island City Code and all
applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes.
   C.   Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have space
within the principal building or an accessory building for storage of all
vehicle parts, new or used. All such parts must be stored within said space.
   D.   All hazardous materials, regulated waste and used vehicle fluids shall
be stored and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the
rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the
Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. Tank storage of fluids and wastes
must be situated within a suitable overflow enclosure.
   E.   Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall comply with
the Grand Island City Code landscaping and screening regulations and minimum
off-street parking and loading space requirements prior to commencing
operations.
36-106   Conditional Uses; Salvage Yards
All salvage yards shall be subject to the following conditions as part of their
permitted conditional use:
   A.   In addition to the information required pursuant to §
36-88, an application for a conditional use for a salvage yard shall include a
site plan for the premises showing the layout of the proposed operation,
building and infrastructure locations, property dimensions, drainage and
landscaping.
   B.   All structures located or constructed on the salvage yard premises
shall comply with the Grand Island City Code and all applicable building,
electrical, plumbing and fire codes.
   C.   All hazardous materials and regulated waste shall be received, stored,
and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the rules and
regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality.
   D.   All operations of a salvage yard, including those which are ancillary
and indirectly related to the salvage yard such as administration, parking,
equipment and/or container storage shall be conducted on the premises subject
to the permitted conditional use.
   E.   All premises on a salvage yard shall be kept and maintained in a clean
and orderly manner, using the best practices of the industry, with no loose
garbage, litter, refuse or waste materials on the premises except those kept in
short term storage for processing. The persons operating the salvage yard shall
on a regular and routine basis inspect all areas adjacent to the salvage yard
and clean up any materials which originated from the salvage yard.
   F.   Physical Appearance . Salvage yards and other similar operations shall
be effectively enclosed or shielded from adjacent properties on all sides by
means of a sight-obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet in height, in good
repair, and constructed of conventional fence building materials and techniques
as approved by the chief building official. No inventory or salvage materials
of any nature may be stacked within fifty (50.0) feet of the fence to a height
greater than said fence.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007)
36-107   Public Facilities
Unless specifically prohibited, public facilities (eg. schools, fire stations,
police stations, government offices) owned and operated by a government entity
are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the setbacks and rules for
that district.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9720, effective 02-06-2019)
36-108   Livestock Feeding Operations
   1.   The following setbacks and design standards are the minimum sanitation
and odor practices for the City of Grand Island and its extra-territorial
jurisdiction. In addition, the City Council of Grand Island, when considering
the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, may impose more
restrictive requirements. These requirements should consider such things as:
      a.   property values
      b.   dust
      c.   lighting
      d.   waste disposal
      e.   dead livestock
   2.   A Conditional Use Permit may be approved after public notice has been
given and public hearing is conducted as required by law
   3.   Agricultural operations of 1,000 animal units and under are considered
a farm as defined in §
36-8 and do not require a Conditional Use Permit, see §
36-54(A)(1)(c) hereof
   4.   All existing livestock feeding operations that have been granted a
conditional use permit may expand within their designated level; except for the
20,000 animal units and above which requires a new Conditional Use Permit for
each expansion beyond 20,000 animal units as outlined in Table 1, without
applying for another conditional use permit. All new livestock feeding
operations and those expanding to the next level shall require a Conditional
Use Permit and shall be located no less than at a distance from non-farm
residences or other residences not on an owner's property in any affected
zoning district as hereafter described:
      a.   Livestock feeding operations (LFO) will be categorized either as
Environmentally Controlled Housing (ECH) operations or Open Lot Operations.
Livestock feeding operations having more than one type of feeding operation at
one location shall be categorized according to the operation which constitutes
the majority of the total operation. Each operation type shall be classified in
one of four levels according to total number of animal units in the operation
at any one time. Levels will include:
 
Class I facility   = 301 — 1,000 animal units
Class II facility  = 1,001 — 5,000 animal units
Class III facility = 5,001 — 20,000 animal units
Class IV facility  = 20,001 or more animal units
 
      Livestock Feeding Operations having more than one type of feeding
operation at one location shall be categorized according to the total number of
animal units.
TABLE 1: Livestock Feeding Operations Spacing and Distance (Distances given in
feet)
Size of Proposed LFO in Animal Units. Non-farm or Other Residence and Other
                                      LFOs (feet)
Size of Proposed LFO in Animal Units. Non-farm or Other Residence and Other
                                      LFOs (feet)
Class I 301-1000      ECH             1,320
                      OPEN            1,320
Class II 1001-5000    ECH             5,280
                      OPEN            2,640
Class III 5001-20,000 ECH             5,280
                      OPEN            2,640
Class IV 20,000+      ECH             7,920
                      OPEN            3,960
 
ECH = Environmentally Controlled Housing
OPEN = Open Lot Operations
      b.   Livestock feeding operations having more than 1,000 animal units
shall also locate at a distance as specified under the environmentally
controlled housing or open lots, in Table 1 from a platted residential area,
public park, recreational area, church, cemetery, religious area, school,
historical site, and residential district
      c.   All livestock feeding operations over 20,000 animal units shall be
required to obtain a new Conditional Use Permit prior to any expansion, unless
it meets the standards of the exceptions in the Exceptions Section
      d.   The applicant shall have a Pre-Submission meeting with the Hall
County Regional Planning Director and the Grand Island Building Director or
his/her designee to discuss tentative plans and layouts prior to formal
submission of the Conditional Use Permit for Livestock Feeding Operations
      e.   A proposed site plan and conditions or requirements of this
regulation pending approval of application for a proposed operation and waste
disposal plan from the Nebraska Department of Water, Energy and Environment
(NDWEE) or any other applicable state agency
      f.   The applicant shall submit all pertinent materials and designs, as
per the Conditional Use Permit application for Livestock Feeding Operations
      g.   The applicant shall file a copy of the proposed Operation and
Maintenance Plan and proposed Manure Management Plan. The approved plans shall
be submitted after NDWEE approval if different from the proposed. Said plans
shall be filed with the Hall County Regional Planning Director
      h.   The applicant shall file a copy of all approved NDWEE plans and
permits with the Hall County Regional Planning Director within thirty (30) days
after they are issued by the NDWEE
      i.   An annual manure management plan shall be submitted to the Hall
County Regional Planning Director which shall follow "best possible management
practices" as specified by NDWEE in order to protect the environment, as well
as the health, safety and general welfare of the public and their property
values
      j.   If stockpiling of animal waste and/or composting of dead carcasses,
as per state statutes, is part of the manure management plan, the waste shall
be maintained in an area as outlined in Table 1 of this section. Said area
shall also be located on the proposed site plan indicated in Subsection (A)
above
      k.   All ground surfaces within outside livestock pens shall be
maintained to insure proper drainage of animal waste and storm or surface
runoff in such a manner as to minimize manure from being carried into any
roadway ditch, drainage area or onto a neighbor's property
      l.   In no event shall any manure storage unit or system be constructed
where the bottom of the unit or system is either in contact with or below the
existing water table where the unit or system is to be constructed. Application
of manure in flooded areas of standing water shall be prohibited
      m.   All runoff or waste generated by a livestock feeding operation
facility shall be contained within the associated farming operation, or, on the
premises upon which the confined feeding facility or feedlot is located. The
applicant must verify that all runoff control ponds, lagoons, methods of manure
disposal and dust control measures are designed to minimize offal and air
pollution, and avoid surface or groundwater contamination as regulated by the
State of Nebraska
      n.   The setbacks from a livestock feeding operation to any non-farm
dwelling, other residence, or other livestock feeding operations are as follows
in Table 2.
TABLE 2: NON-FARM RESIDENCE SPACING AND DISTANCE (Distances given in feet)
 
                      SIZE OF EXISTING AGRICULTURAL OPERATION AND LFO IN A.U.
New Non-farm Residence 100-300 301-1,000 1,001-5,000 5,001-10,000 10,000+
                      0       1,980     3,960       3,960        5,940
 
   5.   EXCEPTIONS:
      a.   Any Class I livestock feeding operation use in existence as of
August 1, 2004, and which is located within the minimum space distance in Table
1 to any church, school, public use, other livestock feeding operation or
single-family dwelling within the current class or to the next class may expand
in animal units and/or land area under a Conditional Use Permit, provided the
proposed expansion complies with all the following limitations:
         1.   Such expansion will not decrease the distance from the livestock
feeding operation use to any church, school, public use, other livestock
feeding operation or single-family swelling not of the same ownership and not
on the same premises with said livestock feeding operation which is less than
the minimum prescribed spacing distance
         2.   Any physical expansion of the existing livestock feeding
operation shall be immediately contiguous with the facilities of the existing
livestock feeding operation
         3.   Such expansion may occur in phases over time, but in no event
shall such expansion(s) result in a livestock feeding operation that is more
than fifty (50) percent larger in animal units than the one-time capacity of
the use which existed as of August 1, 2004. Any expansion beyond this
limitation is prohibited unless a Conditional Use Permit for expansion that
meets all requirements is heard by and authorized by the City Council
         4.   If such expansion results in such livestock feeding operation
being required to obtain a new construction permit from NDWEE, introduction of
additional animals shall be prohibited until said permit is issued by NDWEE or
other applicable or successor agency has been issued and such livestock feeding
operation shall be operated at all times in a manner consistent with the
requirements of said permit and applicable regulations of this chapter.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,025, effective 07-09-2025)
Article 36-VIII
Flood Plain Regulations
36-117   Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purposes 
36-118   General Provisions
36-119   Development Permit
36-120   Establishment Of Zoning Districts
36-121   Standards For Floodplain Development
36-122   Flood Fringe Overlay District -- Including AO And AH Zones
36-123   Floodway Overlay District
36-124   Variance Procedures
36-125   Nonconforming Uses
36-126   Penalties For Violation
36-127   Amendments
36-128   Definitions
36-117   Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purposes
   A.   Statutory Authorization . The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning
regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022,
R.R.S. 1943 assigned the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations designed to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare.
   B.   Findings of Fact .
      1.   Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation . The flood hazard
areas of Grand Island, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   General Causes of the Flood Losses . These flood losses are caused
by: (a) The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases
in flood heights and velocities, (b) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by
uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately
elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
      3.   Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards . This Article uses a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of
interrelated steps.
         a.   Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected
frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The
base flood is selected for this Article. It is representative of large floods
which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this Article. It is in the general order of a
flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence
in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood
Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated March 2, 1983 as amended, and
any future revisions thereto.
         b.   Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic
engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas
to convey the base flood.
         c.   Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
         d.   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the
floodway profile.
         e.   Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the
floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the
base flood.
   C.   Statement of Purpose . It is the purpose of this Article to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in §
36-117(B)(1) herein by applying the provisions of this Article to:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses, which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or
velocities.
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities,
which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction.
      3.   Protect individuals from buying lands, which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      4.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
36-118   General Provisions
   A.   Lands to Which Article Applies . This Article shall apply to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island identified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 26, 2008, and any revisions thereto,
as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within
the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in §
36-120 of this chapter. In all areas covered by this Article, no development
shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop,
granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under such
safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the designated
representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the
general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where
specifically noted in §
36-121,
36-122, and
36-123 herein.
   B.   The Enforcement Officer . The Building Director and/or Planning
Director of the community, or their designee is hereby designated as the
community's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this Article.
   C.   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries . The boundaries of the
floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the
boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. In
such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will
resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question
shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land.
The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.
   D.   Compliance . Within identified special flood hazard areas of this
community, no development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other
applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions . It is not intended by this
Article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Article imposes greater restrictions,
the provision of this Article shall prevail. All other sections inconsistent
with this Article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   F.   Interpretation . In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   G.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability . The degree of flood protection
required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
Article does not imply that areas outside floodway and flood fringe district
boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damage. This Article shall not create liability on the part
of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may
result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
   H.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
Article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Article shall not be affected thereby.
   I.   Appeal . Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is
denied by the Building Director and/or Planning Director, the applicant may
apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment.
36-119   Development Permit
   A.   Permit Required . No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any
floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done
without first obtaining a separate permit for development.
   B.   Administration .
      1.   The Building Director and/or Planning Director or their designee, is
hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Article.
      2.   Duties of the Building Director and/or Planning Director shall
include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Review all development permit applications to assure that the
permit requirements of this Article have been satisfied.
         b.   Require verification, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood
hazard areas.
         c.   Require verification, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.
         d.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the
Building Director and/or Planning Director shall be presented certification
from a registered professional engineer as to the floodproof design.
   C.   Application for Permit . To obtain a floodplain development permit, the
applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for
that purpose. Every such application shall:
      1.   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the
floodplain development permit.
      2.   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by
lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or
development.
      3.   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended.
      4.   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction.
      5.   Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
      6.   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Director and/or Planning Director.
36-120   Establishment Of Zoning Districts
Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped floodplain
areas are hereby divided into the two following overlay districts: A floodway
overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in
the Flood Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)]. Within these districts all
new uses not meeting the standards of this Article and those standards of the
underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
36-121   Standards For Floodplain Development
   A.   No permit for development shall be granted for new construction,
substantial improvements and other development(s) including the placement of
manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE,
AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied.
   B.   All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to
inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation was not
provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions
of this chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community
shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodplain data currently available
from Federal, State or other sources.
   C.   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the
applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial
improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated
developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any location as shown on
the Flood Insurance Study.
   D.   New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements,
prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments
shall require:
      1.   Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site
waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.
      3.   Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing
methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
      4.   All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or flood-proofed up
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   E.   Storage of Material and Equipment .
      1.   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited.
      2.   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
   F.   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that (a) all
such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (b) all
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage, (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards, and (d) proposals for development (including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivision) of five acres or fifty lots, whichever
is lesser, include within such proposals the base flood elevation.
36-122   Flood Fringe Overlay District -- Including AO And AH Zones
   A.   Permitted Uses . Any use permitted in §
36-123 shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be
permitted in the overlay district unless the standards of §
36-121 are met.
   B.   Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District .
      1.   Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
one foot above the base flood elevation. Uninhabited garage floors shall be at
or above the base flood elevation.
      2.   Require new construction or substantial improvements of non-
residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below that level
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer shall certify that the design standards of this section
are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Building Director
and/or Planning Director as set forth in §
36-119.
      3.   Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      4.   Within AH zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      5.   Manufacturing.
         a.   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in
accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that
over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific
requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
            (1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one
additional tie per side.
            (2)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.
            (3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying
a force of 4,800 pounds
            (4)   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
         b.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:
            (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision
            (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision
            (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
            (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which
a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood,
be elevated such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above
one foot above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this section be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one
foot above the base flood elevation, or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with provisions of this
section.
      6.   Recreation vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard
areas on the community's official map shall either (i) be on the site for fewer
than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii) meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements
for "manufactured homes" of this chapter. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
      7.   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
36-118 area areas designated as AO zones. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO zones:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified).
         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
            (1)   Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on
the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or
            (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification
shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
36-119.
         c.   Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
36-123   Floodway Overlay District
   A.   Permitted Uses . Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not
obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any other section. The following are
recommended uses for the Floodway District:
      1.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries,
forestry.
      2.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
      3.   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport
landing strips.
      4.   Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
   B.   New structures for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the
development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along
the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses
are subject to the standards of §
36-121 and §
36-122.
36-124   Variance Procedures
   A.   The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Grand Island
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this Article.
   B.   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide when it is alleged that
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Building Director and/or Planning Director in the enforcement or administration
of this Article.
   C.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in state
law.
   D.   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter; and
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   E.   Conditions for Variances .
      1.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items 8.52-8.56 below) have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood
discharge would result.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws.
      6.   The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of
a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage,
and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this Article.
36-125   Nonconforming Uses
   A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises as of August 1, 2004
or amendment of the chapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions
of this Article may be continued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this Article.
      2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   B.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except
that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this Article.
This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or
regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided
that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
36-126   Penalties For Violation
Violation of the provisions of this Article or failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Article or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$100.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other appropriate authority
from taking such other lawful action is as necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
36-127   Amendments
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Article may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any
and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973,
provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public
hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At least
10 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public
hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. These regulations are in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.
36-128   Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this Article its most reasonable application:
Appeal means a request for a review of the Building Director and/or Planning
Director interpretation of any provision of this Article or a request for a
variance.
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood means the flood having one percent chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year.
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
Existing Construction means (for the purposes of determining rates) structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before August 26, 1974.
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
Flood Fringe is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on
the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one
percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which
the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the
zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see definition of "flooding").
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a
local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of
the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
New Construction . For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction commenced on or after August
26, 1974.
Overlay District is a district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The underlying zoning district
designation does not change.
Principally Above Ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis;
(ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area is the land in the floodplain within a community
subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Start of Construction [for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
Variances is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
Article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
Article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Article 36-IX
Board Of Adjustment
36-134   Establishment 
36-135   Membership
36-136   Rules
36-137   Meetings 
36-138   Minutes 
36-139   Appeal 
36-140   Notice 
36-141   Fees
36-142   Powers And Limitations 
36-143   Action And Vote Required 
36-144   Appeals To District Court
36-134   Establishment
The mayor with the consent of the city council shall appoint a board of
adjustment which shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional
member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of
the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed
for a term of three years and removable for cause by the appointing authority
upon written charges and after a public hearing.
36-135   Membership
Any citizen within the zoning jurisdictional area of the City shall be eligible
for membership. One regular member only of the board of adjustment shall be
appointed from the City membership of the planning commission, and loss of
membership on the planning commission by such member shall also result in
immediate loss of membership on the board of adjustment and appointment of
another planning commissioner to the board of adjustment.
36-136   Rules
The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its
affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.
36-137   Meetings
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such
other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his or her absence
the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
36-138   Minutes
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be
a public record.
36-139   Appeal
Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of an
administrative officer, provided, such appeal shall be taken within ten days
after the decision of the administrative officer, by filing with the office
from whom the appeal is taken, and with the clerk of the board, written notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
36-140   Notice
The board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal, give public
notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the City one time at
least ten days prior to such hearing, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. The hearing shall be
public and any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
36-141   Fees
Prior to the filing of the appeal with the clerk of the board and the
administrative officer from whose decision the appeal is requested, the
appellant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing fee, as provided by a
fee schedule approved by the city council, which shall not be refundable.
36-142   Powers And Limitations
The board of adjustment shall, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards
as may be established by the city council, have the following powers:
   A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures.
   B.   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning
regulation, requests for interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other
special questions upon which the board is authorized by any such regulation to
pass.
   C.   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation under this chapter would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional
and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an
appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as
to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of this code or any ordinance or resolution. No such
variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds that:
      1.   The strict application of the zoning regulations would produce undue
hardship;
      2.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same zoning district and the same vicinity;
      3.   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of variance; and
      4.   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable
and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of
convenience, profit, or caprice.
No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or
situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not
of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the
formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the zoning
regulations.
36-143   Action And Vote Required
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members
of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.
36-144   Appeals To District Court
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may appeal as provided by Section 19-912, Reissue Revised
Statutes of 1943 (in full).
Article 36-X
Amendments, Enforcement, Permits, And Penalties
36-150   Amendments; Initiation And Application 
36-151   Amendments; Procedure
36-152   Amendment; Protest; Limitation
36-153   Hall County Regional Planning Director And Building Department 
36-154   (Reserved)
36-155   Certificate Of Occupancy; General 
36-156   (Reserved)
36-157   Certificate Of Occupancy; Land 
36-158   (Reserved)
36-159   Certificate Of Occupancy; Record 
36-160   (Reserved)
36-161   Penalties 
36-162   Remedies
36-150   Amendments; Initiation And Application
Amendments may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by
application signed by the owner of a parcel sought to be amended, or by a
purchaser under contract in writing duly executed by both buyer and seller, or
by the agent of any of the foregoing duly authorized to do so in writing. An
application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form and accompanied by
such information as required by the city council and herein prescribed. A copy
of the application and supplementary information shall be forwarded by the city
clerk to the planning commission for hearing and recommendation.
At the time of filing of an application for a rezoning amendment (map or text)
with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing
fee, as provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which shall not be
refundable.
36-151   Amendments; Procedure
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments.
Notice of such hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city at least one time ten days prior to such hearing. Notification of such
proposed amendment and hearing shall be sent to the proper school district or
districts at least ten days prior to such hearing. The commission may recommend
other property for amendment in addition to that sought in an application.
Following the hearing, the commission shall take action and shall transmit its
recommendation to the city council, a copy of which shall be sent to the
applicant and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the planning
commission. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission,
the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice
of such hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city at least one time ten days prior to such hearing. In addition to the
publication, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in a conspicuous
place on the property on which action is pending. Such notice shall not be less
than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four inches in width with a white or
yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in
height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon the premises that it is
easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least
ten days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing.
Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If the record
title owners of any lots included in such proposed change be nonresidents of
the municipality, then a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by
certified mail to them addressed to their last known addresses at least ten
days prior to such hearing. The provisions requiring that notice be posted on
the premises to be rezoned shall not apply in the event of a proposed change in
such regulations, restrictions, or boundaries throughout the entire area of an
existing zoning district or of such municipality, or in the event additional or
different types of zoning districts are proposed, whether or not such
additional or different districts are made applicable to areas, or parts of
areas, already within a zoning district of the municipality; but the only
requirement then shall be the publication of the notice in the newspaper as
provided in this section. The city council shall approve or disapprove the
proposed amendment. A majority vote of all the members of the city council
shall be required to adopt any zoning amendment. Notice of the final action
shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be sent to the planning
commission.
36-152   Amendment; Protest; Limitation
In case of a protest against such zoning district change, signed by owners of
twenty percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear
thereof extending three hundred feet therefrom, and of those directly opposite
thereto extending three hundred feet from the street frontage of such opposite
lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of
three-fourths of all the members of the city council. Whenever a change of land
use has been finally disapproved by the city council, neither the planning
commission nor the city council shall consider the same or similar application
for change of land use affecting the same property for a period of six months
from the date of such disapproval by the city council.
36-153   Hall County Regional Planning Director And Building Department
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Hall
County Regional Planning Director and Building Department, who shall have the
power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or
her duties in the enforcement of this chapter.
36-154   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-155   Certificate Of Occupancy; General
No vacant land shall be occupied and used hereafter until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the chief building official.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-156   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-157   Certificate Of Occupancy; Land
Certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in the use of
land shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used and a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the application has been made,
provided, such use is in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-158   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-159   Certificate Of Occupancy; Record
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the chief building official and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land
affected.
36-160   (Reserved)
(Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005)
36-161   Penalties
Pursuant to Section 19-913, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), the
owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any
provisions of this chapter has been committed or shall exist or lessee or
tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which violation has
been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or
any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who
maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100) for any one (1) offense. Each day of non-compliance
with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. However, nothing
shall deprive the citizen of his or her rights under the U.S. Constitution of a
jury trial.
36-162   Remedies
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land
is used in violation of Sections 19-901 to 19-914, Reissue Revised Statutes of
1943 (in full), or this code, or any regulation made pursuant to said sections,
the appropriate authorities of the City may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
Article 36-XI
Wireless Communication Towers
36-168   Purpose 
36-169   Definitions
36-170   Location Of Towers, Construction Standards And Collocation 
36-171   Application To Develop A Tower
36-172   Tower Development Permit, Procedure And Factors 
36-173   Preferred Tower Locations
36-174   Alternative Sites Analysis
36-175   Setbacks And Separation Or Buffer Requirements 
36-176   Illumination And Security Fences
36-177   Exterior Finish, Notice, Signs And Visual Impact 
36-178   Landscaping
36-179   Maintenance, Repair Or Modification Of Existing Towers 
36-180   Inspections
36-181   Maintenance 
36-182   Abandonment
36-183   Certificate Of Completion, Compliance And Appearance 
36-184   Satellite Dish Regulations
36-185   Severability
36-186   Conflicts
36-168   Purpose
The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) jurisdiction over
certain aspects of telecommunications services. This Article is intended to
regulate macro cell towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas in the
City in conformance with the Act without prohibiting or intending to prohibit
any person from providing wireless communications services. Telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas in the City shall be constructed in a way to
protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact through
careful design, siting, and camouflaging, to promote and encourage shared use/
collocation of towers and other antenna support structures rather than the
construction of additional single use towers, to avoid potential damage to
property caused by towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas by
ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained, repaired and removed when no longer used or are
determined to be structurally unsound and to ensure that towers and antennas
are compatible with surrounding land uses.
36-169   Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.
Antenna Support Structure means any building or structure other than a tower
which can be used for the location of telecommunications facilities.
Applicant means any person that applies for a Tower Development Permit.
Application means a process by which the owner of a tract of land within the
zoning jurisdiction of the City submits a request to develop, construct,
modify, or operate a tower upon such tract of land. The term application
includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in
whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the City concerning such
request.
Engineer means any engineer qualified and licensed by the State of Nebraska.
Owner means any person owning personal property, or real property with fee
simple title or a leasehold exceeding (ten) 10 years in duration to any tract
of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City who desires to develop,
construct, modify, or operate a tower upon such tract of land.
Person means an individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a
partnership, an association, a trust, or any other entity or organization.
Stealth means any telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which is
designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not
limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated
into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a
tower such as light poles, power poles and trees.
Telecommunications Facilities means any cables, wires, lines, antennas, or any
other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of
communications signals which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or
near a tower or antenna support structure. However, telecommunications
facilities shall not include:
   A.   Any satellite dish two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located
on real estate zoned AG, TA, RO, B1, B2, B3, M1, M2, M3 and ME.
   B.   Any satellite dish of one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of
the zoning applicable to the location of the satellite dish.
Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure which
supports Telecommunications Facilities. The term Tower shall not include non-
commercial amateur radio operators equipment as licensed by the FCC or a
structure supporting an antenna serving residential premises or dwelling units
exclusively.
Tower Development Permit means a permit issued by the City upon approval by the
Mayor and City Council of an application to develop a tower within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City; which permit shall continue in full force and effect
for so long as the tower to which it applies conforms to this Article. Upon
issuance, a Tower Development Permit shall be deemed to run with the land
during the permit’s duration and may be transferred, conveyed and assigned by
the applicant to assignees and successors-in-interest.
Tower Owner means any person with an ownership interest of any nature in a
proposed or existing tower following the issuance of a Tower Development
Permit.
All terms in this Article which are not specifically defined herein shall be
construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Orders, Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
36-170   Location Of Towers, Construction Standards And Collocation
   A.   Towers shall be permitted conditional uses of land in only those zoning
districts where specifically listed and authorized in this code.
   B.   No person shall develop, construct, modify or operate a tower upon any
tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City prior to approval of
its application for a Tower Development Permit by the Mayor and City Council
and issuance of the permit by the City. Applicants shall submit their
application for a Tower Development Permit to the Building Department in
triplicate and shall pay a filing fee in accordance with the City of Grand
Island Fee Schedule.
   C.   All towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas on which
construction is commenced within the zoning jurisdiction of the City after
February 12, 2020, shall conform to the Building Code and all other
construction standards set forth in the City Code, federal and state law, and
applicable Industry standards. Upon completion of construction of a tower and
prior to the commencement of use, an engineer's certification that the tower is
structurally sound and in conformance with all of the aforementioned applicable
regulatory standards shall be filed with the Building Department.
   D.   It is the policy of the City to minimize the number of towers and to
encourage the collocation of antennas of more than one wireless services
provider on a single tower.
36-171   Application To Develop A Tower
Prior to commencement of development or construction of a tower, an application
shall be submitted in triplicate to the Building Department for a Tower
Development Permit and shall include the following:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and if applicable,
the lessee of the tract of land upon which the tower is to be located.
Applicants shall include the owner of the tract of land and all persons having
an ownership interest in the proposed tower. The application shall be executed
by all applicants.
   B.   The legal description and address of the tract of land on which the
tower is to be located.
   C.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other
towers or useable antenna support structures within a one (1) mile radius of
the location of the proposed tower, including publicly and privately owned
towers or structures.
   D.   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has made diligent
but unsuccessful efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the
applicant's telecommunications facilities on a tower or useable antenna support
structure within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed tower location or
written technical evidence from an engineer that the applicant's
telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another
tower or useable antenna support structure within a one (1) mile radius of the
proposed tower location.
   E.   Written evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower will meet the
Building Code, all other construction standards set forth by the City Code and
federal and state law and applicable Industry standards.
   F.   Color photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower with
a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear
viewed from the nearest residential zoned property and nearest roadway, street
or highway.
   G.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, height and
width of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning district, adjacent
land uses and zoning districts (including when adjacent to other municipalities
or the County), adjacent roadways, a depiction of all proposed transmission
equipment, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings or renderings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, landscaping, fencing, and finished color, method of camouflage and
illumination, parking, utility runs and other information deemed necessary to
assess compliance with this Article.
   H.   A clear and complete written statement of purpose which shall minimally
include: (a) a description of the objective to be achieved; (b) a to-scale map
that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be
benefited by the proposed project; and (c) full-color signal propagation maps
with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s
current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed
site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the
proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site
without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed and signed by a
Nebraska-licensed professional engineer.
   I.   Descriptions and diagrams of the proposed tower, telecommunications
facilities and antennas, manufacturer's literature, appurtenances such as
buildings, driveway, parking area and fences or other security enclosures with
sufficient detail to allow persons reviewing the application to understand the
kind and nature of the proposed facility.
   J.   An application for a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 8 of the City Code.
36-172   Tower Development Permit, Procedure And Factors
After receipt of an application for a Tower Development Permit, the City Clerk
shall schedule a public hearing before the City Council to consider such
application. Notice of such application shall be placed in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City at least one (1) time ten (10) days prior to
such hearing. In addition to the publication, the City Clerk shall cause a
notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property on which action is
pending. Such notice shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches in height and
twenty four (24) inches in width with a white or yellow background and black
letters not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) inches in height. Such posted
notice shall be so placed upon the premises so that it is easily visible from
the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove,
mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. Any
person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The public hearing
shall be held at which all interested parties shall be heard. The City Council
may approve a Tower Development Permit as requested in the pending application
with any conditions or safeguards it deems reasonable and appropriate based
upon the application and input received at the public hearing or deny the
application. In all zoning districts in which towers are a permitted
conditional use of land, the Tower Development Permit shall be deemed a
conditional use permit for said tract of land.
36-173   Preferred Tower Locations
   A.   All new towers are permitted only after application of the following
siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (5):
      1.   manufacturing zones;
      2.   commercial zones;
      3.   other non-residential zoning districts;
      4.   parcels of land in residential zoning districts;
      5.   designated historic districts.
   B.   The applicant for a tower shall address these preferences in an
alternative sites analysis prepared pursuant to §
36-174 below.
36-174   Alternative Sites Analysis
   A.   For a tower, the applicant must address the City’s preferred tower
locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority
was not selected. The City’s tower location preferences must be addressed in a
clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three
(3) higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic
range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a
factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative
candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the
applicant rejected the alternative candidate.
   B.   A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection
may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant
provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify
at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.
   C.   For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative
sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity
objectives the applicant will provide (a) a description of its objective,
whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage or capacity; (b) detailed
maps or other exhibits with clear and concise Radio Frequency (“RF”) data to
illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative (whether it be
collocation or a more preferred location); and (c) a description of why the
alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the
objective.
36-175   Setbacks And Separation Or Buffer Requirements
   A.   All towers up to fifty (50) feet in height shall be set back on all
sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable
zoning district. Towers in excess of fifty (50) feet in height shall be set
back one additional foot for each foot of tower height in excess of fifty (50)
feet, except where such setback is from property owned, controlled and/or
maintained by the City of Grand Island and the City Council finds in granting
the permit that reducing such additional setback will not cause harm to the
intended use of the public property. The height of a tower shall be measured
from the grade at the foot of the base pad to the top of any telecommunications
facilities or antennas attached thereto. Setback requirements shall be measured
from the base of the tower to the property line of the tract of land on which
it is located.
   B.   Towers exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height may not be located in
any residential zoned district and must be separated from all residential zoned
land and occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a
minimum of two hundred (200) feet or one hundred percent (100%) of the height
of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
   C.   Towers of one hundred (100) feet or less in height may be located in
residential zoned districts provided said tower is separated from any
residential structure, school, church, and/or occupied structures other than
those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of one hundred percent (100%)
of the height of the proposed tower.
   D.   Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from
other towers:
      1.   Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers,
whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven
hundred fifty (750) feet.
      2.   Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all
other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet.
36-176   Illumination And Security Fences
   A.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In cases where there are residential
zoned properties located within a distance of 300% of the height of the tower,
any tower subject to this Article shall be equipped with lighting that
minimizes its effect on residential zoned properties.
   B.   All self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be enclosed within a
security fence or other structure designed to preclude unauthorized access.
Monopole towers shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will
preclude to the extent practical, unauthorized climbing of said structure.
36-177   Exterior Finish, Notice, Signs And Visual Impact
   A.   Exterior Finish . Towers shall have an exterior finish which enhances
compatibility with adjacent land uses, subject to review and approval by the
City Council as part of the application approval process.
   B.   Notice . For purposes of this Article, any Tower Development Permit
shall require notice to surrounding property owners located within two hundred
(200) feet of the legal boundary of the real property where the tower is to be
located. An applicant or its designee shall provide this list to the City.
   C.   Signs . No tower may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than
signage required by law or expressly permitted or required by the City.
   D.   Visual Impact . All towers are encouraged to be sited and designed to
minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling
public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with the proper
functioning of the tower.
36-178   Landscaping
All tracts of land on which towers, antenna support structures,
telecommunications facilities and/or antennas are located shall be subject to
the landscaping requirements of the City Code.
36-179   Maintenance, Repair Or Modification Of Existing Towers
All towers constructed or under construction on February 1, 1998 may continue
in existence as a non-conforming structure and may be maintained or repaired
without complying with any of the requirements of this Article. Nonconforming
structures or uses may not be enlarged or the degree of nonconformance
increased without complying with this Article, including applying for and
obtaining a Tower Development Permit. Any modification or reconstruction of a
tower constructed or under construction after February 1, 1998, shall require
compliance with the requirements of this Article including applying for and
obtaining a Tower Development Permit. Said application shall describe and
specify all items which do not comply with this Article and may request,
subject to approval by the Mayor and City Council, an exemption from compliance
as a condition of the Tower Development Permit.
36-180   Inspections
   A.   The City reserves the right to conduct an inspection of towers, antenna
support structures, telecommunications facilities and antennas upon reasonable
notice to the tower owner or operator to determine compliance with this Article
and to prevent structural and equipment failures and accidents which may cause
damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Inspections may be made to
determine compliance with the Building Code and any other construction
standards set forth in the City Code, federal and state law or applicable
Industry standards.
   B.   If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower, antenna support
structure, telecommunications facilities or antennas fail to comply with codes
or standards and constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon written
notice being provided to the owner, the owner shall have sixty (60) days to
bring such into compliance with the codes and standards. Failure to bring such
into compliance within said sixty (60) days shall constitute grounds for
removal at the owner’s expense.
36-181   Maintenance
The towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and
antennas shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair so that the same do not constitute a nuisance to or a danger to the life
or property of any person or the public.
36-182   Abandonment
If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of three hundred sixty-five
(365) days, the Building Department shall notify the tower owner that the site
will be subject to a determination by the Building Department Director that the
site has been abandoned. Upon issuance of a Notice to Show Cause by the
Building Department Director, the tower owner shall have thirty (30) days to
show by a preponderance of the evidence that the tower has been in use or under
repair during the period of apparent abandonment. In the event the tower owner
fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the
relevant period, the Building Department Director shall issue a final
determination of abandonment of the site and the tower owner shall have seventy
five (75) days thereafter to dismantle and move the tower. In the event the
tower is not dismantled and removed, the tower shall be declared a public
nuisance by the Building Department Director, or his/her designee and a written
request shall be directed to the City Attorney to proceed to abate said public
nuisance pursuant to §
20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the
real estate on which the tower is located or the owner of record of the said
real estate.
36-183   Certificate Of Completion, Compliance And Appearance
   A.   A certificate of completion will only be granted upon satisfactory
evidence that the tower was installed in substantial compliance with the
approved plans and photo simulations.
   B.   If it is found that the tower does not substantially comply with the
approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant shall make any and all such
changes required to bring the tower into compliance promptly.
   C.   The site and tower, including all landscaping, fencing and related
transmission equipment must be maintained at all times in a neat and clean
manner and in accordance with all approved plans.
   D.   All graffiti at a tower site must be removed at the sole expense of the
permittee after notification by the City to the owner or operator of the tower.
   E.   If any FCC, State or other governmental license or any other
governmental approval to provide communication services is ever revoked as to
any tower site permitted or authorized by the City, the permittee must inform
the City of the revocation within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such
revocation.
36-184   Satellite Dish Regulations
After February 1, 1998, installation of satellite dish antennas shall be
permitted within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island only upon
compliance with the following criteria:
   A.   Single family residences may not have more than one (1) satellite dish.
   B.   Multiple family residences with ten or less dwelling units may have no
more than one (1) satellite dish. Multiple family residences with more than ten
(10) dwelling units may have no more than two (2) satellite dishes.
   C.   In residential zoning districts, a satellite dish shall not be
installed in the required front yard setback area or side yard setback area.
   D.   All satellite dishes installed within the zoning jurisdiction of the
City after February 1, 1998, shall be of a neutral color such as black, gray,
brown, or such other color as will blend with the surrounding dominant color in
order to camouflage the dish.
36-185   Severability
If any clause, section, or any other part of this Article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Article shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and
effect.
36-186   Conflicts
These Macro Cell Towers regulations are in addition to other regulations in the
City Code. In case of a conflict between regulations, the more restrictive
shall apply.
Article 36-XII
Comprehensive Plan Relationship
36-188   Comprehensive Plan Relationship
36-188   Comprehensive Plan Relationship
This chapter is designed to implement various elements of the comprehensive
plan as required by state statutes. Any amendments to the zoning regulations or
Official Zoning Map shall conform to the comprehensive plan adopted by the
governing body.
Addendum A
Land Use Matrix
To_view_the_Land_Use_Matrix_in_PDF,_click_here.
CHAPTER 37
PLANNING And COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Article 37-I   Planning Commission
Article 37-II   Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Commission 
Article 37-III   Community Development Division 
Article 37-IV   Community Redevelopment Authority 
Article 37-V   Grand Island PACE District
Article 37-VI   Public Art Commission
Article 37-I
Planning Commission
37-1   Planning Commission; Created; Duties
37-2   Composition; Appointment Of Member
37-3   Term Of Members
37-4   Members; Compensation; Other Office
37-5   Removal Of Members; Vacancies
37-6   Powers And Duties Generally
37-1   Planning Commission; Created; Duties
Authority is hereby conferred upon the city council to enter into an interlocal
cooperation agreement to create a regional planning commission in joint
agreement with the County of Hall and any villages within the County of Hall
which may wish to participate; said regional planning commission to have the
full authority and responsibility of a city planning commission for the City of
Grand Island, Nebraska, as provided for and authorized by state statutes.
37-2   Composition; Appointment Of Member
The joint planning commission shall include four members who reside in the City
of Grand Island and who shall represent, insofar as possible, different
professions or occupations in the City, and who shall be appointed by the mayor
by and with the approval of a three-fourths vote of the city council.
37-3   Term Of Members
The term of each appointed city member of the regional planning commission
shall be three years, except that one city member of the first regional
commission appointed shall serve for a term of one year, one for a term of two
years, and two for a term of three years. No member shall be appointed for more
than two successive terms.
37-4   Members; Compensation; Other Office
All city members of the regional planning commission shall serve as such
without compensation and shall hold no other municipal office.
37-5   Removal Of Members; Vacancies
Any city member of the regional commission may, after a public hearing before
the city council, be removed by the mayor by and with the consent of a three-
fourths vote of the Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in
office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of all the members elected
to the council.
37-6   Powers And Duties Generally
It shall be the function and duty of the regional planning commission to
perform those duties as required by state law of city planning commissions or
as customary for planning commissions generally in the same manner as if a city
planning commission were appointed and acting pursuant to law.
Article 37-II
Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Commission
37-11   Interjurisdictional Planning Commission; Created; Duties
37-12   Composition; Appointment Of Members
37-13   Term Of Members
37-14   Interjursidicational Planning Commission; Meetings
37-15   Members; Compensation
37-16   Removal Of Members; Vacancies
37-17   Termination
37-11   Interjurisdictional Planning Commission; Created; Duties
An Interjurisdictional Planning Commission is hereby created with Merrick
County, Nebraska, pursuant to the requirement of Neb. R.R.S. §19-930, et seq.
Said Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall have the powers, duties,
responsibilities and functions of the regional planning commission for the City
of Grand Island in the unincorporated area of Merrick County that is within two
miles of the corporate boundaries of the City of Grand Island.
37-12   Composition; Appointment Of Members
The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall consist of six members. Three
members shall be chosen by the Mayor with the approval of the council from the
City's members on the Hall County Regional Planning Commission which acts as
the City's planning commission. The remaining three members shall be chosen by
the Merrick County Board from members currently serving on the Merrick County
Planning Commission.
37-13   Term Of Members
The term of each appointed member shall be for one year and until their
successors are appointed and qualified. The City of Grand Island members of the
Interjurisdictional Planning Commission may be reappointed to successive one-
year terms during their tenure on the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.
37-14   Interjursidicational Planning Commission; Meetings
The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings, at
least annually and on other occasions as necessary, to carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the commission. A majority of the members must be present
to constitute a quorum.
37-15   Members; Compensation
All members of the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation and without reimbursement for expenses incurred pursuant to
fulfilling the requirements of Neb. R.R.S. §19-930 through §19-933.
37-16   Removal Of Members; Vacancies
Any city member of the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission may, after a
public hearing before the city council, be removed by the mayor by and with the
consent of a three-fourths vote of the council, for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies
occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a member's term shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of all the members elected to the council.
37-17   Termination
The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall continue until such time as
the City of Grand Island and Merrick County agree by a majority vote of each
governing body to eliminate the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission. Upon
termination, jurisdiction shall transfer to the Hall County Regional Planning
Commission which is the planning commission for the city.
Article 37-III
Community Development Division
37-22   Community Development; Purpose
37-23   Community Development Division
37-24   Director; Appointment
37-25   Director; Duties
37-26   Entitlement Stakeholders Committee
37-22   Community Development; Purpose
The purpose of this article is to set forth the manner in which the City shall
exercise all the power and authority to engage in community development
activities granted to the City under the statutes of this state, including but
not limited to, the Community Development Law set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-
2101, et. seq. Pursuant to §18-2101.01 of that Act, the City hereby assumes all
the power and authority granted to an urban renewal authority under said Act.
37-23   Community Development Division
There is hereby created a division of the Regional Planning Department to be
known as the Community Development Division, which shall be responsible for the
performance of all administrative tasks involved in the implementation of the
City's community development projects, programs, policies, and procedures
adopted under the provisions of this article.
37-24   Director; Appointment
The director of the Regional Planning Department shall act as director of the
Community Development Division. The director shall be managed by and be subject
to the personnel rules for the City of Grand Island.
37-25   Director; Duties
The director of the Regional Planning Department shall be responsible for
performing the professional work involved in carrying out the purposes of this
article, for directing the work of the Community Development Division, and for
coordinating all the City's community development programs and projects.
37-26   Entitlement Stakeholders Committee
There is hereby created an Entitlement Stakeholders group consisting of
entities which have funded and/or are related to the data and studies providing
insight into funding programs for the Consolidated Plan and Annual Action Plan
for Community Development Block Grants. Six of the members shall be
representatives of the following organizations/groups: Economic Development
Corporation, Grow Grand Island, Grand Island Area Chamber of Commerce,
Community Redevelopment Authority, City Administration and Hall County Housing
Authority. The seventh member shall be a member of the Grand Island City
Council, as appointed by Mayor. All members shall serve without compensation.
New members/entities may be added by the quorum vote of the Entitlement
Stakeholders Committee. The entities themselves shall appoint a representative
from their organization to serve on the Entitlement Stakeholders Committee.
Members may be removed without cause by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. The Entitlement Stakeholders Committee shall establish such rules and
procedures as are necessary to carry out its duties. Entitlement Stakeholders
Committee shall have the following duties:
   A.   Investigate and discuss all existing and potential Community
Development Block Grant programs and projects.
   B.   Make recommendations on all existing and potential Community
Development Block Grant programs and projects, procedures, and all other
aspects of the Entitlement program.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9525, effective 04-01-2015) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9595, effective 08-16-2016)
Article 37-IV
Community Redevelopment Authority 
37-31   Community Redevelopment Authority; Creation
37-32   Officer
37-33   Director
37-34   Funds
37-35   City Council Liaison
37-31   Community Redevelopment Authority; Creation
There is hereby created the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of
Grand Island, Nebraska, pursuant to the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-
2102.01 (Reissue of 1991).
37-32   Officer
Five persons, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Grand Island, shall
constitute the Authority. The five members shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the approval of the City Council. The Mayor shall designate the term of
office for each member as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2102.01 (Reissue of
1991). The Authority shall select one of its members as chairperson and another
as vice-chairperson. The Authority shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
recommendations, which records shall be made available for public inspection
during regular business hours.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9962 on 2/14/2024
37-33   Director
The City Administrator shall designate a person to serve as the Director and Ex
Officio Secretary of the Community Redevelopment Authority, and that person
shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the Authority, including the
necessary administrative functions described in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2102.01
(Reissue of 1991).
37-34   Funds
All income, revenue, profits, and other funds received by the Authority shall
be deposited with the Treasurer of the City of Grand Island, as Ex Officio
Treasurer of such Authority without commingling such money with any other money
under the Treasurer's control. The money of the Authority shall be disbursed by
the Treasurer by check or draft only upon warrants, orders, or requisitions,
specifying the purpose thereof, duly executed by the Chairperson of the
Authority, or such other person as may be duly authorized and designated by the
Authority of any such activity.
37-35   City Council Liaison
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint one member of
the city council to act as a liaison between the City Council and the Community
Redevelopment Authority.
Article 37-V
Grand Island PACE District
37-36   Grand Island PACE (GI-PACE) District; Creation
37-37   Findings And Determinations
37-38   Title And Definitions
37-39   District Boundaries And Requirements Pursuant To Neb Rev Stat 13-3204
(3)
37-40   Minimum Program Eligibility Requirements
37-41   Estimated Economic Benefit; Waiver; Denial; Appeal
37-42   Project Eligibility
37-43   Application Approval
37-44   Assessment Contract
37-45   Assessment Levy
37-46   Debt Servicing
37-47   Assessment Term
37-48   Transfer Upon Sale; Movable Property
37-49   Transfer Upon Sale; Purchaser Assumes Responsibility
37-50   Marketing And Participant Education
37-51   Verification Of Operation
37-52   Authorization For PACE Program
37-53   Liability Of City Officials; Liability Of City
37-54   (Reserved)
37-55   (Reserved)
37-56   (Reserved)
37-57   (Reserved)
37-58   (Reserved)
37-59   (Reserved)
37-36   Grand Island PACE (GI-PACE) District; Creation
The City of Grand Island desires to create a clean energy assessment district
to enable property assessed clean energy financing for its property owners
while; to authorize the clean energy assessment district to enable third-party
lenders to accept applications and enter into financing agreements with
property owners within the boundaries of the district; and to create a clean
energy assessment district, which shall be known as the Grand Island PACE
District (“GI-PACE”), as authorized by Nebraska Revised Statute Sections 13-
3203 and 13-3204(3), which boundaries shall be the corporate boundaries of the
City of Grand Island and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
37-37   Findings And Determinations
That the City Council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska (the “City”),
hereby finds and determines as follows:
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§13-3201 to 13-3211, inclusive, the Property
Assessment Clean Energy Act (the “Act”), energy efficiency and the use of
renewable energy are important for preserving the health and economic well-
being of Nebraska’s citizens. Using less energy decreases the cost of living
and keeps the cost of public power low by delaying the need for additional
power plants. To further these goals, it is necessary for the City to promote
energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems. Upfront costs for
energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems may prohibit or
deter many property owners from making improvements. It is necessary for the
City to implement an alternative financing method through the creation of a
clean energy assessment district.
Financing energy projects to further these goals is a valid purpose and can be
accomplished through Property Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) financing, which
is used to overcome the upfront costs for energy efficiency improvements and
renewable energy systems by using private capital and equity, rather than
public debt.
Pursuant to the Act and Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3204, the City of Grand Island is
authorized to establish a clean energy assessment district so that owners of
qualifying property can access PACE financing for energy efficiency
improvements or renewable energy improvements to their properties located in
the City. The City also may enter into an agreement with one or more other
municipalities pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act, Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§13-801, et seq., for the joint creation, administration, or creation and
administration of clean energy assessment districts, pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. §13-3210. The City declares its intent that the provisions of this
Chapter shall be in conformity with federal and state laws. The City enacts
this Chapter pursuant to the Act, as amended.
37-38   Title And Definitions
Except the words and phrases specifically defined below or in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§13-3203, as amended, words and phrases used in this Article shall have their
customary meanings. As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings:
District . The City of Grand Island PACE District, created pursuant to this
Chapter, as authorized by Neb. Rev. Stat. §§13-3203 and 13-3204(3), which
boundaries shall be the corporate boundaries of the City and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
District Administrator . The GI-PACE committee consisting of the Planning
Director, Building Department Director, Public Works Director, Utilities
Director and City Attorney, or the designee of each, or a third-party
administrator selected by the City. The committee shall appoint a designee for
signatures.
Energy Project . The installation or modification of an energy efficiency
improvement or the acquisition, installation, or improvement of a renewable
energy system. Energy Projects shall be limited to projects having an estimated
cost of $250,000 or more.
PACE Financing . Funds provided to the owner(s) of qualified property by a
third-party lender, pursuant to the Act and this Chapter, for an energy
efficiency improvement or renewable energy system(s).
Qualifying Property . Commercial property, including multifamily residential
property having more than four (4) dwelling units, and industrial property
located in the District.
37-39   District Boundaries And Requirements Pursuant To Neb Rev Stat 13-3204
(3)
The City finds that the financing of energy efficiency improvements and
renewable energy systems is a valid public purpose. Such public purposes
include, but are not limited to, reduced energy and water costs, reduced
greenhouse gas emissions, economic stimulation and development, improved
property valuation, and increased employment.
   A.   The boundaries of the District shall be the corporate boundaries of the
City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as allowed pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 13-3204(1).
   B.   The District Administrator shall use a form contract, as contained in
the GI-PACE Manual, for assessment contracts among the City, the owner of the
qualifying property, and a third-party lender, governing the terms and
conditions of financing and annual assessments in accordance with the Act,
including Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3205(1), which provides for repayment of the
costs financed through annual assessments upon the qualifying property
benefited by the energy project.
   C.   The District Administrator is authorized to enter into assessment
contracts on behalf of the City.
   D.   The District Administrator will use a financing application process and
eligibility requirements, which shall be more specifically defined in a program
manual created by the District Administrator for financing energy projects in
accordance with the requirements of the Act and accepted by the third-party
lender.
37-40   Minimum Program Eligibility Requirements
Submission of an application, contained in the GI-PACE Manual, to the District
Administrator, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
   A.   Applicant name and contact information, including property owner and
developer;
   B.   Project location and legal description;
   C.   Identification of contractor or supplier, including anticipated PACE
contractor and a copy of the approved bid for the energy efficiency project;
   D.   Project description;
   E.   Total project cost; in an amount of not less than Two-Hundred Fifty
Thousand ($250,000.00) Dollars;
   F.   Description of proposed improvements;
   G.   Description of energy efficiency project to be financed;
   H.   Amount of requested assessment;
   I.   Interest rate on the PACE assessment and any required fees;
   J.   Term of assessment;
   K.   Energy savings report indicating estimated energy savings and estimated
cost savings for the energy project issued by a duly licensed Nebraska
Professional Engineer;
   L.   Whether the applicant is requesting a waiver of the estimated economic
benefit requirement;
   M.   Title report showing any mortgage or lien holders;
   N.   Lender consent;
   O.   Projected jobs created by PACE project;
   P.   Project environmental benefits;
   Q.   Funding source; and
   R.   All other such information as needed to demonstrate the project
complies with all the requirements of the Act.
37-41   Estimated Economic Benefit; Waiver; Denial; Appeal
The District Administrator may grant an applicant’s request to waive the
estimated economic benefit requirement. If the District Administrator denies
the applicant’s waiver request, the applicant may appeal the denial by
submitting a request in writing to the City Administrator for the City. The
appeal shall be mailed by certified mail or hand delivered to the City
Administrator within fourteen (14) days after the denial. The City
Administrator will review the matter on the record made by the District
Administrator and, after providing the applicant an informal opportunity to be
heard, the City Administrator will make the final decision.
37-42   Project Eligibility
The District Administrator shall review the application to determine whether
the energy project meets the eligibility requirements of the Act and this
Ordinance. An energy project shall not be eligible for PACE financing if the
qualifying property is subject to any of the following:
   A.   Delinquent ad valorem taxes;
   B.   Delinquent personal property taxes;
   C.   Delinquent special assessments;
   D.   Overdue or delinquent electric, water or sewer charges;
   E.   Involuntary liens, including but not limited to construction liens;
   F.   Notice of default pursuant to any mortgage or deed of trust related to
the qualifying property, or
   G.   If the property owner or property developer is delinquent in the
payment of any assessment required to be paid for any energy efficiency
improvement financed pursuant to the Act.
37-43   Application Approval
If the energy project is determined to be eligible under the terms of the Act
and as required in this Chapter, the District Administrator shall review the
application and approve, request additional information, or deny the
application at their discretion.
37-44   Assessment Contract
Upon approval of an application, the District Administrator is authorized to
proceed with and execute an assessment contract. The form Contract is attached
as “Exhibit A.”
37-45   Assessment Levy
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3205(7), annual assessments agreed to under an
assessment contract shall be levied against the qualifying property and
collected in accordance with the Act.
37-46   Debt Servicing
The District shall establish procedures to determine the following in the
future:
   A.   Subject to prior approval of the City Council, the District
Administrator or third party administrator shall establish provisions for an
adequate debt service reserve fund created under Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3209, if
applicable;
   B.   Subject to prior approval of the City Council, the District
Administrator or third party administrator shall establish provisions for an
adequate loss reserve fund created under Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3208, if
applicable; and
   C.   Any application, administration, or other program fees to be charged to
owners participating in the program that will be used to finance costs incurred
by the City as a result of the program.
37-47   Assessment Term
The assessment term shall not exceed the weighted average useful life of the
energy project paid for by the annual assessments.
37-48   Transfer Upon Sale; Movable Property
Any energy efficiency improvement that is not permanently affixed to the
qualifying property upon which an annual assessment is imposed to repay the
cost of such energy efficiency improvement must be conveyed with the qualifying
property if a transfer of ownership of the qualifying property occurs during
the assessment term.
37-49   Transfer Upon Sale; Purchaser Assumes Responsibility
Prior to the effective date of any contract that binds the purchaser to
purchase qualifying property upon which an annual assessment is imposed, the
owner shall provide notice to the purchaser that the purchaser assumes
responsibility for payment of the annual assessment as provided in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 13-3205(3)(d), and that the obligations set forth in the assessment
contract, including the obligation to pay annual assessments, are a covenant
that shall run with the land and be assessed upon future owners of the
qualifying property.
37-50   Marketing And Participant Education
In connection with providing PACE financing, the City will provide for
marketing and participant education.
37-51   Verification Of Operation
The City shall obtain, or applicable third-party lenders shall obtain and
provide to the City, written verification by a duly licensed Nebraska
Professional Engineer that the renewable energy system or energy efficiency
improvement was properly installed and is operating as intended.
37-52   Authorization For PACE Program
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3204(1), the District shall be governed by the
Grand Island City Council.
   A.   The District Administrator shall comply with the Act and the provisions
of this Chapter and follow any applicable City procurement policy and
procedures for selecting a third-party administrator, should a third-party
administrator be selected for the administration of the PACE program. Any such
third-party administrator must ensure that there is no financial requirement,
liability, or exposure to the District or City. The District Administrator as
defined in Section
37-38 of this ordinance may serve as the administrator of the PACE program for
the District and City.
   B.   The District or City may also engage the services of a state or local
financing agency for the purposes of providing conduit bond financing for the
District or City as part of its third-party administration.
   C.   Upon selection of a third-party administrator, that third-party
administrator may, on behalf of the City, accept applications for financing
energy efficient improvements within the District boundaries, facilitate the
financing application process, and review eligibility requirements for
financing energy projects in accordance with the requirements of the Act and as
accepted by the third-party lender.
   D.   The District may be expanded via the Interlocal Cooperation Act in
order to create a program of sufficient size and scale to attract qualified
third-party administrators and/or to promote energy efficiency across multiple
political subdivisions, as authorized under the Act.
37-53   Liability Of City Officials; Liability Of City
That notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, officers,
officials, employees, or agents of the City, the District, or Hall County shall
not be personally liable to any person or entity for any claims, liabilities,
costs, or expenses, of whatever kind or nature, under, arising out of, or
related to the City's or District’s participation in the District's PACE
Program or any PACE Financing, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE Assessments. Not in limitation of the foregoing,
the City has no liability to a property owner or lender for or related to
energy savings improvements or funding under a PACE Financing or Program, other
than to remit PACE Assessments received in accordance with the Act.
(Added Ordinance No. 9752, effective 11-6-2019)
37-54   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-55   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-56   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-57   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-58   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-59   (Reserved)
(Reserved by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
Article 37-VI Public Art Commission
37-60   Purpose of Article
37-61   Creation
37-62   Funding and Staff
37-63   Definitions
37-64   Composition
37-65   Appointment of Members
37-66   Removal of Members
37-67   Compensation of Members; Conflict of Interest
37-68   Rules of Procedure
37-69   Duties
37-70   Submission of Proposals
37-71   Specific Reservations
 
oCross reference: 
2-11 Boards and Commissions
37-60   Purpose of Article
The purposes of this article are:
   1.   To allow for the creation of a public art commission;
   2.   To provide a system of review for acceptance and placement of public
art gifts to the City;
   3.   To provide a system of review for the solicitation of public art
projects to the City;
   4.   To provide a means to improve and maintain visual and cultural aspects
of the City;
   5.   To expand public experience through exposure to culture through various
art forms which enhance and improve public facilities and the City's
environment;
   6.   To encourage and stimulate citizens, developers, landowners,
contractors, and architects to support displays of art for public enjoyment.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-61   Creation
There is hereby created a Public Art Commission.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-62   Funding and Staff
The City may appropriate such funds as it deems necessary for the proper
administration and functioning of the Public Art Commission. The City
Administrator, or their designee, shall provide administrative support to
Commission.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-63   Definitions
Art: Shall mean the application of skill and taste to tangible objects produced
according to aesthetic principles.
Artist: A practitioner of the visual fine arts, recognized by his or her peers
as a professional who produces visual art, as defined below.
Commercial Advertising: Shall mean all displays designed to promote a
commercial enterprise, a not-for-profit corporation, or an individual other
than a deceased public figure; or a display which includes commercial
components such as business names, logos, references, or promotional materials
except for those materials included on plaques placed by the Commission to
memorialize the identity of donors of public art.
Commission: The Public Art Commission.
Visual Art: Shall include, but is not limited to:
   •   Painting of all media, including both portable and permanently affixed
work such as murals;
   •   Sculpture, which may be in any material or combination of materials
suitable for public display;
   •   Other visual media, including but not limited to digital or electronic
displays, prints, drawings, stained glass, calligraphy, mosaics, photography,
clay, fiber and textiles, wood, metals, plastics, or other materials or
combination of materials, or crafts or artifacts of meaningful artistic merit.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-64   Composition
The commission shall have seven members, of which there shall be a member in
each of the following categories:
   •   Museum curator;
   •   Architect or landscape architect;
   •   Representative of a local nonprofit visual arts corporation or
association;
   •   Visual art teacher;
   •   Commercial or established visual artist or designer;
   •   Two at-large members with demonstrated interest or experience in the
visual arts.
Commission members shall be residents of the City, reside within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, or be employed at least 20 hours per
week within the City by a museum, architecture firm, school, or non-profit
visual arts corporation or association.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-65   Appointment of Members
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the City Council.
Four initial members of the Commission shall be appointed to 4-year terms and
three initial members shall be appointed to 3-year terms so as to stagger
terms. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three-year term.
In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the commission for any
reason, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy for the remainder of
the unexpired term in the same manner as the original term.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-66   Removal of Members
Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the City Council. Cause
may include, but is not limited to, consistent failure to attend meetings,
violation of the provisions of this article, or personal conduct which brings
the City or Commission into disrepute.
Notification to the Mayor, and acceptance thereof, that a member of the
Commission no longer meets qualification for the Commission in the position for
which they were appointed, has failed to attend three consecutive meetings, or
is deceased shall be deemed a vacancy upon acceptance of notice by the Mayor
and does not require further action by the City Council or Commission.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-67   Compensation of Members; Conflict of Interest
The members of the Commission shall serve without pay for the faithful
performance of their duties. No one, by service on the Commission, shall be
precluded from earning professional fees in the practice of their profession
because of such service. Commission members may not serve on any other City
Boards or Commissions. In any matters in which a Commission member has a
conflict of interest, the member shall abstain from discussion or voting.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-68   Rules of Procedure
   1.   Four regular members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
   2.   Four affirmative votes by regular members of the Commission shall be
necessary for final action on any matter.
   3.   The Commission shall, at its first meeting each calendar year, appoint
a Chairperson.
   4.   The Commission shall meet at such times as it may determine, or upon
call of the Chairperson.
   5.   The initial meeting of the Commission, and the first meeting each
calendar year, shall be convened by the Mayor, who shall preside over the
Commission as a non-voting member until such time as a Chairperson can be
elected.
   6.   The Commission may establish other standards and procedures consistent
with the provisions of this article as it deems necessary.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-69   Duties
The duties of the Commission shall be:
   1.   To make recommendations of any work of visual art to be acquired by the
City, whether by purchase, gift or otherwise, and to recommend and supervise
its proposed location;
   2.   To recommend the removal, relocation or alteration of any existing work
of visual art in the possession of the City;
   3.   To examine works of visual art and make recommendation to the City
Council in reference to the purchase of City-owned works of art;
   4.   To advise the City Council of the artistic merit and value of
paintings, sculptures and other fine art articles offered to the City as
donations or for purchase, or proposed for disposition by the City;
   5.   To confer with persons who have offered to donate or loan fine art to
the City which may be placed on public sites or in public buildings in an
endeavor to increase the aesthetic appeal and beauty of such public sites and
buildings and the City in general;
   6.   To investigate and process the means by which fine art can be obtained,
including the identification of grants which may be available for the purpose
of acquiring such fine art, whether through federal, state or other
governmental agencies or bodies through whom such grants may be obtained, and
generally do whatever may be necessary or appropriate to acquire such fine art,
and to bring such opportunities to the attention of the City Council;
   7.   To review both the proposed visual art and its proposed location for
aesthetic quality and harmony with proposed municipal construction;
   8.   To act as an advisory committee to the City Council, Public Library
Board, or other City boards, department, or commissions in all matters and
deliberations pertaining to visual art and aesthetics, if requested by such
body or department;
   9.   To encourage the display of visual art for public enjoyment;
   10.   To make recommendations concerning ongoing curatorship and maintenance
of city-owned visual art;
   11.   To evaluate the placement of public art in a manner which does not
interfere with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, ingress or egress
from property, safety and convenience, or reasonable access to and/or
maintenance of trees, shrubs, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes, and access to locations used for utility services and public
transportation;
   12.   To reduce unnecessary exposure of the City to injury or damage claims
and insurance liability; and to reduce or eliminate the impact of criminal
behaviors such as vandalism or graffiti through the use of materials suitable
for public art;
   13.   To report to the City Council, in writing, all of its recommendations,
deliberations and minutes of each meeting.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-70   Submission of Proposals
   1.   Prior to the acquisition, relocation, or disposal of works of visual
art by the City, the responsible department shall submit such proposal to the
Commission. The Commission shall make its recommendation in response to such
proposal, in writing to the City Council and responsible department within 30
days of such submittal.
   2.   Recommendations of the Commission shall include evaluation of such
factors as the Commission deems appropriate. The Commission is encouraged to
evaluate factors such as price, materials, labor, insurability, general quality
and merit, life-cycle, placement, and promotion of public art.
   3.   The Commission may request all plans, sketches, models, information
concerning history and competence of the artist, and all other information
deemed necessary to adequately review a proposal.
   4.   The Commission may request consultation of employees and officials of
the City as may be necessary to evaluate proposals and submissions, and must
take efforts to evaluate any impacts on public safety, welfare, health, or
compliance with law.
   5.   The Commission may make such public requests as funding allows and as
it deems necessary to facilitate its duties. The Commission may aid departments
of the City and the City Council in developing and evaluating requests for
proposals or calls for artists as may be necessary from time to time.
   6.   Proposals or submissions recommended by the Commission may not include
Commercial Advertising.
   7.   Proposals for the acquisition of art in any fashion other than an
absolute and unrestricted transfer of ownership to the City must be accompanied
by proof that the owner, donor, or applicant has provided proof that they have,
and will maintain, a public liability insurance policy in the form of a
commercial or comprehensive general liability policy which names the City as an
additional ensured and which has been purchased for a term consistent with the
proposed public display of said artwork.
   8.   Proposals which incorporate landscaping, trees, shrubbery, flowers, or
other material requiring maintenance shall be accompanied by a maintenance plan
and shall be evaluated for all costs associated therein.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
37-71   Specific Reservations
   1.   The Commission may not bind the City in any matter.
   2.   The Commission may not make recommendations which violate the law or
which constitute unlawful discrimination.
   3.   The Commission may not take actions motivated by personal financial
gain, the promotion of any candidate for political office, or the promotion of
religion.
   4.   The Commission may not grant, deny, or waive any license agreement or
permit.
   5.   The Commission may not recommend acquisition, donation, acceptance,
placement, or relocation, of any art which will be placed:
      a.   Within five feet of kiosk, bench, trash receptacle, or bicycle rack,
or three feet of mailbox, post, pole, or any area planted with grass, shrubs,
flowers, or trees; except that such standards may be waived if pedestrian
circulation space between such items and the work of art is not needed and
sufficient space for maintenance of such items and the work of art is provided;
if the original design of such items specifically provides for works of art in
an integrated design; or if the work of art may be incorporated into an
integrated design of such items;
      b.   Within the sight triangles of any street, alley, and/or driveway
intersection;
      c.   So as to reduce the clear, continuous sidewalk width to less than
eight feet;
      d.   Within five feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility;
      e.   Within five feet of any driveway or alley;
      f.   Within six feet of a display window or building entrance;
      g.   Within six feet of the curb face;
      h.   So as to impair or interfere with pedestrian traffic;
      i.   So as to interfere or impair the vision of operators of vehicles at
or near street intersections or roundabouts;
      j.   So as to require the pruning or removal of any tree, shrub, or
flowers except that such standard may be waived if such pruning or removal of
any tree, shrub or flowers would not diminish the aesthetic appearance, natural
form, value and/or health of such trees, shrubs, and the surrounding
landscaping;
      k.   Upon any highway right-of-way or any other federal aid highway
without the approval of the necessary State or Federal authorities, and in
accordance with any conditions of such approval.
   6.   The lack of such submittal to, or recommendation by, the Commission
shall not invalidate any project or acquisition undertaken by the City.
(Added by Ordinance No. 10,007, effective 01-28-2025)
CHAPTER 38
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
Article 38-I   Local Option Municipal Economic Development Program
Article 38-II   Good Life District Economic Development Program
Article 38-I   Local Option Municipal Economic Development Program
38-1   Economic Development Program Adopted
38-2   Tax Oversight Committee Serves as Citizen Advisory Review Committee
38-3   Reserved
38-4   Reserved
38-5   Reserved
38-6   Reserved
38-7   Reserved
38-8   Economic Development Program Administration
38-9   Local Option Economic Development Program Audit
38-10   Disclosure Of Confidential Information
38-11   Conflict With Plan
38-1   Economic Development Program Adopted
At an election held on November 8, 2022, the voters of the City of Grand Island
approved the continuation of an economic development program effective October
1, 2023 and continuing for a period of ten (10) years thereafter. The voters
also approved the annual appropriation of nine hundred and fifty thousand
dollars ($950,000) from local sources of revenue for the same term for the
purpose of funding the City of Grand Island Local Option Economic Development
Program as set forth in Exhibit 'A' to Resolution No. 2022-13, all as
authorized by the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act, R.R.S. 1943,
§18-2701, et seq. The Local Option Economic Development Program of the City of
Grand Island shall be available for public inspection in the office of the City
Clerk and posted on the City's web site.
HISTORY
Approved by Ord. 9908 on 12/6/2022
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-2   Tax Oversight Committee Serves as Citizen Advisory Review Committee
The Tax Oversight Committee established in Chapter 2 of the Grand Island City
Code shall sit as the citizen advisory review committee as authorized by the
Municipal Economic Development Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-2715 and shall fulfill
all duties of the citizen advisory review committee as set forth in the Local
Option Economic Development Program of the City of Grand Island.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-3   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9455, effective 10-15-2013)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-4   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-5   Reserved
(Amended by Ordinance No. 9039, effective 04-12-2006) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9455, effective 10-15-2013)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-6   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-7   Reserved
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-8   Economic Development Program Administration
The City Administrator or his/her designated representative shall be the
Program Administrator and shall be responsible for the administration of the
Economic Development Program of the City, shall be an ex-officio member of the
Tax Oversight Committee, and shall be responsible for assisting the committee
and providing it with necessary information and advice on the economic
development program. The City Finance Director will be responsible for
providing financial information to the committee and to the auditing firm that
does the annual audit.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-9   Local Option Economic Development Program Audit
The city shall provide for an annual, outside, independent audit of its
economic development program by a qualified private auditing business. The
auditing business shall not, at the time of the audit or for any period during
the term subject to the audit, have any contractual or business relationship
with any qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the economic
development program or any financial institution directly involved with a
qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the economic
development program. The results of such audit shall be filed with the city
clerk and made available for public review during normal business hours.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-10   Disclosure Of Confidential Information
All trade secrets, academic and scientific research work which is in progress
and unpublished or other proprietary or commercial information of a qualifying
business participating in the Economic Development Program of the city which if
released would give advantage to business competitors and serve no public
purpose shall be confidential. Members of the Tax Oversight Committee, in their
capacity as members and consistent with their responsibilities as members, may
be permitted access to business information received by the city in the course
of its administration of the economic development program, which information
would otherwise be confidential under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-712.05 or by
agreement with a qualifying business participating in the economic development
program. The mayor and city council shall designate by resolution other persons
who are authorized to have access to such confidential business information.
The unauthorized disclosure of any business information which is confidential
under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-712.05 by any person who knowingly releases such
confidential information other than to persons who are authorized to have
access to such information in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor and upon conviction or being found
guilty, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of three months in the
county jail or a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.
(Chapter 38 moved from Chapter 2 by Ordinance No. 9039, effective 04-12-2006)
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 9994 on 10/8/2024
38-11   Conflict With Plan
   Conflicts between the language of the Grand Island City Code and the
Economic Development Program Plan will be resolved in favor of the language
contained in the Plan.
(Added by Ordinance No. 9455, effective 10-15-2013)
Article 38-II   Good Life District Economic Development Program
38-12   Purpose and Acknowledgments
38-13   Boundaries
38-14   Definitions
38-15   Taxation and Revenue, General
38-16   Good Life District Occupation Tax
38-17   Allocated Sales Tax
38-18   Good Life District Program Fund
38-19   Applications to the Program Fund
38-20   Compliance, Modifications, and Program Restrictions
38-21   Amendment or Repeal of the Program Ordinance
38-22   Reservation of Governance Rights and Effect of Other Laws
38-12   Purpose and Acknowledgments
   The Mayor and City Council having been so authorized by the voters of the
City of Grand Island hereby establish a Good Life District Economic Development
Program as authorized by the Good Life District Economic Development Act.
   The purpose of this chapter is to effectuate and implement the voter
authorized program which will fulfil the purposes set forth in the Good Life
District Economic Development Act (“Act”), as may be amended from time to time,
within the boundaries of any approved Good Life District in the City of Grand
Island.
   The Program shall leverage the authorities contained in the Act, as may be
amended from time to time, to promote and develop the general and economic
welfare of the City of Grand Island and the State of Nebraska by providing
support for unique and transformational projects that will strengthen our
community, grow our economy, and strengthen our retail, entertainment, and
tourism industries.
   The Program recognizes the ability to use transformational development to
improve the economic well-being of our citizens and our community through job
creation, infrastructure, and other improvements that attract and retain
tourists and college graduates from around the state.
   The Program will focus on transformational and unique projects that generate
new economic activity, expand the tax base and generate additional state and
local taxes, create new economic opportunities, housing and jobs for residents,
and promote retail, entertainment, and dining attractions.
   This Program shall remain in effect until June 5, 2054, or until terminated
by the City as permitted by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4412(7), whichever occurs
first.
   The City of Grand Island, by passage of this Article and establishment of
the Program, recognizes the promises made by the Nebraska Legislature in
LB1317, as codified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4429, that the State of Nebraska
has pledged that the State will not alter, impair, or limit the rights vested
in the Act until such time as any authorized bond, together with applicable
interest, are fully met and discharged and such contracts are fully performed
in accordance with the Act, and the City acts in reliance on this assurance in
so establishing the Program.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-13   Boundaries
   The boundaries of the Good Life District Program Area are as follows:
   BEGINNING AT THE INTERSECTION OF THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF AIRPORT
ROAD/ U.S. HIGHWAY 281, AND THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BROADWELL AVENUE;
THENCE SOUTH, ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BROADWELL AVENUE, TO THE
INTERSECTION OF THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BROADWELL AVENUE, AND THE SOUTH
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE BNSF RAILWAY COMPANY, ALSO BEING THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF OLD HIGHWAY 2; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY, ALONG THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE OF OLD HIGHWAY 2, TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF
OLD HIGHWAY 2, AND THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE EAST LINE OF VETERANS LEGACY
SOUTH SUBDIVISION; THENCE SOUTH TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 5, VETERANS
LEGACY SOUTH SUBDIVISION, SAID POINT ALSO BEING ON THE SOUTH RIGHT OF WAY LINE
OF OLD HIGHWAY 2; THENCE SOUTH, ALONG THE EAST LINE OF THE VETERANS LEGACY
SOUTH SUBDIVISION, TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 4, VETERANS LEGACY SOUTH
SUBDIVISION, ALSO BEING A POINT ON THE NORTHEASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF
CUSTER AVENUE; THENCE SOUTH, TO AN EASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 3, VETERANS LEGACY
SECOND SUBDIVISION, SAID POINT ALSO BEING ON THE SOUTHWESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE OF CUSTER AVENUE; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY, ALONG THE NORTHEASTERLY LINE OF
LOT 3, VETERANS LEGACY SECOND SUBDIVISION, ALSO BEING THE SOUTHWESTERLY RIGHT-
OF-WAY LINE OF CUSTER AVENUE, TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 3, VETERANS LEGACY
SOUTH SUBDIVISION, ALSO BEING THE INTERSECTION OF THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF
CUSTER AVENUE AND THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SHERIDAN AVENUE; THENCE
SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG THE NORTH AND WEST LINES OF LOT 3, VETERANS LEGACY SOUTH
SUBDIVISION, ALSO BEING THE SOUTHEAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SHERIDAN AVENUE, TO
THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 3, VETERANS LEGACY SOUTH SUBDIVISION, ALSO
BEING THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL AVENUE AND THE
EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SHERIDAN AVENUE; THENCE WEST, ALONG THE NORTH RIGHT-
OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL AVENUE, TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE OF WEBB ROAD AND THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL AVENUE; THENCE
SOUTH, ALONG THE WEST RIGHT-OF WAY LINE OF WEBB ROAD, TO THE INTERSECTION OF
THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 13TH STREET AND THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF
WEBB ROAD; THENCE WEST, ALONG THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 13TH STREET, TO
THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 13TH STREET AND THE WEST
LINE OF THE EAST HALF OF SECTION 12, TOWNSHIP 11 NORTH, RANGE 10 WEST; THENCE
NORTH, ALONG SAID WEST LINE OF THE EAST HALF OF SECTION 12, TOWNSHIP 11 NORTH,
RANGE 10 WEST, TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL
AVENUE AND SAID WEST LINE OF THE EAST HALF OF SECTION 12, TOWNSHIP 11 NORTH,
RANGE 10 WEST; THENCE EAST, ALONG THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL
AVENUE, TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF WEBB ROAD AND THE
SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITAL AVENUE; THENCE NORTH, ALONG THE WEST RIGHT-
OF-WAY LINE OF WEBB ROAD, TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 6, TIMBERLINE SECOND
SUBDIVISION; THENCE EAST, TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 1, SCHUMANN
SUBDIVISION; THENCE NORTH, ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SCHUMANN SUBDIVISION TO THE
SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 8, SCHUMANN SUBDIVISION; THENCE WEST, ALONG THE SOUTH
LINE OF SAID LOT 8, TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 8, SAID CORNER ALSO
BEING ON THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF WEBB ROAD; THENCE NORTH, ALONG THE WEST
LINE OF SAID LOT 8, LINE ALSO BEING THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF WEBB ROAD, TO
THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 8; THENCE EAST, ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID
LOT 8, TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID LOT 8; THENCE NORTH, ALONG THE EAST LINE
OF SAID SCHUMANN SUBDIVISION, TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 11, SCHUMANN
SUBDIVISION, POINT ALSO BEING THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 6, LAWTON
SUBDIVISION; THENCE NORTH, ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID LAWTON SUBDIVISION, TO
NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 1, LAWTON SUBDIVISION, ALSO BEING ON THE SOUTH RIGHT-
OF-WAY LINE OF AIRPORT ROAD/U.S. HIGHWAY 281; THENCE EAST ALONG THE SOUTH
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF AIRPORT ROAD/U.S. HIGHWAY 281, TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
   The boundaries of the Good Life District shall not be reduced except upon
request made to the State by the City of Grand Island. In the event an
application to reduce boundaries is made by any party other than the City of
Grand Island, the moving party shall no longer be considered eligible to apply
for funds, or receive funds, rights, or privileges under this Article of City
Code.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-14   Definitions
   The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in Chapter
38,
Article II (Sections
38-12 through
38-22):
   Act shall have the same meaning as the Good Life District Economic
Development Act.
   Additional good life district retailer shall mean a for profit, as described
in subdivision (8)(c) of this section, retailer that opens a new location in a
good life district, has retail space at the time the good life district was
established within the good life district or within forty miles of the
district, and maintains the new location within the good life district plus all
locations existing at the time the good life district was established within
the good life district or within forty miles of the district for three years
from the date when the additional good life district retailer first located
within the good life district. If the number of locations within the good life
district or within forty miles of the district falls below the number required
to be an additional good life district retailer but is at least equal to the
number that existed at the time the good life district was established within
three years, such retailer shall qualify as a relocated good life district
retailer subject to the restrictions and requirements of subdivision (14) of
this section. The term includes a Related Person.
   Applicant shall mean any applicant for Program Funds.
   Bond has the same meaning as Neb. Rev. Stat. § 10-134.
   City shall mean the City of Grand Island.
   Controlling property rights means, with respect to real estate in a good
life district, the authority of a good life district applicant or project area
applicant to manage and control the development of real estate, including
through direct ownership or through leasehold rights, joint ventures, purchase
contracts, restrictive covenants, or any other similar arrangement. Whenever
such property rights do not include direct ownership, the good life district
applicant or project area applicant shall not be considered to have controlling
property rights unless such applicant has submitted to the department a waiver
and acknowledgment from the property owner that (a) the owner consents to his
or her property being included in the project area, (b) the owner acknowledges
that the applicant or city, as applicable, will have certain rights with
respect to how local sources of revenue from the owner's property will be spent
or allocated, and (c) the owner is waiving any and all rights with respect to
all such revenues for the duration of the good life district and that such
waiver will apply to all subsequent owners of the property.
   District shall have the same meaning as Good Life District.
   Eligible Costs shall mean: payment and reimbursement of (a) the costs of
acquisition, planning, engineering, designing, financing, construction,
improvement, rehabilitation, renewal, replacement, repair, landscaping,
irrigation, and maintenance of privately and publicly owned real estate,
buildings, improvements, fixtures, equipment, and other physical assets within
the Good Life District and debt service on such real estate, buildings,
improvements, fixtures, equipment, and other physical assets, (b) the costs of
construction and acquisition of publicly owned infrastructure and publicly
owned property rights within or related to the Good Life District, (c) costs of
and related to the public right-of-way, including streets, signage, lighting,
refuse services, and landscaping, (d) the costs of new technology assets,
including hardware, software, and related intellectual property, (e) the costs
of marketing and tenant improvement allowances, and (f) city costs related to
implementing, operating, and funding the Program. Eligible costs will not
include expenses which may be considered non-revenue producing under this
Article or Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4410(14) unless expressly allowed by Council by
and through an approved application and unless those expenses represent less
than twenty percent of any funds received by and through that approved
application and no portion of those costs have been provided for through any
other government issued or backed grant, loan, bond, or tax increment
financing.
   Evidence of Commitments shall mean evidence of commitments from any source,
provided in written form acceptable to the City, so long as the evidence
relates to any portion of the project described in the application made to the
State upon creation of the District, as amended or supplemented. Evidence may
be certified by the City prior to submission to the State.
   Fund shall have the same definition as Good Life District Program Fund.
   Good Life District Applicant shall mean the person who applied for the Good
Life District as approved by the Department of Economic Development, or any
Related Person.
   Good Life District Economic Development Act shall mean the Act as in effect
on August 13, 2024.
   Good Life District Economic Development Program means the Good Life District
Economic Development Program established pursuant to Ordinance No. 9983 of the
City pursuant to the Act, and codified in Chapter 38,
Article II, of the City Code, to utilize funds derived from local sources of
revenue for the purpose of paying eligible costs, and for paying the principal
of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Act.
   Good Life District Occupation Tax means the occupation tax as described in
Section
38-16 of the City Code.
   Good Life District Program Area means the area provided in Section
38-13 of the City Code, established pursuant to the Act for the Program which
shall include all property within the Good Life District.
   Good Life District Program Fund means the fund established and described in
Section
38-18 of the City Code.
   Good Life District Retailer means a retailer with taxable sales that is
located in the Grand Island Good Life District. The term includes an individual
person.
   Good Life District shall mean the District established by the State of
Nebraska within the City pursuant to the Good Life Transformational Projects
Act.
   Legislative Findings shall incorporate the findings made in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§ 77-4409 as in place on August 13, 2024, and shall include the findings of
Council contained in Ordinance No: 9983.
   Local Sources of Revenue means the sources of revenue established for the
Program, revenue generated by and through the powers of the Act, and any
revenue generated from grants, donations, or state and federal funds received
by the City for the Program, subject to any restrictions of the grantor, donor,
or state or federal law. Excepting that no property tax revenue generated
within the District shall be considered a Local Source of Revenue eligible for
appropriation into the Program.
   New Business means (i) a new-to-market sales tax collecting business that
was not legally licensed and located within the good life district or within
forty miles of the good life district prior to the creation of such district
and (ii) any Related Person. New business does not include the residential
portion of any business. New business does not include the location of any
entity that for purposes of the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967 is either (A) not
subject to sales and use taxes or (B) not subject to either an income tax or a
franchise tax under sections 77-3801 to 77-3807. It shall also include all
other definitions contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4403 as amended by LB707
(2025).
   New Development Costs means development costs that are incurred as part of a
project located in a good life district as approved by the Grand Island City
Council via the processes set forth in Chapter 38, Article II of City Code.
   Nonrevenue Producing Costs means costs paid from the Fund for (a)
construction or acquisition of privately owned real and personal property which
is not expected to generate local sources of revenue for the Program through
the use of such property in the operation of one or more businesses located in
the District or (b) operating expenses or other noncapital expenditures of a
qualifying business which is not a governmental entity.
   Occupation Tax shall mean a Good Life District Occupation Tax as established
by the City of Grand Island.
   Program Area shall have the same meaning as Good Life District Program Area.
   Program shall have the same definition as Good Life District Economic
Development Program.
   Project(s) shall mean any project within the boundaries of the District
which is in compliance with the Act and this Program except that project shall
also include publicly owned infrastructure necessary to support economic
development within the boundaries of any approved District and shall not
include any ineligible project or project funded with resources which make it
ineligible for Program funding.
   Qualifying Business shall mean for purposes of making application for
Program funds, any person, entity, corporation, nonprofit corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship which owns or
leases property or operates its business within the boundaries of the District;
any person or entity who, as part of their application, demonstrates a plan to
own or lease property or operate its business within the District; the person,
corporation, or entity, who made an approved application within the District;
and the City of Grand Island; and any political subdivision, state agency, or
other governmental entity which includes any portion of an approved Good Life
District within its territorial boundaries. If a municipal, state, or federal
license is required for the operation of a business, a business shall only be
considered a qualifying business if they have the required license and maintain
that license in good standing. Qualifying business also includes any Related
Person as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4403.
   Related Persons shall mean any corporations, partnerships, limited liability
companies, or joint ventures which are or would otherwise be members of the
same unitary group, if incorporated, or any persons who are considered to be
related persons under either section 267(b) and (c) or section 707(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   Relocated Good Life District Retailer shall mean (a) a retailer that
relocates to the District and that has less than one hundred thousand square
feet of retail space at the time the District was established for any single
location that is outside of the District but located within forty miles of the
District with no location being equal to or greater than one hundred thousand
square feet and (b) any Related Person. After ten years from when the Relocated
Good Life District Retailer first located within the District or exceeded one
hundred thousand square feet of retail space, such retailer shall no longer
qualify as a Relocated Good Life District retailer.
   Replacement Tax shall mean any tax imposed by the City designed to replace
the portion of the State Sales and Use Tax reduced by the Act within the
boundaries of the District.
   Sales and Use Tax shall mean the Sales and Use Tax imposed by the State of
Nebraska pursuant to the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, as amended from time to
time.
   State Sales Tax shall have the same meaning as Sales and Use Tax.
   Termination shall mean termination of the Good Life District if the
conditions set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4406, as in effect on August 13,
2024, are not demonstrated by the applicant, the City of Grand Island, or any
other person or if, through the passage of time, the District shall have ceased
to exist by operation of law.
   Viable Development shall mean the proposed development is demonstrated to be
not inconsistent with the statutory requirements of the District where the
project is located as defined in Grand Island City Code Chapter 38, Article II,
the Good Life District Transformational Projects Act, as may be amended from
time to time, and/or the Good Life District Economic Development Program Act,
as may be amended from time to time.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-15   Taxation and Revenue, General
   All Local Sources of Revenue established for or received for the Program,
shall be deposited into the Good Life District Economic Development Fund and
may be appropriated and spent for eligible costs of the Good Life District
Economic Development Program in any amount and at any time at the discretion
and direction of the City Council.
   Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4412(2)(b), the City intends to exercise
the right to use all available Local Sources of Revenue available except that
no property tax dollars shall be appropriated to the Program Fund. All Local
Sources of Revenue shall be appropriated by the City solely for Program
purposes until the Termination of the District.
   The Nebraska Budget Act shall not apply this Program, any future Program, or
any Local Sources of Revenue dedicated to such Program.
   The City of Grand Island shall consider all revenue collected directly by
the State of Nebraska under its authorities in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4413(2) et
seq. which is remitted, rebated, or refunded to the City, to be a Local Source
of Revenue for purposes of this program and the same shall be deposited into
the Good Life District Economic Development Fund.
   The City reserves the right to designate a portion of the City’s local
option Sales and Use Tax as a local source of revenue, as authorized by Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-4413(3), in the future, but does not exercise this right at
this time.
   The City may issue bonds as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-4418 to 77-
4426 as it deems necessary from time to time. Such bonds may be issued in such
principal amounts as the City Council determines are necessary to provide
sufficient funds to carry out the Program or for any of the purposes of and
powers granted pursuant to the Act, including the payment of eligible costs and
all other costs or expenses of the City incident to and necessary or convenient
to carry out the Program. Principal of and interest on such bonds shall be
payable from the Local Sources of Revenue dedicated to the Program and/or
deposited into the Fund.
   Bonds issued or delivered under the Act shall be authorized by resolution of
City Council and may be issued and secured under a resolution, trust indenture,
or other security instrument in one or more series, and shall bear such date or
dates, mature at such time or times prior to the expiration of the Program,
bear interest at such rate or rates, be in such denomination or denominations,
bear such title and designation, be in such form, either coupon or registered,
carry such conversion or registration privileges, have such rank or priority,
be executed in such manner, be payable in such medium of payment and at such
place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption, with or without
premium, as such resolution, trust indenture, or other security instrument may
provide and without limitation by any other law limiting amounts, maturities,
interest rates, or redemption provisions. Any officer of the City authorized or
designated to sign, countersign, execute, or attest any bond may utilize a
facsimile signature in lieu of his or her manual signature. The bonds may be
sold at public or private sale as provided by the City Council and at such
price or prices as determined or directed by the City Council.
   Bonds issued or delivered under the Act may be issued for such combination
of eligible costs and redevelopment projects and other Program purposes and may
be payable from Local Sources of Revenue or such other sources as permitted
under the Act, as may be provided in the resolution, trust indenture, or other
security instrument related to the bonds. The City may make any allocation or
designation with respect to the application of proceeds of such bonds, and any
allocation or designation of Local Sources of Revenue and other sources
permitted under the Act to the repayment of such bonds, as determined in or
pursuant to such resolution, trust indenture, other security instrument, or
other measure of the City Council.
   In the event any officer whose signatures appear on any bonds issued under
the Act cease to be officers before the delivery of such obligations, such
signatures shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes to the
same extent as if such officers had remained in office until such delivery.
   The City reserves all rights incidental to the issuance of its bonds.
Specifically, the City reserves all rights enumerated in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-
4402 to 77-4429 as operative on August 13, 2024, including the right to issue
refunding bonds or to issue additional bonds for Program purposes as part of
the same series of bonds. All Bonds of the City issued pursuant the Act are
declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and,
together with interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempt from all
taxes as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4428.
   Any tax or revenue authorized or imposed as part of the Good Life District
Program, including the Good Life District Occupation Tax, shall be in addition
to all other forms of tax and shall be separate and apart from any tax imposed
pursuant to the Local Option Revenue Act. No Program tax shall be subject to
deduction for any refunds made pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-4105, 77-4106,
77-5725 or 77-5726 and shall not be affected by or included in the tax
incentives available under the Employment and Investment Growth Act, the
Nebraska Advantage Act, the ImagiNE Nebraska Act, the Nebraska Advantage
Transformational Tourism and Redevelopment Act, the Urban Redevelopment Act, or
any other tax incentive act which affects the local option tax imposed by a
city pursuant to the Local Option Revenue Act.
   All Local Sources of Revenue shall remain in effect and shall not end or
terminate until this Good Life District Economic Development Program terminates
except that the City reserves the right to limit the duration of any imposed
Good Life District Occupation Tax or portion of any local option sales and use
tax established pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-27,142 as set forth in any
authorizing ordinance.
   The obligations of the City with respect to the Program, including any bonds
issued or contracts of the City entered into under the Act, shall not be a
general obligation of the city or a pledge of its credit or taxing power, nor
in any event shall bonds or contracts be payable out of any funds or properties
of the city, other than the Local Sources of Revenue appropriated by the City
and dedicated to the Program pursuant to the Act and any other taxes pledged
for payment of bonds pursuant to the Act.
   Bonds issued under the act shall not constitute an indebtedness within the
meaning of any constitutional or statutory debt limitation or restriction. In
no event should members of the City Council or any other City employee or
official involved in executing bonds issued under the Act, be liable personally
on such bonds by reason of the issuance thereof.
   The City reserves the exclusive right to all revenue obtained from the
Program and shall be authorized to collect any available Local Source of
Revenue through June 5, 2054, or until terminated by the City as permitted by
the Act, whichever occurs first.
   In no event shall any Good Life District Program Fund revenue be used in a
manner which may be inconsistent with the Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4412, or
other applicable state or local laws.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-16   Good Life District Occupation Tax
   From October 1, 2024 to September 30, 2025 the City shall impose a Good Life
District Occupation Tax in the amount of 2.75% on all establishments located
within the Good Life District Program Area (38-13), and/or any transactions
occurring within the Good Life District Program Area which are subject to State
Sales and Use Tax. Council hereby finds, determines, and declares it is
appropriate a tax be imposed and said tax is authorized by the Good Life
District Economic Development Act, the Program Ordinance adopted by the City of
Grand Island, and furthers the purposes required within the Act and Program.
   Said Good Life District Occupation Tax shall be imposed on all items which
are subject to the Nebraska State Sales and Use Tax (“State Sales Tax”) as
defined in the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967 as amended from time to time.
   All revenue derived from this Good Life District Occupation Tax shall be
deposited into the Program Fund established as part of the Good Life District
Program Ordinance and shall be used for the purposes allowed by that Fund.
   All persons or entities engaged in any sales which would be subject to State
Sales Tax shall collect this occupation tax at a rate of 2.75% on sales subject
to State Sales Tax. Itemization of this tax may be made, but is not required,
on the bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each person or
entity engaged in taxable sales shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this
section.
   Each and every person or entity operating any establishment and/or making
any transactions or sales subject to State Sales and Use Tax, within the
Program Area shall, starting October 1, 2024, and continuing until September
30, 2025 impose said tax; and every person or entity not located within the
Good Life District Program Area, but conducting transactions or sales subject
to the State Sales and Use Tax within the Good Life District Program Area, will
have the authority to impose said Occupation Tax effective October 1, 2024 and
must fully impose said Occupation Tax no later than November 1, 2024 and
continuing until September 30, 2025.
   The Finance Director shall, for purposes of this occupation tax, and other
duties contained in Chapter 38,
Article II, have the same authorities and responsibilities as set forth in
Grand Island City Code Chapter 23,
Section 72.
   If any person or entity neglects or refuses to make a return of payment of
the taxes as required by this article, the Finance Director shall follow the
provisions of Grand Island City Code Chapter 23, Sections
70,
71,
73,
74, and
76 for the collection of any taxes authorized herein. The Finance Director
shall not have authority to waive any penalties or interest which shall accrue
due to failure to remit any owed tax or to make prompt return.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-17   Allocated Sales Tax
   Starting on October 1, 2025 the State of Nebraska shall allocate a portion
of the State Sales Tax to Program. This includes funds set forth in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 77-4410, § 77-4413, and other related statutes. This allocation shall
be considered a Local Source of Revenue for purposes of this Article and shall
be deposited into the Program Fund and remains subject to recapture under Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-4406 unless otherwise encumbered.
   Pursuant to state law this allocation shall be performed by the State Tax
Commissioner and will include fifty percent (50%) of the State Sales Tax
collected by a Good Life District Retailer that was not located in the Good
Life District at the time the District was established or expanded and is not a
Relocated Good Life District Retailer as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4403
on transactions physically occurring in the District, and fifty percent (50%)
of the State Sales taxes collected in the District from businesses that were
previously located in the District at the time the District was established up
to five million dollars per year ($5,000,000), and fifty percent (50%) of
certain state sales taxes collected paid by the Good Life District Applicant or
a Good Life District Retailer on New Development Costs for a new business,
additional Good Life District Retailer, or Relocated Good Life District
Retailer. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4413(2) includes certain other exceptions,
deviations, or modifications which may be amended from time to time.
   The Tax Commissioner will provide to the City a detailed report with each
sum monthly remittance which will include the information set forth in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-4413(2)(e) however the City must maintain that report as a
confidential document and may only disclose the aggregate total of taxable
sales and remittance for the entire District.
(Added by Ord. No. 10,029, effective 08-05-2025)
38-18   Good Life District Program Fund
   All revenue generated by any Local Source of Revenue which is appropriated
or collected for this Program, to include any allocated, remitted, or refunded
portion of the State Sales Tax as set forth in the Act or
38-17, and any earnings from the investment of such funds, shall be deposited
into the Good Life District Program Fund which shall be a restricted fund.
   The City is authorized to establish subaccounts in the Good Life District
Program Fund as determined appropriate.
   Any funds in the Fund may only be appropriated and spent for eligible costs
of the Program in any amount and at any time at the discretion and direction of
City Council, subject to any restrictions which may be established in
connection with the authorization and issuance of bonds or pursuant to other
contractual obligations as permitted by the Act.
   All amounts deposited in the Fund which are not currently required or
committed for purposes of the Program shall be invested as provided for in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-2341.
   The City may pledge, grant, loan, or otherwise utilize any Local Sources of
Revenue deposited into the Fund for the payment of any bond indebtedness
incurred by the City for purposes of the Program. The City may disburse these
funds, once appropriated or collected, only for Program purposes as set forth
in Chapter 38, Article II of Grand Island City Code including the payment or
reimbursement of Eligible Costs made pursuant to any supplemental terms and
conditions contained in a duly awarded contract. Disbursements may be made to a
qualifying business only upon receipt of evidence that such distribution is for
the direct payment or reimbursement of an Eligible Cost for work which has been
completed in the Program Area pursuant to an approved Application. In no event
shall any Good Life District Program Fund revenue be used in a manner which may
be inconsistent with the Act or other applicable state or local laws.
   The City of Grand Island shall charge a quarterly administrative fee to the
Good Life District Program Fund equivalent to 3% of the funds deposited with
the Fund in the quarter preceding any disbursement. Each quarterly fee shall be
charged by the City to the Program Fund within 45 days of the close of each
fiscal quarter, and shall be paid prior to payment of any other Eligible Costs
or debt service on bonds which may be payable from the Fund. This quarterly fee
shall be used to cover the City’s internal administrative, financial, and legal
expenses related to the administration of this Program including the cost of
publication of any requests for proposals, meeting notices, or public hearings,
and the cost of routine financial management of the Program Fund by employed
City personnel. This administrative fee will not cover, and the City shall
impose additional administrative charges against the Fund, for the cost of
required independent audits, infrastructure expenses, or outside professional
services related to a particular project or application, or any necessary
contracted professional services or bond related expenses. For purposes of Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-4406(4) the administrative fee shall be considered an
encumbered amount immediately upon the close of each fiscal quarter, whether or
not the fee has been charged by the City to the Program Fund.
   Any proceeds from the issuance and sale of bonds pursuant to the Act which
provide funds to carry out the Program shall be deposited into the Fund or with
a bond trustee pursuant to any resolution, trust indenture, or other security
instrument entered into in connection with the issuance of such bonds or as
otherwise provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4423.
   When the Program terminates by expiration of time, or in the event the
Program is repealed by Council, the balance of money remaining in the Fund
which are not otherwise pledged for the payment of bonds or otherwise committed
by contract under the Program, shall be deposited into the general fund of the
City. Any funds received by the City by reason of the Program, after the
termination of the Program, shall be transferred from the Fund to the general
fund as such funds are received.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Act, any bonds, contracts,
or other obligations which remain outstanding or unpaid upon expiration of the
Program on June 5, 2054, shall be deemed canceled and extinguished after all
remaining amounts held in the Fund have been depleted to pay such bonds,
contracts, or other obligations, and the City shall have no continued
liability, express or implied, with respect to such bonds, contracts, or other
obligations.
   The Fund shall remain open after termination of the Program until such time
as all bonds, contracts, and other obligations payable from such Fund are no
longer outstanding or are extinguished as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-
4418, and such funds related to them fully accounted for, with no further City
action required, and after the completion of a final audit pursuant to Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-4416.
   The Fund shall be audited, annually, as required in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-
4416. Such audit shall be conducted by a qualified independent accounting firm
who does not have any current or prior contractual business relationship with
any qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the Program. The
costs of said audit shall be paid from the Fund. The results of such audit
shall be filed with the City Clerk and made available for public review.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-19   Applications to the Program Fund
Generally
   Applications for assistance from the Good Life District Economic Development
Program by Applicants other than the City of Grand Island may occur by:
   (1)   Qualified Response to any City issued Request for Proposals seeking
development proposals within the District, or
   (2)   Direct Application for Program Funds made by a Qualified Business,
Direct Application Process
   Direct Applications shall be made on a form to be developed by the City of
Grand Island and will include all contents, qualifications, and materials
required herein.
   Each submitted application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee. These fees shall be codified in the City’s adopted Fee
Schedule. Fees shall be based on the amount of Program Funds requested. Should
an applicant amend their request after making the initial application fee, they
shall remit any increased fee due and owing prior to their application being
placed on the Council agenda. No refunds shall be made for reduced requests.
 
Amount of Program Funds Requested Application Fee
Under $500,000                    $2,500
$500,000 to $1,500,000            $5,000
$1,500,000 to $3,000,000          $7,500
$3,000,000 to $5,000,000          $10,000
$5,000,000 to $10,000,000         $20,000
Over $10,000,000                  $50,000
 
   The Community Development Director, or their designee, shall be tasked with
developing, implementing, and maintaining, the necessary documentation and
schedule for initial application review. This process, and any required forms,
will be made available and public on the City’s website when developed.
   Application materials shall be held in confidence as permitted by Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 77-4412(d) and shall not be considered public records until such time
as a final application packet is prepared for Council consideration by the
Community Development Director. Once an applicant has authorized submission of
their reviewed application to City Council, the contents of the application
packet presented to Council shall no longer be held in confidence. In the event
an applicant chooses to withdraw their application prior to submission to City
Council, all application materials provided by the applicant will be
disregarded and will remain confidential and shall not be a public record.
Application materials provided by the applicant during preliminary review, but
not forwarded to Council by the City Administrator, shall remain confidential
and shall not be a public record.
   At all stages the Community Development Director, or member of the
Administrative Review Team, may retain and use any outside consultants or
experts deemed necessary to fulfil their obligations under this Ordinance. This
may include delegation of some, or all, of the pre-Council review phases or
duties as may be deemed appropriate from time to time.
   The Application process will include at least the following steps,
procedures, and requirements:
      (1)   A completed written application and required supporting materials
shall be submitted to the Community Development Director.
      (2)   The Community Development Director, or their designee, shall review
the application to ensure it is complete and includes all supporting materials.
      (3)   The application will undergo a preliminary, confidential, review by
the Administrative Review Team which shall include the following officials or
their designee(s): City Administrator, the Finance Director, the Community
Development Director, the Public Works Director, the City Attorney, and any
other department heads the Community Development Director deems necessary. The
Administrative Review may be facilitated by the Community Development Director,
or the Director may use an outside consultant to provide that facilitation.
         a.   During the preliminary review, each member of the Administrative
Review Team may:
            i.   Request supplemental materials or information from the
Applicant.
            ii.   Make investigatory findings as to eligibility of the
applicant and/or project.
            iii.   Make written recommendations to be forwarded to Council to
include suggestions as to schedule es, restrictions, conditions, compliance
procedures or modifications necessary.
         b.   The Community Development Director, or designee, will coordinate
all requests, findings, and recommendations and will prepare a final report of
the Team to be included in the Application Packet.
         c.   The Community Development Director will cause an Application
Packet to be prepared which will include all Application materials,
supplemental materials, and findings and recommendations of the Administrative
Review Team.
      (4)   Upon the conclusion of the preliminary review by the Administrative
Review Team the Community Development Director will meet in consultation with
the application to provide the applicant with the opportunity to:
         a.   Review the Application Packet prepared for forwarding to City
Council for their approval, and/or
         b.   Present the Applicant with suggested modifications or changes
recommended by the Administrative Review Team and permit the Applicant the
ability to modify their proposal for no additional application fee subject to a
deadline to be established by the Community Development Director, and/or
         c.   To notify the Applicant that the Administrative Review Team
intends to recommend denial of the application and to provide the Applicant the
opportunity to withdraw their application, and/or
         d.   To provide an opportunity for the Applicant to Withdraw their
application from consideration by Council for any reason, or no reason at all.
      (5)   Once this consultation has occurred, the Community Development
Director shall cause a final Application Packet to be prepared for Council’s
consideration which shall include all application materials submitted,
recommendations by the Administrative Review Team, and any other materials
members of the Administrative Review Team or Applicant deem necessary.
      (6)   The Applicant shall be entitled to notice that the Administrative
Review Process has been completed, notice of the date and time of the City
Council meeting at which their application will be considered, and notice that
upon submission of their application to City Council all contents of their
application shall become public record except for redactions necessary to
shield confidential information such as dates of birth, social security
numbers, banking/routing information, or items which include information that
may jeopardize public safety like the location of critical infrastructure,
security features of buildings, or other safety items which serve no public
purpose by their release.
      (7)   City Council shall consider all Applications submitted to them
during their regular meetings or a special meeting called for the purpose of
application review.
      (8)   After consideration of a properly presented application Council
shall pass a resolution reflecting required findings and a determination that
an application be approved as submitted, approved subject to restrictions or
modifications, rejected with instructions for resubmission directly to Council,
or rejected outright.
      (9)   In addition to their approval, Council shall designate in their
resolution whether they are:
         a.   Authorizing the Mayor to sign any agreements, contracts, or other
legal documents submitted by the Applicant, and/or
         b.   Authorizing the City Attorney in consultation with the Community
Development Director or other members of the Administrative Review Team to
negotiate terms of any agreements, contracts, or other legal documents
consistent with the Application for the Mayor’s signature without further
action by Council, and/or
         c.   Will require the applicant to present all proposed agreements,
contracts, or other legal documents consistent with the Application for Council
review and future approval.
Applicant Qualifications
   An Applicant for Program Funds other than the City of Grand Island must be a
qualified applicant. To be a qualified applicant the person, entity, or group
of persons and entities must:
      (1)   Be a Qualified Business.
      (2)   Have, or be able to obtain, minimal insurance coverage which names
the City of Grand Island as an additional insured.
      (3)   Be able to obtain a performance bond in an amount sufficient to
guarantee performance of all deliverables for which any Program Funds are
requested.
      (4)   Be committed to legal compliance and must be able to certify that
they will conduct all operations consistent with all required local, state, and
federal laws.
      (5)   May not have been debarred, disqualified, or otherwise restricted
from participation in any public project within ten (10) years preceding the
application.
      (6)   For payment of Eligible Costs which are improvements to or related
to real property, provide: (1) proof of ownership in property for which program
funds would be expended; and/or (2) an exclusive interest in property that can
be enforced and encumbered by restriction for a period of not less than 30
years; and/or (3) evidence that any improvements proposed on public property
are designed in accordance with relevant industry standards; and/or (4)
authorization from all involved property owners for submission of an
application and consent for negotiated encumbrance of the property for a period
of not less than 30 years.
Application Contents
   The Community Development Director shall develop an application form or
guidance documents to include these documents or their equivalents. In the
event an application is determined to be incomplete, or missing any supporting
materials, at any stage in review the Community Development Director, or
designee, will provide written notice of any deficiencies or missing materials
and will establish a deadline of no less than 7 days from notice in which the
Applicant may provide the same.
   In the event an Applicant fails or declines to cure any deficiencies or
provide missing materials within the established deadline their application
shall be administratively closed by the Community Development Director. An
administratively closed application may be reopened for review within 90 days
of the missed deadline if defects are cured. After 90 days has elapsed a new
application must be filed, including the payment of a new application fee.
   Applications should include:
      (1)   Supporting documentation to demonstrate the application is made by
a qualified applicant.
      (2)   A Project proposal which shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A concise written summary of the project.
         b.   The total cost of the proposed project and a summary of the
financial structure proposed.
         c.   A developer capital stack for the project prepared by an attorney
or financing professional which includes documentation of commitments for
financing of the project.
         d.   A summary of the request for Program Funds including the amount
of funding, a proposed disbursement schedule, and whether the request is for
payment of project expenses or reimbursement after project completion.
      (3)   For each request for Program Funds, applicant shall provide written
support highlighting how use of the proposed Program Funds exemplifies the
Program purposes and goals and outlining why this request should receive
funding priority.
      (4)   For each request for Program Funds, the applicant shall include a
developer gap analysis detailing the necessity for the City to provide
incentives for the project from Program Funds. This gap analysis should
highlight what benefit or return on investment use of Program Funds would
provide to the Program that would not exist but for the use of Program Funds,
any “but for” analysis which supports that the project benefits would not occur
or would be substantially delayed but for use of the Fund.
      (5)   A draft site plan to include visual site plans, studies, surveys,
or other documents.
      (6)   An estimate of the number of new permanent jobs created within the
project.
      (7)   An estimate of the number of temporary, seasonal, or construction
related jobs created within the project.
      (8)   A list of all occupied structures to be built; to include the type
of structure, approximate square footage, and proposed use.
      (9)   Developer governance documents for each involved developer or sub-
developer. If applicable, corporate structure charts showing equity ownership
for the project, developer, or landowners.
      (10)   Projected annual sales estimated for development within the
project to include the following details: annual estimated taxable sales,
annual estimated non-taxable sales, percentage of taxable sales estimated to be
made to out-of-state residents.
      (11)   Projected annual out-of-state visitors to project.
      (12)   Supporting documentation for any estimates used in support of
sales, visitor, or jobs projections.
      (13)   Documentation of land acquisition or executed contracts supporting
acquisition for such land.
      (14)   Any purchase agreements, sale agreements, leases, memorandums of
understanding, or other commitment documents from businesses described in the
site plan or who intend to occupy any buildings included in the list of
occupied structures.
      (15)   Pro forma documents for any hospitality, leisure, recreational, or
athletic-related business described in the site plan or who intend to occupy
any buildings included in the list of occupied structures.
      (16)   Proposals for contracts, agreements, deed restrictions, or other
encumbrances which provide assurances to the City that the project will be
executed to completion or will be sufficiently encumbered so as to leave the
City with a demonstrable return on investment should the project fail to be
completed.
      (17)   A summary of any annexations, rezoning actions, or blight studies
which are or may be necessary for the project, including a proposed schedule
for all preliminary actions which must occur prior to distribution of Program
Funds.
      (18)   Identification of any professionals, consultants, or third parties
which may be needed to assist the City or Applicant in the development of the
proposed project for whom the applicant is requesting payment or reimbursement
of expenses from the Program Fund.
      (19)   Either: (1) An affidavit confirming that no tax increment
financing is, or will be requested, as part of the Project so long as Program
Funds are expended or (2) A summary of what tax increment financing is, or may
be, requested as part of the project, and a draft of any proposed Redevelopment
Plan pursuant to the Nebraska Community Development Law, if tax increment
financing is requested for any part of the Project, and a cost-benefit study
which includes and incorporates any requested Program Funds.
         a.   Note that any application for Project Funds is not, and will not
be, considered as an applicant for tax increment financing but is merely
required as an aid to the City in evaluating the range and scope of incentives
requested.
      (20)   Applicant will include clear and concise statements detailing how
their project fits the Program Goals listed below, if applicable:
         a.   How does the proposed project promote the goals and purposes
contained in the Good Life District Transformational Projects Act and Chapter
38, Article II of Grand Island City Code?
         b.   What makes this project unique and transformational as opposed to
normal or routine economic development and growth?
         c.   How does the project expand the tax base within the Program Area?
         d.   Does the project demonstrate an ability to generate additional
Local Sources of Revenue in an amount equal to, or greater than, the requested
initial grant of Program Funds?
         e.   What impacts will the project have on the provision of public
services to include police, fire, schools, and public works?
         f.   How will this project draw visitors from outside the State of
Nebraska?
         g.   Does this project fill an identified gap in available resources
in the City of Grand Island? If so, how?
      (21)   Per Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4412(e):
         a.   The Applicant will provide adequate documentation to demonstrate
the existence of sufficient infrastructure to serve the program area; or how
such infrastructure will be created, funded, and maintained by and through the
proposed Project.
         b.   The Applicant will provide required data showing that sufficient
capital investment in buildings and facilities exist to generate enough Local
Sources of Revenue to Sustain the Program.
         c.   The Applicant will provide sufficient assurances that
substantially all of the eligible costs will be used for the benefit of the
Program Area.
      (22)   Certification that the application does not include a request for
costs which may be considered Nonrevenue Producing as defined in
38-14; or if the applicant is seeking consideration by Council for certain
costs to be considered Eligible Costs, applicant will provide:
         a.   Detailed itemization of all potential Nonrevenue Producing
eligible costs which applicant is seeking and documentation to include:
            1.   Evidentiary support establishing that the costs are otherwise
Eligible Costs.
            2.   Materials supporting the applicants request to use Program
Funds as opposed to other funding sources available to the applicant.
            3.   Evidence that the payment of these expenses will create an
indirect return on investment resulting in the generation of more Program Funds
than are received to fund these otherwise ineligible expenses.
            4.   A proposed Program Fund distribution schedule that ensures
that Eligible Costs are prioritized before Nonrevenue Producing Costs would be
distributed.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Good Life District Applicant is an
Applicant for funding from the Program, the Good Life District Applicant shall
not be required to submit any additional information about the business
structure, business entity, or historical business information of the entity
which is the Good Life District Applicant than what was included in the
original application to the Nebraska Department of Economic Development for
establishing the Good Life District.
City Applications
   City Administration may present proposals for the City’s use of the Program
Fund directly to City Council who may grant approval of any presented proposal
so long as the use of funds is for Eligible Costs. Such uses may occur within
the Program Area which serve the goals and purposes of the Program, provides
infrastructure in support of growth within the Program Area or is otherwise
related to the Program Area, or other permitted Eligible Costs.
   City Administration may make application to City Council for the ability to
use or pledge Program Funds in conjunction with the issuance of any bonds
authorized under this Program.
   No fee shall be charged for requests made by the City, processed in response
to a City-issued request for development proposal, or in furtherance of the
issuance or processing of authorized bonds made by the City.
Limitations on Eligible Costs
   The City specifically authorizes all defined types of eligible costs
contained in
38-14 City; however Council reserves the right to limit, on a per-application
basis, the amounts or types of Eligible Costs as are determined to be in the
best interest of the City and the Program, including per-project maximums or
maximum portions of project expenses eligible for funding by the Program.
   Any costs which must be considered “New Development Costs” pursuant to law
must qualify within the meaning of said statute. Specifically those costs must
be incurred as part of the project located in the District, must be equal to
the construction and improvement costs of real property and the acquisition
costs of personal property that are part of such project including (1)
Improvements to real property located in the District, (2) New construction of
and additions to existing buildings, (3) Construction and acquisition of
infrastructure improvements in and related to the District, and/or (4)
Acquisition of personal property located in the District.
   The following shall not be considered a “New Development Cost”: (1) The
acquisition of a business that (a) does not qualify as a new business, (b) is
continued by the purchaser, and (c) was operated within the District, or within
forty miles of the District, during the three hundred sixty-six days prior to
the date of acquisition.
Further Considerations
   City Council shall specifically consider, when reviewing applications:
      (1)   Whether there is sufficient existing infrastructure to serve the
Program Area with the addition of this Project; or whether this Project creates
the required infrastructure.
      (2)   Whether any proposed or necessary infrastructure is adequately
constructed and funded by and through the proposed Project.
      (3)   Whether the proposed Project includes sufficient capital investment
in buildings and facilities to generate enough Local Sources of Revenue to
sustain the Program.
      (4)   Whether the proposed Project provides sufficient guarantee that
substantially all of the Eligible Costs will be used for the benefit of the
Program Area.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-20   Compliance, Modifications, and Program Restrictions
   No Projects shall be eligible if the project includes a licensed racetrack
enclosure or an authorized gaming operator as such terms are defined in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 9-1103, except for infrastructure or facilities that are publicly
owned or are used by or at the direction of the Nebraska State Fair Board, so
long as no gaming devices or games of chance are expected to be operated by an
authorized gaming operator within any such facilities;
   No Projects shall be eligible if the project received funds pursuant to the
Shovel-Ready Capital Recovery and Investment Act or the Economic Recovery Act.
   No Project shall be eligible if the project includes any portion of a public
or private university.
   Pursuant to the Act and, Chapter 38,
Article II of the Grand Island City Code shall serve as notice to the
Department of Economic Development that the City intends to fully preserve its
right to pledge any or all local sources of revenue for the payment of bonds
issued pursuant to the Good Life District Economic Development Act and that the
City believes removal of any property from the boundaries of an approved Good
Life District would not be in the best interest of the City, would be contrary
to the goals and purposes of the approved application for the Good Life
District, and would jeopardize the City’s ability to honor the voter’s
directive that transformational growth be pursued as allowed by the Act.
   Should City Council identify parcel(s) of land which are appropriate for
removal from the District it may pass a resolution determining that said
removal is in the best interest of the City by a two-thirds vote of its
Members.
   As the City of Grand Island and its citizens have relied on the local
sources of revenue needed to fund this Program, any property owner, applicant,
or other entity, other than the City of Grand Island, wishing to remove
property from the District as approved shall be responsible for all costs and
expenses incurred by the City of Grand Island including all administrative and
legal expenses, the cost of removing or modifying any infrastructure funded in
whole or in part by the Program, the cost of any necessary bond refinancing,
shall secure the consent of the City Council prior filing an amended map with
the State, and shall remain obligated to impose and collect the Good Life
District Occupation Tax, or any other source of local revenue including any
allocated tax, so long as the subject property would have been within the
approved boundaries of the District but for the modification of the District as
approved. Should any costs be so attributed, the City Council shall certify the
amount due and owed each quarter and shall cause the same to be levied as an
assessment against any real property and may pursue other legal actions as
needed to enforce this section.
   Demonstration to the State of Nebraska that the required new development
costs have been met will include demonstration made by evidence submitted by
the District applicant or the City of Grand Island, or any other person who
submits satisfactory evidence to the Department of Economic Development.
   The Good Life District Applicant, or any other recipient of allocated sales
taxes or reduced sales taxes, or of any Program Funds must submit an annual
report to the State pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4405(4) et seq. no later
than December 31 of each year that the good life district is in existence. This
report must also be submitted to the City of Grand Island. Persons or entities
who sell or transfer property subject to this reporting obligation must
transfer this reporting obligation with the property.
   The Good Life District Applicant, and all persons or entities receiving Good
Life District Funds or other financial assistance under this Program shall
certify to the City of Grand Island annually the amount they have committed for
investment within the District and the amount they have actually expended. This
sworn certification shall be due no later than October 31st of each year. This
certification shall include all evidence of Commitments or expenditures since
the later of the creation of the District or the last submitted annual report.
This report shall include all evidence reasonably available to substantiate
these amounts. Evidence may include proof of actual expenditures, executed
contracts, promissory notes, or other reliable, verifiable, or certified
evidence. Any person or entity failing to make said sworn certification or
failing to provide sufficient evidence of expenditures or commitments shall be
ineligible to receive additional Program funds and will be considered in breach
of any funding agreements. The Good Life District Applicant, any related
parties, and/or any party to which the Applicant has assigned, sold, or
transferred its rights or obligations, must provide this certification whether
or not funds are received by the Applicant or related parties.
   The City may, at the request of the Good Life District Applicant, or on its
own initiative, certify the evidence of commitments and expenditures as set
forth in Neb. Rev. Stat § 77-4406(2) and Grand Island City Code § 38-21 and
remit the same to the State. Such certification must be supported by sufficient
evidence and Council may compel the production of any evidence it reasonably
believes may be available or necessary to make said certification.
   The City shall be authorized to pass any actions necessary to impose and
enforce any Local Sources of Revenue as needed to develop and fund the Program
Fund.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-21   Amendment or Repeal of the Program Ordinance
   City Council reserves the right to amend the authorizing Ordinance and this
Chapter of City Code at any time by a two-thirds vote of the members of
Council.
   City Council may repeal this ordinance in its entirety, subject only to the
provisions of any outstanding bonds or existing contracts relating to such
program and the rights of any third parties arising from such bonds or
contracts. Any effort to repeal the Program Ordinance must be approved by a
two-thirds vote of the members of Council.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
38-22   Reservation of Governance Rights and Effect of Other Laws
   The City retains the express authority to issue bonds, enter into contracts,
or incur other obligations as allowed by the Act subject only to the approval
of City Council.
   As set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4426, no consent of any department,
division, commission, board, bureau, or instrumentality of the State is
required and no other proceedings or happenings, or any other conditions or
things than those actions required by Council shall be required. The validity
of and security for any bonds, contract, or other obligations shall not be
affected by the existence or nonexistence of any such consent or other
proceedings, conditions, or things. No other proceedings except those required
under this Program shall be required. No other laws shall apply to bonds,
contracts, or other obligations issued or entered into pursuant to the Good
Life District Economic Development Act.
   Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-4427, In any suit, action, or proceeding
involving the validity or enforceability of any bonds, contract, or agreement
of a city pursuant to the Good Life District Economic Development Act, or the
security therefore, brought after the lapse of thirty days after the
authorization by the City Council for the issuance of such bonds or entry into
such contract or agreement, any such bond, contract or agreement, and the
security therefore and provisions therein, reciting in substance that it has
been authorized by the city pursuant to the Good Life District Economic
Development Act or to provide financing for a Good Life District Economic
Development Program shall be conclusively deemed to have been authorized for
such purpose and such bonds, contracts, or agreement, and security therefore
and provisions therein, issued or delivered pursuant to such authorization
shall be conclusively deemed to have been issued, entered into, provided, and
carried out in accordance and compliance with the purposes and provisions of
the Good Life District Economic Development Act, and deemed to be valid and
binding obligations and agreements of the city for the duration of the term of
such obligations and agreements as provided therein.
   All State actions brought pursuant to the Program shall be brought in the
District Court of Hall County, Nebraska. All Federal actions shall be brought
in the District of Nebraska.
   All applicants for Projects or Program Funds which involve one or more
persons, entities, or owners shall waive its right to bring any cause of action
related to the Program or any Program Project or any contract for Funds except
for those causes of action filed jointly by all impacted persons, entities, or
owners other than the City of Grand Island. In the event an action is filed
with the consent of all involved parties other than the City of Grand Island,
while said cause of action is pending no additional appropriation or
distribution of Program Funds or any other public financing authorized by the
Act, or as part of any project approval, shall be made until such time as said
cause of action is resolved and all applicable appeal times have lapsed. Any
appropriations or distributions which would have been made between the filing
of said cause of action and the expiration of any opportunity to appeal shall
be deemed waived by the applicant for Funds.
   If any provisions of the Act are inconsistent with the provisions of any
other law of the State of Nebraska, or ordinance of the City of Grand Island,
the provisions of the Act shall be controlling.
The powers conferred to the City by the Good Life District Economic Development
Act shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other
law of Nebraska, including, without limitation, the Local Option Revenue Act,
the Community Development Law, the Local Option Municipal Economic Development
Act, and the Good Life Transformational Projects Act.
The Good Life District Economic Development Act and all grants of power,
authority, rights, or discretion to a city under the act shall be liberally
construed, and all incidental powers necessary to carry the act into effect are
hereby expressly granted to and conferred upon a city. Nothing in this Program
or the Act shall be construed to limit the existing statutory authority of the
City of Grand Island.
(Added by Ord. No. 9983, effective 09-03-2024) (Amended by Ord. No. 10,029,
effective 08-05-2025)
CHAPTER 39
GRAND ISLAND SMOKING REGULATION ACT
39-1   Title
39-2   Purpose
39-3   Definitions; General Provisions
39-4   Smoking Prohibited; Exceptions
39-5   Proprietor To Prohibit Smoking; Exceptions
39-6   Enforcement
39-7   Violations And Penalties
39-8   Severability
39-9   Cigar Bar, Defined
39-1   Title
This section shall be known as the Grand Island Smoking Regulation Act.
39-2   Purpose
The City Council does hereby declare it to be the public policy of this City to
encourage places of employment and public places to reduce the health and
safety risks posed by smoking and vaping in places of employment and public
places. The City Council authorizes the Health Director of the Central District
Health Department and law enforcement to administer and enforce this Section
within the City of Grand Island.
39-3   Definitions; General Provisions
For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them by this Section.
Employed . Employed shall mean hired, contracted, subcontracted, or otherwise
engaged to furnish goods or services.
Employee . Employee shall mean a person who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wage(s), profit, or other
remuneration.
Employer. Employer shall mean a person, nonprofit entity, sole proprietorship,
partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited partnership, limited liability
company, co-op, firm, trust, association, organization, or other business
entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments,
where goods or services are sold, who employs one or more employees.
Guestroom or Suite . Guestroom or suite shall mean sleeping rooms and directly
associated private areas, such as bathrooms, living rooms, and kitchen areas,
if any, rented to the public for their exclusive transient occupancy including,
but not limited to, guestrooms or suites in hotels, motels, inns, lodges, or
other such establishments.
Health Director . Health Director shall mean the Director of the Central
District Health Department or authorized representative(s).
Indoor Area . Indoor area means an area enclosed by a floor, a ceiling, and
walls on all sides that are continuous and solid except for closeable entry and
exit doors and windows and in which less than twenty percent of the total wall
area is permanently open to the outdoors. For walls in excess of eight feet in
height, only the first eight feet shall be used in determining such percentage.
International No-Smoking Symbol . International no-smoking symbol shall mean a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it.
Place of Employment . Place of employment means an indoor area under the
control of a proprietor that an employee accesses as part of his or her
employment without regard to whether the employee is present or work is
occurring at any given time. The indoor area includes, but is not limited to,
any work area, employee breakroom, restroom, conference room, meeting room,
classroom, employee cafeteria, and hallway. A private residence is a place of
employment when such residence is being used as a licensed child care program
and one or more children who are not occupants of such residence are present.
Proprietor . Proprietor shall mean any employer, owner, operator, supervisor,
manager or any other person who controls, governs, or directs the activities in
a place of employment or public place.
Public Place . Public place shall mean an indoor area to which the public is
invited or in which the public is permitted, whether or not the public is
always invited or permitted. A private residence shall not be considered a
“public place.”
Smoke or Smoking . Smoke or smoking shall mean the lighting of any cigarette,
cigar, or pipe; or the possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe,
regardless of its composition.
Vape(ing) . Vape(ing) shall mean the inhaling and exhaling of the aerosol
produced by any vaping device.
Vaping Device . Vaping device shall mean a device that consists of a
mouthpiece, battery, a cartridge for containing the e-liquid or e-juice and a
heating component for the device that is powered by a battery. Vaping devices
may include but not be limited to, e-cigarettes, vape pens, advanced personal
vaporizers (MODS), JUUL’s or any other device whether professionally made or
homemade that are designed and used to inhale vapor products.
39-4   Smoking Prohibited; Exceptions
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or vape in a place of employment
or a public place, except as designated by a proprietor pursuant to this
Section.
39-5   Proprietor To Prohibit Smoking; Exceptions
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor of any place of employment or
public place to allow smoking or vaping except as follows:
      1.   Guestrooms or suites, provided the following requirements are met:
         a.   The number of rooms or suites designated for smoking shall be no
greater than 20% of the total number of guestrooms or suites.
         b.   Each guestroom or suite where smoking or vaping is allowed shall
have a permanent sign posted containing the words “smoking allowed” on each
entrance.
      2.   As part of a study conducting research into the health effects of
smoking or vaping in a scientific or analytical laboratory either governed by
state or federal law or at a college or university approved by the Nebraska
Coordinating Commission for Post Secondary Education. The proprietor shall post
a temporary sign on all entrances to the laboratory indicating that smoking or
vaping is being allowed for the purposes of research.
      3.   Cigar bars as defined in Grand Island City Code Section
39-9.
   B.   Proprietors shall conspicuously post or display required signs so that
the signs are readily viewable by employees and the public.
   C.   This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking or
vaping where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9940 on 8/22/2023
39-6   Enforcement
The Health Director and law enforcement agencies are hereby authorized to
inspect a place of employment or public place at any reasonable time to
determine compliance with this Section.
39-7   Violations And Penalties
   A.   A person who smokes or vapes in a place of employment or a public place
in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a minimum fine of:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100) and costs for the first offense;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200) and costs for the second offense;
      3.   Five hundred dollars (500) and costs for the third and subsequent
offenses.
   B.   A proprietor of a place of employment or public place upon whom a duty
is placed by the provisions of this section, who shall fail, neglect, or refuse
to perform such duty, or who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions
hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a minimum fine of:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100) and costs for the first offense;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200) and costs for the second offense;
      3.   Five hundred dollars (500) and costs for the third and subsequent
offenses.
   C.   Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
   D.   Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this section by an officer, manager, supervisor, agent
or employee of any proprietor, if said act or omission is made with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the proprietor, shall be deemed and
held to be the act or omission of such proprietor, and said proprietor shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been committed by
such proprietor personally.
39-8   Severability
Each section and subsection is hereby declared to be independent of every other
section or subsection herein and invalidity of any section or subsection herein
shall not invalidate any other section or subsection there.
(Adopted by Ordinance No. 9158, effective 6-1-2008) (Amended by Ordinance No.
9746, effective 9-11-2019)
39-9   Cigar Bar, Defined
Cigar bar shall mean an establishment operated by a holder of a Class C liquor
license which:
   A.   Does not sell food;
   B.   In addition to selling alcohol, annually receives ten percent or more
of its gross revenue from the sale of cigars, other tobacco products, and
tobacco-related products, except from the sale of cigarettes or vape products.
A cigar bar shall not discount alcohol if sold in combination with cigars or
other tobacco products and tobacco-related products;
   C.   Has a walk-in humidor on the premises;
   D.   Does not permit the smoking of cigarettes or vape devices; and
   E.   Is not within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a licensed childcare
center or school.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 9940 on 8/22/2023
CHAPTER 40
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
40-1   Purpose/Intent
40-2   Definitions
40-3   Applicability
40-4   Responsibility For Administration
40-5   Severability
40-6   Ultimate Responsibility
40-7   Illicit Discharge
40-8   Discharges To The Municipal Storm Sewer System MS4
40-9   Illicit Connection
40-10   Suspension Of Storm Drainage System Access
40-11   Construction
40-12   Post-Construction
40-13   Technical Standards, Specifications, And Guidance
40-14   Monitoring Of Discharges
40-15   Best Management Practices
40-16   Watercourse Protection
40-17   Notification Of Discharges And Spills
40-18   Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump Systems
40-19   Through 40-29 (Reserved)
40-30   Notice Of Violation
40-31   Appeal Of A Notice Of Violation
40-32   Enforcement Measures
40-33   Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
40-34   Injunctive Relief
40-35   Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
40-36   Criminal Prosecution
40-37   Remedies Not Exclusive
40-38   Storm Water Fee Schedule Established
40-1   Purpose/Intent
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Grand Island, Nebraska through the regulation of
stormwater and non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. In addition,
the purpose is to control land disturbances, or to reduce or eliminate soil
erosion and sedimentation within the City of Grand Island, NE. This ordinance
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by discharges by any person.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
   C.   To prevent non-storm water discharges generated as a result of spills,
inappropriate dumping, or disposal to the City of Grand Island separate storm
drainage system.
   D.   To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction
activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use,
and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks
the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land.
   E.   To require the construction of locally-approved, permanent stormwater
runoff controls to protect water quality and maintain non-erosive hydrologic
conditions downstream of construction activity and development.
   F.   To require responsibility for and long-term maintenance of structural
stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management.
   G.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
   H.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by geothermal water source heating and cooling system
discharges by any user.
   I.   To limit the connection and discharges of spent groundwater from
geothermal heat pump systems to the MS4.
40-2   Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency. The City of Grand Island, its employees, or
third parties designated by the Public Works Director which enforce this
ordinance.
Best Management Practices(BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. Best
Management Practices also include treatment practices, operating procedures,
and practices to control site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge disposal, water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times,
on different schedules, but under one proposed plan which may include, but is
not limited to, an announcement or piece of documentation (including a sign,
public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit
application, zoning request, computer design, etc.) or physical demarcation
(including boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor markings, etc.) indicating
construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Construction Permits. Such activities include, but are not
limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition and other land
disturbing actions.
Construction Site. Any location where construction activity occurs.
Contractor. Any person performing or managing construction work at a
construction site, including, but not limited to, any construction manager,
general contractor or subcontractor, and any person engaged in any one or more
of the following: earthwork, pipework, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, landscaping or material supply.
Clearing. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
Director. The City Engineer or the Public Works Director
Disturbed Area. Area of the land’s surface disturbed by any work or activity
upon the property by means including but not limited to grading, excavating,
stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials, clearing, vegetation removal,
removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials, or other activities
which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is
zoned for agricultural use.
Drainage Plan. A schematic of the proposed area and how it connects to city’s
storm sewer system. Include proposed location, grade, direction of flow,
elevations, drainage structures and drainage areas.
Earthwork. The disturbance of soil on a site associated with construction
activities.
Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind,
ice or gravity.
Erosion Control. Measures that prevent soil erosion to the maximum extent
practicable.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A plan that indicates the specific measures
and sequencing to be used for controlling sediment and erosion on a development
site during construction activity according to locally approved standards,
specification, and guidance.
Final Stabilization. When all soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and vegetative cover has been established with a uniform density of
at least 70 percent of predisturbance levels, or equivalent permanent, physical
erosion reduction methods have been employed. For purposes of this Ordinance,
establishment of a vegetative cover capable of providing erosion control
equivalent to pre-existing conditions at the site is considered final
stabilization.
Financial Security. A surety bond, performance bond, maintenance bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees provided to the City of
Grand Island to assure that a construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
is carried out in compliance with requirements of this Ordinance.
Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System. A geothermal system uses the Earth’s
thermal properties in conjunction with electricity to provide greater
efficiency in the heating and cooling of buildings.
Geothermal System (Closed Loop). A mechanism for heat exchange, which consists
of the following basic elements: Underground loops of piping; heat transfer
fluid; a heat pump; an air distribution system. An opening is made in the
Earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and connected to a heat
exchange system in the building. The pipes form a “closed loop” and are filled
with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated through the piping from the
opening into the heat exchanger and back. The system functions in the same
manner as the open loop system except there is no pumping of well or surface
water.
Geothermal System (Open Loop). Water is pumped from a well or surface water
into a heat exchanger located in a surface building. The water drawn from the
Earth is then pumped back into the aquifer through a different well or in some
cases the same well, otherwise known as re-injection. Alternatively, the ground
water could be discharged the Earth’s surface or a surface water body, also
known as pump & dump. In the heating mode, cooler water is returned to the
Earth’s surface or surface water body, while in the cooling mode warmer water
is returned to the Earth’s surface or surface water body.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illicit Discharge. Any unauthorized direct or indirect non-storm water
discharge to the storm drainage system.
Illicit Connections.
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyance which allows any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drainage
system.
   B.   Any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and
sinks regardless of whether said drain or connection has been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   C.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   D.   An Illicit Connection does not include connections that are allowed
under section
40-8 of this code.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Industrial Permits.
Low Impact Development (LID) means de-centralized management of precipitation
that would otherwise be stormwater runoff, utilizing design techniques that
infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, or temporarily detain stormwater.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). Publicly-owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage ditches/channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit means a permit issued by Environmental Protection Agency (or
by the State of Nebraska under authority delegated to it) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NDEQ. Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.
N.O.I (Notice of Intent) is a formal announcement of intent to disturb the
earth surface and is used to request a City, State, or Federal permit to
discharge stormwater for a variety of activities primarily for construction and
development.
N.O.T. (Notice of Termination) is a formal announcement that all construction
and ground disturbance activities are no longer authorized to discharge
stormwater associated with any City, State, or Federal permitted activity under
the NPDES program.
Outfall. The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private
stormwater drainage system.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
Operator. The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control of
activities occurring at the construction site. This can be the owner, the
developer, the general contractor or the agent of one of these parties. It is
anticipated that at different phases of a construction project, different types
of parties will satisfy the definition of ‘operator’ and the pertinent portions
of any applicable permit authorization from the State of Nebraska will be
transferred as the roles change.
Owner. The person who owns a facility, development, part of a facility, or
land.
Permittee. The applicant in whose name a valid permit is issued.
Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law.
Phasing. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization
of each phase before the clearing of the next.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Post-Construction. The general time period referenced in perpetuity from the
approval for final acceptance of the construction phase of any construction
activity.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management. The management of stormwater for a
period of time in perpetuity from approval for final acceptance of the
construction phase of any construction activity. The management of stormwater
includes the use of STFs that meet minimum site performance standards in
accordance with a community’s MS4 permit. STFs are intended to provide
stormwater treatment during this time period and are considered functional
after vegetation has been established.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP). Documentation supporting
analysis, design, maintenance and inspection of STFs installed on a site in
order to meet minimum site performance standards in accordance with a
community’s MS4 permit.
Receiving Water is any water of the State of Nebraska, including any and all
surface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of
Nebraska. These include all watercourses, even if they are usually dry,
irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater, and storm sewer systems
owned by other entities.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Redevelopment. Any land-disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition or replacement of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of
impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes,
but is not limited to the following activities that meet the minimum standards
set forth in this definition:
   A.   The expansion of a building footprint;
   B.   Addition or replacement of a structure;
   C.   Replacement of impervious surface that that is not part of a routine
maintenance activity;
   D.   Land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious
surfaces.
Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are
conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original
purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect
public health and safety.
Sediment. Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported
naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any person.
Sediment control. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.
Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
Site plan. A plan or set of plans showing the details of any land disturbance
activity of a site including but not limited to the construction of structures,
open and enclosed drainage facilities, stormwater management facilities,
parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths, recreational
facilities, ground covers, plantings and landscaping.
Spill. A release of solid or liquid material, which may cause pollution of the
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or waters of the State.
Stabilization. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to; any roads with
drainage systems; municipal streets; gutters; curbs; inlets; piped storm
drains; pumping facilities; retention and detention basins; natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels; reservoirs; and other drainage structures.
The storm drainage system in Grand Island is a municipal separate storm sewer
system as defined by applicable federal regulations.
Storm Water. Any water that occurs in surface flow, runoff, or drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
Stormwater Treatment Facilities (STFs). Permanent best management practices put
in place to provide control and treatment of stormwater runoff after
construction activity for land development is complete. These facilities are
physical in nature and sometimes referred to as “structural” BMPs and can
include Low Impact Development Techniques.
Subdivision Development includes activities associated with the platting of any
parcel of land into two or more lots and all construction activity taking place
thereon.
Utility Agency/Contractor. Private utility companies, public utility
departments, or other utility providers, contractors working for such private
utility companies, or public entity utility departments, or other utility
providers engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility lines and
services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas,
telephone, television and communication services.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from any premises or facility. Wastewater includes
sewage that is treated at the City’s Waste Water Treatment Plant.
Waters of the State. Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are
contained in or flow in or through the State of Nebraska. The definition
includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry.
40-3   Applicability
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
40-4   Responsibility For Administration
The City of Grand Island shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
City of Grand Island may be delegated by the Public Works Director to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the City.
40-5   Severability
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
ordinance.
40-6   Ultimate Responsibility
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are
minimum standards. Compliance with this ordinance does not act as a waiver or
defense to any person for contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge
of pollutants. Ultimate responsibility for prohibited acts rests with persons
who own or are in possession or control of premises from which the discharge of
contaminates or pollutants emanates.
40-7   Illicit Discharge
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
drainage system or watercourses any materials including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illicit discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited
except as allowed under section
40-8 of this code.
40-8   Discharges To The Municipal Storm Sewer System MS4
   A.   Permitted Discharges.
      1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water
sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering; diverted stream flows; rising
ground water; ground water infiltration to storm drains; uncontaminated pumped
ground water; foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems); crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; springs;
non-commercial washing of vehicles; natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows;
swimming pools (if dechlorinated – typically less than one PPM chlorine);
firefighting activities; and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
      2.   Discharges determined by the City to be necessary to protect public
health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing if the City is notified in writing prior to the time of
the test.
      4.   Any non-storm water discharge permitted under an National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination system permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to
the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges.
      1.   The following discharges are strictly prohibited from entering the
City Storm Sewer Conveyance System established by this ordinance: wastewater
from the washout of concrete, wastewater from the washout and cleanout of
stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, other construction
materials, fuels, oils, other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment
operation and maintenance, soaps, and solvents used in vehicle and equipment
washing.
      2.   Any other discharge that is not permitted by this ordinance.
40-9   Illicit Connection
The Construction, Use, Maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system are prohibited.
   A.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   B.   A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the
person connects a line conveying sewage or pollutants to the Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System or allows such a connection to continue.
40-10   Suspension Of Storm Drainage System Access
Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations . The City of
Grand Island may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system discharge
access to a person when the City deems it necessary to prevent an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to: the environment; to the health or welfare of persons or to the storm
drainage system; or to waters of the United States of America. If the person
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City of
Grand Island may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to persons, the storm drainage system, waters of the United States of
America.
Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge . Any person discharging
to the storm drainage system in violation of this ordinance may have their
storm drainage system access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a person of the proposed
termination of storm drainage system access by personal delivery or by United
States Mail. The person may request a hearing before the City Director of
Public Works by delivering such request in writing to the City Clerk. The
person is not entitled to a stay of the termination pending any such hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person accesses or attempts to access the
storm drainage system from premises terminated pursuant to this Section,
without the prior approval of the City.
40-11   Construction
   A.   General Requirements for Construction Activities.
      1.   Except for construction activity relating to the Building Phase of
Development, the City of Grand Island shall require proof of coverage by a NDEQ
general permit authorization for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Sites
before providing approval for construction activity and land developments
requiring –including but not limited to: site plan applications, subdivision
applications, building applications, and right-of-way applications from the
City of Grand Island, unless exempt pursuant to Subsection (A)(1)(a) below.
These provisions apply to all portions of any plan for land disturbing activity
which would cause the disturbance of at least one acre of soil even though
multiple, separate and distinct land development activities within the overall
development may take place at different times on different schedules.
         a.   The following activities are exempt from this Ordinance:
            (1)   Any emergency activity that is necessary for the immediate
protection of life, property, or natural resources; and
            (2)   Construction activity that provides maintenance and repairs
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of a facility.
      2.   The city shall be invited to the pre-construction meeting to review
the installation of all temporary erosion and sediment control BMPs included on
the approved erosion and sediment control plan at least two (2) business days
before any construction activities are scheduled to start.
      3.   Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants
or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMPs.
Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or
contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of
waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the
site is prohibited. Sanitary waste facilities shall be provided and maintained
in a secured manner.
      4.   Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning
of vehicles or equipment containing such materials or used in transporting or
applying ready-mixed concrete, shall not be allowed to discharge from any
construction site. Concrete wasted on site must be disposed in a manner
consistent with locally approved standards and generally require establishment
of a designated wash-out area.
      5.   Cover or perimeter control shall be applied within seven (7) days to
any soil stockpiles, which will remain undisturbed for longer than 14 calendar
days.
      6.   Disturbed soil shall be managed with BMPs that are adequately
designed, installed, and maintained according to locally-approved technical
standards, specifications and guidance for the duration of the construction
activity to minimize erosion and contain sediment within the construction
limits.
      7.   Sediment tracked or discharged onto public right-of-way shall be
removed immediately.
      8.   Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals
shall have adequate protection to contain all spills and prevent any spilled
material from entering the MS4 or waters of the State.
      9.   Temporary BMPs shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be
stabilized with permanent BMPs at the conclusion of construction activity.
   B.   Requirements for the Building Phase of Development.
      1.   Any person who engages in construction activity is responsible for
compliance with this Ordinance and all applicable terms and conditions of the
approved construction activity and SWPPP as it relates to the building phase of
development. The following information shall be included with the application
for a building permit and be submitted to the Public Works Department:
      2.   Either the legal description and NPDES permit number for the Larger
Common Plan of Development; OR
      3.   The location of the property where the building phase of development
is to occur; AND
      4.   Contractor acknowledgement that the building phase of development
for the property described on the application for a building permit will be
conducted in conformance with Chapter 40 of the Municipal Code and the
Construction Activity SWPPP.
      5.   Site plans shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for the
purpose of review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit and the
beginning of the construction phase of development. This is to ensure
compliance with EPA directives and with section
40-12 of this ordinance as it pertains to the Post-Construction Management of
Stormwater run-off.
   C.   Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
      1.   A SWPPP shall be prepared and updated in accordance with locally-
approved technical standards, specification, and guidance for construction
activity within the City of Grand Island and shall include an erosion and
sediment control plan for land disturbance.
      2.   The SWPPP shall include a description of all potential pollution
sources, temporary and permanent BMPs that will be implemented at the site.
BMPs used will be approved by the Public Works Director.
      3.   The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the
Public Works Director for review with any application covered in
40-11 (A)(1) of this Ordinance.
      4.   Land disturbing activities may not proceed until approval of the
erosion and sediment control plan is provided by the Public Works Director.
      5.   The owner or operator is required to have a copy of the SWPPP
readily available or on site for review with content that reflects the current
condition of the construction activity and all records that demonstrate
compliance and are required by this Ordinance.
      6.   The SWPPP shall include a description of routine site inspections.
         (1)   The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs at
intervals of no greater than 14 calendar days and within 24-hours after any
precipitation event of at least one half inch.
         (2)   Inspections of BMPs shall be conducted by an individual
knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls
who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that
could impact stormwater quality and to assess the effectiveness of any erosion
and sediment control measures selected to control the quality of stormwater
discharges from the construction activity.
         (3)   Inspection reports shall provide the name and qualification of
the inspector, date of the evaluation, risks to stormwater quality identified,
and all corrective actions necessary to prevent stormwater pollution.
         (4)   The owner or operator of a construction activity may be
requested to submit copies of inspection reports for review on a periodic basis
by the Public Works Director.
      7.   Based on inspections performed by the owner, operator, authorized
City of Grand Island personnel, State or Federal regulators, modifications to
the SWPPP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the
objectives of this Ordinance. In this case, the owner shall meet with an
appointed official of the City of Grand Island to determine the appropriate
modifications. All required modifications shall be completed within seven (7)
calendar days of receiving notice of inspection findings, and shall be recorded
in the SWPPP.
      8.   The owner or operator of a construction site shall be responsible
for amending the SWPPP whenever there is a significant change in design,
construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the
potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, or if the
SWPPP proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of
controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with land
disturbance.
      9.   Records of inspection are to be maintained with the SWPPP for the
life of the project. Inspection records are to be available to City of Grand
Island inspectors upon request. Delay in providing a copy of the SWPPP or any
requested records shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
   D.   Requirements for Utility Construction.
      1.   Utility agencies or their representatives shall develop and
implement BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility
construction within the City of Grand Island. The City of Grand Island may
require additional BMPs on utility construction activity. If the utility
construction disturbs greater than one (1) acre, the utility agency must comply
with the requirements of Section
40-11 (A) & (B) of this Ordinance.
      2.   Utility agencies or their representative shall implement BMPs to
prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed
areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site
exits shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto
public right-of-way shall be removed immediately.
      3.   Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development,
utility agencies or their representatives shall obtain and comply with any
approved erosion and sediment control plans for the project. Any impact to
construction and post-construction BMP’s resulting from utility construction
shall be evaluated prior to disturbance by the developer and utility company.
Repairs to the disturbed BMPs must be completed within forty eight (48) hours,
by individuals agreed upon during the design phase or at a preconstruction
meeting.
40-12   Post-Construction
The purpose of this section is to provide requirements and criteria to prevent
and manage stormwater pollution and to diminish adverse impacts to health,
safety, property, and the general welfare of the citizens of the City of Grand
Island through regulating stormwater runoff from areas of development and
redevelopment to the maximum extent practicable as required by the Federal
Clean Water Act, 33.U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (as amended to date), the Nebraska
Environmental Protection Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-1501 et seq. (as amended to
date) and the rules and regulations promulgated under such Acts. This chapter
will also promote the public welfare by guiding and regulating the design,
construction, and maintenance of areas of development and redevelopment.
Additional criteria can be found in the City of Grand Island Post-Construction
Stormwater Guidance Manual.
   A.   Post-Construction Requirement of Permanent BMPs/STFs.
      1.   Land development that meets the requirements of Section
40-11 (A)(1) must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of
permanent BMPs/STFs. Permanent BMPs/STFs shall be provided for in the drainage
plan for any subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement,
subdivision agreement or other local development plan.
      2.   Structural BMPs/STFs located on private property shall be owned and
operated by the owner(s) of the property on which the BMP is located; unless
the City of Grand Island agrees in writing that a person or entity other than
the owner shall own or operate such BMP/STF. As a condition of approval of the
BMP/STFs, the owner shall also agree to maintain the BMP/STF in perpetuity to
its design capacity unless or until the City of Grand Island shall relieve the
property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain
the BMP/STF shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat,
development agreement, subdivision agreement or other form acceptable to the
City of Grand Island and shall be recorded with the City of Grand Island Public
Works Department.
      3.   The preferred Structural BMPs/STFs that are acceptable in the City
of Grand Island and its 2 mile jurisdictional boundary without additional
review by the Public Works Director are: Bioswales, Rain Gardens, Permeable
Pavement, Green Roofs, Retention Ponds, and Detention Ponds (Provided the
detention Ponds include treatment areas to improve water quality; i.e. a
treatment forebay and filtration strip). If there are other stormwater
treatment measures a developer would like to use, plans for those measures will
need to be submitted to and approved in writing by the Director of Public
Works, prior to construction and development.
      4.   A Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP) shall be
submitted to the planning department for transmittal to the Public Works
Director on a form or format specified by the director, as part of any
preliminary plat application required under Sec.
33-7; if not already submitted as part of a preliminary plat process. For any
significant redevelopment, a post-construction stormwater management plan shall
be submitted along with the permit application for any activity requiring a
building permit under Sec.
33-6.
(1)   For all developments that have not had a preliminary plat approved prior
to January 1, 2019, the post-construction stormwater management plan, at a
minimum, shall include Low Impact Development (LID) STFs to provide for water
quality control of the first one-half inch of runoff from the site. The
director may also require this minimum control level for replats that
significantly increase the amount of impervious area in a preliminarily platted
subdivision, which was approved prior to July 1, 2018.
(2)   For all developments with plats preliminarily approved after July 1, 2018
and for significant redevelopment projects, the post-construction stormwater
management plan, at a minimum shall include the STF or STFs selected, the STF
design, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the STFs,
and where it is reasonably practicable, include STFs for water quality control
of the first one-half inch of runoff from the site. Provisions for STFs are set
forth in the Grand Island Post-Construction Stormwater Management Guide. For
significant redevelopment projects that involve replacement of building
structures without significant disturbance of existing parking or other
pervious areas, BMPs for water quality control of the first one-half inch of
runoff from the site shall not be required. For significant redevelopment
projects involving an outlot parcel that is part of a greater existing
development, the calculation of the area requiring control of the first one-
half inch of runoff shall be based only on the impervious area of the project
site that is being added or disturbed within the out lot parcel.
   B.   Exemptions from the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan.
Systems designed to accommodate only one single family dwelling unit, duplex,
triplex, or quadraplex, provided the single unit is not part of a larger common
plan of development or sale, are exempt from the requirements in this Ordinance
to submit a Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan. Additional policies
and procedures for the development and implementation requirements for BMPs/
STFs can be found in the City of Grand Island Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Guide.
   C.   Completion of Permanent BMPs/STFs. Upon completion of a project, the
City of Grand Island shall be provided a written certification stating that the
completed project is in compliance with the approved Final Drainage Plan. All
applicants are required to submit “as built” plans for any permanent BMPs once
final construction is completed and must be signed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Nebraska.
   D.   Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Permanent BMPs/STFs.
      1.   The owner of site must, unless an on-site stormwater management
facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Grand Island,
execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, that shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of the permanent BMPs/STFs.
      2.   Permanent BMPs/STFs included in a Drainage Plan which is subject to
an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to
document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the
requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Ordinance.
         (1)   All BMPs/STFs must be inspected by the owner, using an approved
inspection form, (Appendix B of the Grand Island Post-Construction Guidance
Manual), for maintenance and repair requirements at a minimum, once per
quarter.
         (2)   All BMPs/STFs shall be inspected, by a qualified employee of the
City of Grand Island, twice per year to ensure owner compliance with the design
of the BMP/STF and to ensure maintenance and repair actions are adequately
monitored.
      3.   The maintenance agreement shall also provide that if, after notice
by the City to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory
corrections are not made by the owner(s) or occupant within a reasonable period
of time (30 days maximum), and the City may perform all necessary work to place
the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) or occupant of the
facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any lawful penalties.
40-13   Technical Standards, Specifications, And Guidance
All BMPs/STFs designed to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall
reference the appropriate technical standards, specifications and guidance as
follows:
   A.   City of Grand Island Standards and Specifications for Construction.
   B.   Nebraska Department of Roads Drainage Design and Erosion Control
Standards, Specifications and Guidance.
   C.   Any other alternative methodology approved by the City of Grand Island,
which is demonstrated to be effective.
40-14   Monitoring Of Discharges
   A.   Applicability. This section applies to all premises that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   B.   Access to premises.
      1.   The City of Grand Island’s designees shall be permitted to enter and
inspect premises and facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City.
      2.   The City’s designees shall be given access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of: inspection; sampling; examination and copying of
records that must be kept under the conditions of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit to discharge storm water; and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The City may place upon the premises such devices as deemed
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges from the
premises.
      4.   The City of Grand Island may require a person to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. Sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at no expense to the
City. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure accuracy.
      5.   Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed at the request of the City
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall not be paid
by the City.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing Grand Island City designees access
to premises is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility or premises with a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to discharge storm water
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
City reasonable access for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this ordinance.
      7.   If a City of Grand Island designee has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, the City of Grand
Island may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
40-15   Best Management Practices
The City of Grand Island may adopt requirements identifying Best Management
Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the United States of America. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at the owner or
operator’s expense, reasonable protection from discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural Best
Management Practices. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-
structural Best Management Practices to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. These Best Management
Practices shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan as necessary
for compliance with requirements of any National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit.
40-16   Watercourse Protection
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, and such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
40-17   Notification Of Discharges And Spills
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility, premises, or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which result or may result in illegal discharges
or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage system, or
waters of the United States of America, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the
event of such release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies and the City of Grand Island of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-
hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of Grand Island in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person, by phone, or by facsimile shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Grand Island within three
business days of the prior notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three years.
40-18   Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump Systems
Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump Systems may be installed and operated within
the City of Grand Island, and its two mile extraterritorial jurisdiction,
subject to permitting and other applicable requirements of the Grand Island
City Code provided that any discharge of the spent water from any such system
shall be dedicated to a beneficial use (i.e. Maintaining the water level of a
private pond), and shall not include chemical additives for cleaning or
descaling, nor shall it create a threat to public health or safety, a nuisance,
or unlawful pollution of waters of the state. In no event shall the spent water
from any Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System be directed toward or allowed
to enter into or onto any publicly maintained street right of way, road right
of way, ditch, storm sewer system, or sanitary sewer system.
Closed Loop Systems are permitted to be installed and must follow Federal,
State, and Local guidelines (whichever are most restrictive). New Open Loop
Systems are prohibited in the City of Grand Island and its 2 mile
jurisdictional boundary. Any Open Loop System that was previously installed,
prior to the implementation of this ordinance, are exempt from these
restrictions until the system requires overhaul and/or replacement. It is at
that time the new guidelines must be met.
   A.   Material Requirements.
      1.   Geothermal piping shall have a 50-year warranty.
      2.   All piping shall be installed with tracer wire from the structure
over all pipes to alert future owners and excavators to the presence and
location of the system.
      3.   Heat transfer fluid used in exchanger lines must be a USP or food
grade propylene glycol or calcium chloride solution. Ethylene Glycol will
not be accepted.
      4.   The system shall include a pressure-based leak detector that will
stop the system circulating pumps, should a leak occur.
   B.   Prohibited Acts.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install a well to be used for
geothermal heat transfer purposes within the City of Grand Island or its two
mile extraterritorial jurisdiction without obtaining a permit for said well.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to fail to register any well as required by
this Article.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to connect or discharge any water from said
well, provided it maintains a beneficial use to the city and/or community, to
the city stormwater conveyance system without first obtaining a permit for the
connection.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or maintain a
Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System in any manner contrary to the
provisions of Grand Island City Code.
40-19   Through 40-29 (Reserved)
40-30   Notice Of Violation
Whenever the City of Grand Island finds that a person has violated or failed to
meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the City’s designee may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation:
   A.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
   B.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
   C.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
   D.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
   E.   Payment of costs to cover administrative and remediation expenses;
   F.   The implementation of source control, treatment, and prevention
practices. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a
contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator and may be
assessed against the real estate or collected by civil action.
40-31   Appeal Of A Notice Of Violation
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination. The
notice of appeal must be received within 10 days from the date of the notice of
violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice
of appeal. The decision of the Director shall be final.
40-32   Enforcement Measures
If the violation has not been corrected as set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 25 days of the original
deadline if the Director upholds the notice of violation, then representatives
of the City of Grand Island may enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City’s designees or
agents to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
40-33   Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
After abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not
paid within 30 days, the City of Grand Island may sue to recover the costs
through a civil action or levy and assess the costs against the real estate in
the manner of special assessments.
40-34   Injunctive Relief
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the City of Grand Island
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person
to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. Injunctive relief shall
be in addition to any other remedy available under this ordinance or any other
federal or state law.
40-35   Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated or restored at the violator's expense,
in the same manner as other nuisances under the Grand Island Municipal Code.
40-36   Criminal Prosecution
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of an infraction. Each day shall constitute a separate offense and be
punishable by a fine of $100.00. Criminal fines shall be in addition to any
civil remedies available under Grand Island Municipal Code.
40-37   Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ordinance No. 9636 effective 7-12-2017)
40-38   Storm Water Fee Schedule Established
There is hereby assessed against all property within the City that is connected
to water of the City a monthly storm water utility fee as set forth in the
Grand Island Fee Schedule. Such fee is based upon a determination of the use
for each property. The owner, occupant and any person who is responsible for
the payment of water service to the property, shall all be jointly and
severally responsible for the payment of said fee. Persons responsible for the
payment of water service to the property shall include the person responsible
for payment for water provided to a master meter that is then distributed to
multiple users, whether or not said users are located on the same property as
the master meter. The fees shall be set based upon the following property use
categories:
   A.   All property devoted to a residential use. The term “residential” shall
include single family homes, mobile homes, and mobile home parks, duplexes and
apartment units. The term “residential” shall not include rooming or boarding
houses, dormitories, and similar facilities; and
   B.   Property devoted to any use other than residential. (Ordinance No. 9648
effective 10-1-2017)
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances and Resolutions
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed Code Section
9967           3-12-2024   23-126,
                           23-127
9968           3-12-2024   4-19
9972           4-9-2024    31-21
9973           5-7-2024    35-63
9974           5-21-2024   26-34
9975           5-21-2024   18-25
9976           5-21-2024   36-99
9977           6-11-2024   35-30
                           15-53,
                           15-55,
                           15-57,
                           15-60,
                           15-63,
                           15-64,
9978           6-11-2024   15-68,
                           15-70,
                           15-74,
                           15-76,
                           15-77,
                           15-78,
                           15-79
                           15-2,
                           15-3,
                           15-4,
9981           7-9-2024    15-6,
                           15-8,
                           15-14,
                           15-18,
                           15-49
9977 (Amended) 9-10-2024   35-30
                           15-53,
                           15-55,
                           15-57,
                           15-60,
                           15-63,
9978 (Amended) 9-10-2024   15-64,
                           15-68,
                           15-70,
                           15-74,
                           15-76 -
                           15-79
9983           9-3-2024    38-12 -
                           38-22
9990           9-24-2024   23-21
                           2-76 -
                           2-80,
                           23-79,
                           38-1,
9994           10-8-2024   38-2,
                           38-8,
                           38-9,
                           38-10, Repeals Ch. 23, Art. VIII, Repeals 38-3 - 38-
                           7
9999           11-5-2024   27-64 -
                           27-76
10,001         11-19-2024  36-97
10,005         1-14-2025   23-61
10,007         1-28-2025   37-60 -
                           37-71, Reserves 37-54 - 37-59
                           18-6,
                           18-9,
                           18-19,
                           18-25,
                           18-28,
                           18-41,
                           18-43,
10,008         1-28-2025   18-45 -
                           18-45.3,
                           18-46,
                           18-47,
                           18-53,
                           18-55,
                           18-57,
                           18-61,
                           18-69
                           26-28,
                           26-34,
                           26-41,
                           26-44 -
                           26-44.3,
                           26-45.1,
                           26-45.5,
                           26-46.1,
10,009         1-28-2025   26-46.3,
                           26-53,
                           26-55,
                           26-56,
                           26-59,
                           26-60,
                           26-65 -
                           26-71,
                           26-72,
                           26-73
10,010         2-25-2025   15-76,
                           15-80
                           13-1 -
                           13-3,
                           13-60 -
                           13-64,
                           13-64.1,
                           13-64.2,
10,012         3-11-2025   13-66 -
                           13-72,
                           13-81 -
                           13-87,
                           13-91 -
                           13-96,
                           13-96.1
                           27-2 -
                           27-12,
                           27-14 -
                           27-22,
10,014         6-7-2025    27-25,
                           27-27,
                           27-28, Reserves 27-29 - 27-33, Reserves 27-35 - 27-
                           38, 27-52, Reserves 27-53 - 27-59, 27-60, Reserves
                           27-61 - 27-63
                           36-7,
                           36-8,
                           36-25,
                           36-27,
                           36-54,
                           36-55,
10,025         6-24-2025   36-56,
                           36-58,
                           36-60,
                           36-61,
                           36-97,
                           36-99,
                           36-108
10,029         8-5-2025    38-12 -
                           38-22
10,030         8-5-2025    1-13,
                           1-14
                           35-4,
                           35-5,
                           35-7,
                           35-10,
10,038         9-23-2025   35-11,
                           35-36 -
                           35-39,
                           35-41,
                           35-43
10,043         10-28-2025  2-18,
                           2-21
10,050         11-4-2025   22-84,
                           32-48
10,051         11-4-2025   25-30 -
                           25-33
                          
 
 
