VILLAGE OF MULLEN, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 239, passed 7-10-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   VILLAGE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.17   Local changes to this code of ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the Mullen Code of
Ordinances and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body
of the village.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This village code as modified
by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Hooker County, Nebraska.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this village unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities,
the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies and associations.
(Neb. RS 49-801(16))
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Mullen,
Nebraska.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this village shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
Village Board or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this village for the transaction of all village
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to
the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including ordinances
specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public
places;
   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;
   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedications of land to
public use;
   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
   (G)   Appropriating money;
   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or
   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified
by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed
or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in
force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 17-614
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of
the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. RS 18-
132)
   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
   copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.
§ 10.17 LOCAL CHANGES TO THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   Any provision of this code of ordinances may be repealed, modified or
superseded by an ordinance passed by the Village Board.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this municipal code set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure
to comply. Whoever incites another to commit any act which is an offense under
this code or under any other ordinance of the municipality may be prosecuted
and punished as though he or she was the principal offender.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-8-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505
CHAPTER 11: VILLAGE STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Corporate seal
§ 11.01 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   The official corporate seal of the municipality shall be kept in the
office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and shall bear the following
inscription: “Village Seal, Village of Mullen, Hooker County, Nebraska.”
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall affix an impression of said
official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances and all other
official papers issued by order of the governing body and countersigned by the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1-401)
Statutory reference:
   Seal; other powers, see Neb. RS 17-502
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES; LEGISLATION
      
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   ELECTIONS
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; LEGISLATION
Section
Board of Trustees
   
30.01   Election; terms; qualifications
   
30.02   General powers
   
30.03   Oath; organization; Chairperson
   
30.04   Chairperson; powers and duties; absence
   
30.05   Standing committees
   
30.06   Vacancy
Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions
   
30.20   Grant of power
   
30.21   Resolutions and motions
   
30.22   Introduction of ordinances
   
30.23   Ordinances; style, title
   
30.24   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders, bylaws
   
30.25   Publication or posting
   
30.26   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
30.27   Amendments and revisions
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.01 ELECTION; TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The corporate powers and duties of the village shall be vested in a
Board of Trustees which shall consist of five members. At the first statewide
general election held after the incorporation of the village, two Trustees
shall be elected to serve two years and three Trustees shall be elected to
serve four years. Thereafter the Board members shall be elected as provided in
the Election Act. The terms shall begin on the first regular meeting of the
Board in December following the statewide general election.
(Neb. RS 17-202)
   (B)   The members of the Board of Trustees shall be elected at the statewide
general election as provided in division (A) above and each four years
thereafter. Except as provided in that division, the term of each Board member
shall be four years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
(Neb. RS 32-532)
   (C)   Any person may be a Trustee who is a citizen of the United States,
resides in the village and is a registered voter.
(Neb. RS 17-203)
   (D)   Unless the village provides otherwise, members of the Board of
Trustees shall be elected from the village at large on a nonpartisan ballot.
   (E)   The Board of Trustees shall determine whether the person meets all
requirements before swearing in a Trustee.
(Neb. RS 32-602)
Statutory reference:
   Ability to elect Trustees at large or by ward, see Neb. RS 32-554
   Ability to provide for a partisan ballot, see Neb. RS 32-557
   Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.
   Holding other office or employment, see Neb. RS 17-209.02 and 32-604
§ 30.02 GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have the power to pass ordinances:
      (1)   To prevent and remove nuisances within the village or within its
one-mile zoning jurisdiction;
      (2)   To restrain and prohibit gambling;
      (3)   To provide for licensing and regulating theatrical and other
amusements within the village;
      (4)   To prevent the introduction and spread of contagious diseases;
      (5)   To establish and regulate markets;
      (6)   To erect and repair bridges;
      (7)   To erect, repair and regulate wharves;
      (8)   To regulate the landing of watercraft;
      (9)   To provide for the inspection of building materials to be used or
offered for sale in the village;
      (10)   To govern the planting and protection of shade trees in the
streets and the building of structures projecting upon or over and adjoining,
and all excavations through and under, the sidewalks of the village;
      (11)   To maintain the peace, good government and welfare of the village
and its trade and commerce; and
      (12)   To enforce all ordinances by inflicting penalties upon inhabitants
or other persons for violation of such ordinances not exceeding $500 for any
one offense, recoverable with costs.
(Neb. RS 17-207)
   (B)   The village has the power and authority by ordinance to define,
regulate, suppress and prevent nuisances, and to declare what constitutes a
nuisance, and to abate and remove the same. The village may exercise this power
and authority within its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 18-1720)
§ 30.03 OATH; ORGANIZATION; CHAIRPERSON.
   Every Village Trustee, before entering upon the duties of his or her office,
shall take an oath to support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of Nebraska and faithfully and impartially to discharge the duties
of his or her office. All Trustees elected to office shall qualify and meet on
the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees in December thereafter,
organize, elect a Chairperson of the Board of Trustees and appoint the officers
required by law.
(Neb. RS 17-204)
Statutory reference:
   Oath, see Neb. RS 11-101
§ 30.04 CHAIRPERSON; POWERS AND DUTIES; ABSENCE.
   (A)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees
and perform all duties of his or her office in accordance with the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the village.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the Board of Trustees shall cause the ordinances of
the Board to be printed and published for the information of the inhabitants
and cause such ordinances to be carried into effect. In the absence of the
Chairperson from any meeting of the Board, the Board shall have power to
appoint a Chairperson pro tempore, who shall exercise and have the powers and
perform the same duties as the regular Chairperson.
(Neb. RS 17-210)
   (C)   The Chairperson and the Chairperson pro tempore shall have the same
powers and privileges as other members of the Board of Trustees.
§ 30.05 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   At the organizational meeting of the Board of Trustees each year, the
Chairperson shall appoint members of those standing committees as the Board may
create by ordinance or resolution. The membership of the standing committees
may be changed at any time by the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be an ex
officio member of each standing committee. The members of the standing
committees shall serve terms of office of one year, unless reappointed.
   (B)   The standing committees shall be appointed or reappointed each year
until changed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 30.06 VACANCY.
   (A)   Every elective office shall be vacant upon the happening of any of the
events specified in Neb. RS 32-560 except as provided in Neb. RS 32-561.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) below,
vacancies in village elected offices shall be filled by the Board of Trustees
for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy, except a vacancy
resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing and presented to
the Board at a regular or special meeting and shall appear as a part of the
minutes of that meeting. The Board shall at once give public notice of the
vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the village or by posting in three public places in the village the office
vacated and the length of the unexpired term.
      (2)   (a)   The Chairperson of the Board shall call a special meeting of
the Board or place the issue of filling the vacancy on the agenda at the next
regular meeting at which time the Chairperson shall submit the name of a
qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired
term. The regular or special meeting shall occur upon the death of the
incumbent, or within four weeks after the meeting at which such notice of
vacancy has been presented. The Board shall vote upon the nominee, and if a
majority votes in favor of the nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled.
         (b)   If the nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the
nomination shall be rejected, and the Chairperson shall, at the next regular or
special meeting, submit the name of another qualified registered voter to fill
the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to receive a majority of the
votes, the Chairperson shall continue at that meeting to submit the names of
qualified registered voters in nomination and the Board shall continue to vote
upon the nominations at such meeting until the vacancy is filled. All Trustees
present shall cast a ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Board
who has been appointed to fill a vacancy on the Board shall have the same
rights, including voting, as if that person were elected.
   (C)   The Chairperson and Board of Trustees may, in lieu of filling a
vacancy in a village elected office as provided in division (B) above, call a
special election to fill that vacancy.
   (D)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the members
of the Board of Trustees, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
village election to fill those vacancies.
(Neb. RS 32-569)
Statutory reference:
   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-560 through 32-572
   Ineligibility of official subjected to recall, see Neb. RS 32-1308
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS
§ 30.20 GRANT OF POWER.
   In addition to its special powers, the village shall have the power to make
all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions, not inconsistent
with the laws of the state, as may be expedient for maintaining the peace, good
government and welfare of the village and its trade, commerce and
manufactories, and to enforce all ordinances by inflicting fines or penalties
for the breach thereof, not exceeding $500 for any one offense, recoverable
with costs.
(Neb. RS 17-505)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of standard codes, see Neb. RS 18-132 and 19-922
   Prosecution in county court, see Neb. RS 25-2703
§ 30.21 RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   Unless the Board of Trustees has specified other procedures, resolutions and
motions shall be introduced in one of the methods prescribed in §
30.22 for the introduction of ordinances. The issue raised by the resolution or
motion shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary law
adopted for the guidance of the Board of Trustees. A majority vote shall be
required to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution or motion
shall be by roll call vote.
§ 30.22 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   Unless the Board of Trustees has specified other procedures, ordinances
shall be introduced by members of the Board of Trustees in one of the following
ways:
   (A)   With the recognition of the Chairperson, a member may, in the presence
and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Board of Trustees, read
aloud the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer for future consideration; or
   (B)   With the recognition of the Chairperson, a member may present the
proposed ordinance to the Clerk-Treasurer who, in the presence and hearing of a
majority of the members elected to the Board of Trustees, shall read aloud the
substance of the ordinance and file it for future consideration.
§ 30.23 ORDINANCES; STYLE, TITLE.
   (A)   The style of all village ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the
Chairperson and Board of Trustees of the Village of Mullen, Nebraska:....”
(Neb. RS 17-613)
   (B)   No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly expressed in
the title.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
§ 30.24 READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation
or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence
of a majority of all elected members of the Board of Trustees. Ordinances of a
general or permanent nature shall be read by title on three different days
unless three-fourths of the Board of Trustees vote to suspend this requirement.
Such requirement shall not be suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of
territory, or the redrawing of boundaries for Village Board of Trustees
election districts or wards as otherwise provided by law.
      (2)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read
by title and then moved for final passage. Three-fourths of the Board of
Trustees may require a reading of any such ordinance in full before enactment
under either procedure set out in this section.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and every
resolution or order to enter into a contract by the Board of Trustees, the yeas
and nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance or
any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number
of members elected to the Board of Trustees shall be required. All appointments
of the officers by the Board of Trustees shall be made viva voce, and the
concurrence of a like majority shall be required, and the names of those, and
for whom they voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment shall be recorded.
The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a
village which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and
nays of each member of the Board of Trustees to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. RS 17-616)
Statutory reference:
   Adjustments to boundaries of election districts, see Neb. RS 17-614
§ 30.25 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published within 15 days after they are passed:
   (A)   In a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the village or,
if no paper is published in the village, then by posting a written or printed
copy in each of three public places in the village; or
   (B)   In book, pamphlet or electronic form.
(Neb. RS 17-613)
Statutory reference:
   Chairperson of Board of Trustees; duties, see Neb. RS 17-210
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-131
§ 30.26 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
30.25 and division (B) below, an ordinance for the government of the village
which has been adopted by the Board of Trustees without submission to the
voters of the village shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage
of the ordinance.
(Neb. RS 19-3701)
   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious disease or other
impending danger, failure of a public utility or any other emergency requiring
its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation
of the Chairperson and the posting thereof in at least three of the most public
places in the village. The emergency ordinance shall recite the emergency, be
passed by a three-fourths vote of the Board of Trustees and be entered of
record on the Village Clerk-Treasurer’s minutes.
(Neb. RS 17-613)
§ 30.27 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the village and modifications to zoning or
building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
Statutory reference:
   Modifications to zoning or building districts, see Neb. RS 19-915
   Ordinances revising all the ordinances of the village, see Neb. RS 17-614
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Bonds; requirements
   
31.02   Oath of office; village officials
   
31.03   Compensation; how fixed; limitations
   
31.04   Conflicts of interest involving contracts
   
31.05   Interlocal agreements
Appointed Officials
   
31.20   Appointment; terms; removal; powers; duties
   
31.21   Qualification for office
   
31.22   Merger of offices
   
31.23   Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.24   Village Clerk
   
31.25   Village Treasurer
   
31.26   Village Attorney
   
31.27   Village Engineer; special engineer
   
31.28   Municipal Utilities Superintendent
Meetings
   
31.40   Definitions
   
31.41   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
31.42   Notice to news media
   
31.43   Village Board meetings; when; where; quorum
   
31.44   Emergency meetings
   
31.45   Closed sessions
   
31.46   Public participation
   
31.47   Order of business
   
31.48   Votes
   
31.49   Minutes
   
31.50   Change in office
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BONDS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The village may enact ordinances or bylaws to require from all
officers and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or evidence of
equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their duties. The village
may pay the premium for such bonds or insurance coverage.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (B)   (1)   All official bonds of officers of the village shall be in form
joint and several and made payable to the village in such penalty as the Board
of Trustees may fix.
      (2)   In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by
municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking or
evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a
single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position or blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers,
including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or
undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium for the
bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a
minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the Board of Trustees,
and with such terms and conditions as may be required.
(Neb. RS 11-104)
      (3)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal
minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official.
   (C)   (1)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed
in the Village Clerk-Treasurer’s office within the following time:
         (a)    Of all officers elected at any general election, following
receipt of their election certificate and not later than ten days before the
first Thursday after the first Tuesday in January next succeeding the election;
         (b)   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days after their
appointment; and
         (c)   Of officers elected at any special election and village
officers, within 30 days after the canvass of the votes of the election at
which they were chosen.
      (2)   The filing of the bond with the oath endorsed thereon does not
authorize a person to take any official action prior to the beginning of his or
her term of office pursuant to Article XVII, § 5, of the Constitution of
Nebraska.
(Neb. RS 11-105)
   (D)   All official bonds of village officers shall be executed by the
principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who shall
be freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any official
bond of a village officer may be executed by the officer as principal and by a
guaranty, surety, fidelity or bonding company as surety, or by two or more such
companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to transact business
in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a village officer.
(Neb. RS 11-109)
   (E)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall carefully record and preserve the
bonds in his or her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when
required, under the seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to receive
for the same the usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in
other cases.
(Neb. RS 11-110)
   (F)   (1)   The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed upon such
bond by the officer approving the same, and no bond shall be filed and recorded
until so approved.
(Neb. RS 11-111)
      (2)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval
of the Board of Trustees and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the
instrument by the Chairperson and Village Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to the
approval of the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the
faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such principal and shall
inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the conditions of
such bonds.
(Neb. RS 11-112)
   (H)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any informality
of irregularity in its execution or approval.
(Neb. RS 11-113)
   (I)   No village official shall be taken as security on the bond of any
administrator, executor or other officer from whom, by law, bond is or may be
required.
(Neb. RS 11-114)
   (J)   If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to have his
or her official bond executed and approved as provided by law and filed for
record within the time limited by this section, the Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she has
failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials, or before
the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be deemed
to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file the bond
within ten days of the issuance of such order for appointed officials, or
before the date for taking office for elected officials, and sufficient cause
is not shown within that time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto
become vacant, and such vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by
election or appointment as the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the
same office.
(Neb. RS 11-115)
   (K)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon the
duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and form with
the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed, as herein
provided.
(Neb. RS 11-116)
   (L)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed, he or she
shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above directed, but
when such officer has had public funds or property in his or her control, his
or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced and fully
accounted for such funds and property. When it is ascertained that the
incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the nonelection or
nonappointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor to
qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days from the time at which
his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.
(Neb. RS 11-117)
   (M)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than two
successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply to
incorporated surety companies.
(Neb. RS 11-118)
   (N)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer of the
village, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, become insufficient, the
Board may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the officer may
give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. If the officer fails,
refuses or neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties to the
satisfaction and approval of the Board, the office shall, by such failure,
refusal or neglect, become vacant and it shall be the duty of the Board to
appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the office.
§ 31.02 OATH OF OFFICE; VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   (A)   All officials of the village, whether elected or appointed, except
when a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering
upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath, which
shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:
      “I, ______________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely and without
mental reservation or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully
and impartially perform the duties of the office of ____________________,
according to law and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I
do not advocate nor am I a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will
not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence. So help me God.”
   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath shall be
filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Neb. RS 11-101)
§ 31.03 COMPENSATION; HOW FIXED; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The appointive officials and other employees of the village shall
receive such compensation as the Board of Trustees shall designate by
ordinance; and the annual salary of the Chairperson and other members of the
Board of Trustees shall be fixed by ordinance.
(Neb. RS 17-209)
   (B)   Trustees may perform and, upon Village Board of Trustees approval,
receive compensation for seasonal or emergency work subject to §
31.04.
(Neb. RS 17-209.02)
   (C)   The village may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and prescribe
the compensation of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (D)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the village other
than his or her salary. The Board of Trustees shall not pay or appropriate any
money or other valuable thing to any person not an officer for the performance
of any act, service or duty, the doing or performance of which shall come
within the proper scope of the duties of any officer of the village.
(Neb. RS 17-611)
   (E)   The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, except
when there has been a combination and merger of offices as provided in §
31.22, except that when there are officers elected to the Board of Trustees, or
any other board or commission having more than one member and the terms of one
or more members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all
members of such board or commission may be increased or diminished at the
beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have
resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time
for which he or she was elected if during the same time the salary was
increased.
(Neb. RS 17-612)
§ 31.04 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.
         (a)   A business:
            1.   In which the individual is a partner, limited liability
company member, director or officer; or
            2.   In which the individual or a member of the individual’s
immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or
is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market
value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
         (b)   An individual who occupies a confidential professional
relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This
definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if
the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.
(Neb. RS 49-1408)
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A child residing in an individual’s household, a spouse
of an individual or an individual claimed by that individual, or that
individual’s spouse as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
(Neb. RS 49-1425)
      OFFICER.
         (a)   Includes:
            1.   A member of any board or commission of the village which
spends and administers its own funds who is dealing with a contract made by
that board or commission; or
            2.   Any elected village official.
         (b)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance
drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or 70-624.04, no
officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her governing
body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an interest
in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment of the contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An
action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the County Attorney, the governing body or any resident within the jurisdiction
of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after the contract
is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the reimbursement of any
person for the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor or
services furnished under the contract to the extent that the governing body has
benefitted thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a payment, fee or commission as a result of the
contract.
   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply if the contract is an agenda item
approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governing body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (E)   If an officer’s parent, spouse or child is an employee of the
officer’s governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to all employees, or all employees within a
classification, and do not single out his or her parent, spouse or child for
special action.
   (F)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.01)
   (G)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) below about every
contract entered into by the governing body in which an officer of the body has
an interest and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division (C) above.
This information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of
the officer’s last day in office and shall include:
         (a)   The names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   The nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   The date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   The amount of the contract; and
         (e)   The basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
not later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this division (G) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.02)
   (H)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by division (G)
above shall be filed within ten days after the account is opened. Thereafter,
the person charged with keeping records for the governing body shall maintain a
running account of amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from
petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.03)
   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (H) above, the governing body
may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an officer of the
governing body may have an interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.05)
   (J)   The governing body may exempt from divisions (A) through (H) above
contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of that body may have an
interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.06)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on conflicts of interest, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312
and 49-1499.03 through 49-14,103
   Penalty for violation of restrictions on contracts, see Neb. RS 49-14,103.04
§ 31.05 INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS.
   The village is authorized to enter into interlocal cooperation agreements
with other governmental units.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-801 through 13-827
APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; REMOVAL; POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees may appoint a Village Clerk, Treasurer,
Attorney, Engineer, Utilities Superintendent and Chief of Police, and other
such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law.
Pursuant to division (A)(2) below, the Village Chief of Police or any other
police officer may appeal to the Village Board his or her removal, demotion or
suspension with or without pay. After a hearing, the Village Board of Trustees
may uphold, reverse or modify the action.
      (2) The Village Board of Trustees shall by ordinance adopt rules and
regulations governing the removal, demotion or suspension with or without pay
of any police officer, including the Chief of Police, in accordance with the
requirements of Neb. RS 17-208. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the peremptory suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer
by the appropriate authority, pending the hearing authorized by this section,
in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty or disobedience of orders.
      (3)   Division (A)(2) above does not apply to a police officer during his
or her probationary period.
   (B)   The Village Clerk, Treasurer, Attorney, Utilities Superintendent,
members of the Board of Health and other appointed officers, except regular
police officers, shall hold office for one year unless removed by the
Chairperson of the Village Board with the advice and consent of the Trustees.
(Neb. RS 17-208)
   (C)   (1)   The village may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and
prescribe the powers and duties of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
      (2)   If the Village Board of Trustees appoints any of the officials
specified in this chapter or any other officials, the officials shall have the
powers and duties, if any, provided in this chapter or as otherwise provided by
village ordinances and state law.
§ 31.21 QUALIFICATION FOR OFFICE.
   Each appointive officer who is required to give bond shall qualify by filing
the required bond and oath as provided in §§
31.01 and
31.02. Each appointive officer who is not required to give bond shall qualify
by filing the required oath as provided in §
31.02.
§ 31.22 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees may, by ordinance, combine or merge any
elective or appointive village office or village employment, or any combination
of duties of any such offices or employments, except that the office of Trustee
shall not be combined or merged with any other village office or village
employment, except as provided in division (B) below.
      (2)   The village offices or village employments combined or merged shall
always be construed to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger
shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only.
   (B)   The office of Trustee shall not be combined or merged with any other
village office or village employment, except that a member of the Board of
Trustees may receive compensation to perform seasonal or emergency work upon
approval by the Board of Trustees. No member of the Board of Trustees shall
receive compensation from the village in excess of the maximum amount provided
by law.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, volunteer firefighters and volunteer
rescue squad personnel shall not be considered village officers.
(Neb. RS 17-209.02)
§ 31.23 CLERK-TREASURER.
   The appointive offices of Municipal Clerk and Municipal Treasurer are hereby
combined and merged, in accordance with the authority granted to the governing
body by §
31.22.
(Prior Code, § 1-207) (Ord. 100, passed 11-8-1995)
§ 31.24 VILLAGE CLERK.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall have the custody of all laws and ordinances
and shall keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the Board of Trustees.
After the period of time specified by the State Records Administrator pursuant
to the Records Management Act, being Neb. RS 84-1220, the Clerk may transfer
the journal of the proceedings of the Board of Trustees to the State Archives
of the State Historical Society for permanent preservation. The Clerk shall
also perform such other duties as may be required by the ordinances of the
village. If the Clerk is acting as the Treasurer, he or she shall also comply
with the requirements of §
31.25(A)(3).
(Neb. RS 17-605)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and publish the
official proceedings of the Board of Trustees within 30 days after any meeting
of the Board. The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village, shall set forth a statement of the proceedings of the meeting, and
shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim
and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each year,
the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly or hourly salaries
corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job title published
shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and functions of the
position. The charge for the publication shall not exceed the rates provided
for in Neb. RS 23-122.
(Neb. RS 19-1102)
      (2)   Publication under division (B)(1) above shall be made in one legal
newspaper of general circulation in the village. If no legal newspaper is
published in the village, then the publication shall be made in one legal
newspaper published or of general circulation within the county in which the
village is located. The cost of publication shall be paid out of the general
funds of the village.
(Neb. RS 19-1103)
   (C)   The Clerk shall dispose of or destroy village public records when the
records have been determined to be of no further legal, administrative, fiscal
or historical value by the State Records Administrator pursuant to the Records
Management Act, being Neb. RS 84-1220. This shall not apply to the minutes of
the Clerk and the permanent ordinance and resolution books, or any other record
classified as permanent by the State Records Administrator.
(Neb. RS 18-1701)
   (D)   (1)   The Clerk shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Clerk’s custody and may charge a fee for providing copies of a
public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
      (2)   The Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any
record in his or her office as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   The Clerk shall permit no records, public papers or other documents of
the village kept and preserved in his or her office to be taken therefrom,
except by such officers of the village as may be entitled to the use of the
same, but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor, and except pursuant to
Neb. RS 84-712(2). He or she shall keep all the records of his or her office,
including a record of all licenses issued by him or her, in a blank book with a
proper index. He or she shall include as part of his or her records all
petitions under which the Board of Trustees shall order public work to be done
at the expense of the property fronting thereon, together with references to
all resolutions and ordinances relating to the same. He or she shall endorse
the date and hour of filing upon every paper or document so filed in his or her
office. All such filings made by him or her shall be properly docketed.
Included in his or her records shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto
and other documents incorporated by reference and arranged in triplicate in a
manner convenient for reference. He or she shall keep an accurate and complete
account of the appropriation of the several funds and draw, sign and attest all
warrants ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund from which the
same is payable. At the end of each month, he or she shall then make a report
of the amounts appropriated to the various funds and the amount of the warrants
drawn thereon.
   (F)   The Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances and resolutions under
his or her charge to the Chairperson for his or her signature. He or she shall
also deliver to officers, employees and committees all resolutions and
communications which are directed at such officers, employees or committees.
With the seal of the village, he or she shall duly attest the Chairperson’s
signature to all ordinances, deeds and papers required to be attested to when
ordered to do so by the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   The Clerk shall issue and sign all licenses, permits and occupation
tax receipts authorized by law and required by the village ordinances. He or
she shall collect all occupation taxes and license money, except where some
other village officer is specifically charged with that duty. He or she shall
keep a register of all licenses granted in the village and the purpose for
which they have been issued.
   (H)   The Clerk shall keep in a book with a proper index copies of all
notices required to be published or posted by the Clerk by order of the Board
of Trustees or under the ordinances of the village. To each of the file copies
of the notices shall be attached the printer’s affidavit of publication, if the
notices are required to be published, or the Clerk’s certificate under seal
where the same are required to be posted only.
   (I)   The Clerk shall receive all objections to the creation of paving
districts and other street improvements. He or she shall receive the claims of
any person against the village, and in the event that the claim is disallowed
in part or in whole, the Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or
attorney by letter within five days after the disallowance, and the Clerk shall
then prepare transcripts on appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all
proper cases.
§ 31.25 VILLAGE TREASURER.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money
belonging to the village. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund
or appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall
give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt for such money,
specifying the date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also
file copies of such receipts with his or her monthly reports. The Treasurer
shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be required, render an
account to the Board of Trustees, under oath, showing the state of the treasury
at the date of such account and the balance of money in the treasury. He or she
shall also accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and
disbursements, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her,
which warrants, with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed
with his or her account in the Village Clerk’s office. If the Treasurer fails
to render his or her account within 20 days after the end of the month, or by a
later date established by the Board of Trustees, the Chairperson, with the
advice and consent of the Board, may use this failure as cause to remove the
Treasurer from office.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against
the village, showing the number and amount of each bond, for and to whom the
bonds were issued and the date upon which any bond is purchased, paid or
canceled. He or she shall accompany the annual statement submitted pursuant to
Neb. RS 19-1101 with a description of the bonds issued and sold in that year
and the terms of sale, with every item of expense thereof.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall annually complete continuing education through
a program approved by the Auditor of Public Accounts, and proof of completion
of such program shall be submitted to the Auditor of Public Accounts.
(Neb. RS 17-606)
   (B)   (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually within 60 days
after the close of the village fiscal year a statement of the receipts and
expenditures of funds of the village for the preceding fiscal year. The
statement shall also include the information required by Neb. RS 16-318(3) or
Neb. RS 17-606(2). Not more than the legal rate provided for in Neb. RS 33-141
shall be charged and paid for such publication.
(Neb. RS 19-1101)
      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general
circulation in the village. If no legal newspaper is published in the village,
then such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or of
general circulation within the county in which the village is located.
(Neb. RS 19-1103)
   (C)   (1)   All warrants upon the Treasurer shall be paid in the order of
their presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 77-2201
through 77-2215.
(Neb. RS 77-2201)
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register, which shall show in
columns arranged for that purpose the number, the date and the amount of each
warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the same is
drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in whose
name the warrant is registered, the date of payment, the amount of interest and
the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the person in whose
name such warrant is registered is mailed.
(Neb. RS 77-2202)
      (3)   The Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all sums which
shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show the source from
which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show
the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether the same
was paid in cash, in warrants or otherwise. The Treasurer shall deliver one of
the duplicates to the person making the payment and retain the other in his or
her office.
(Neb. RS 77-2209)
      (4)   The Treasurer shall daily, as money is received, foot the several
columns of the cash book and of the register and carry the amounts forward, and
at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the
Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he or she shall close
the account for that year in the register and shall carry forward the excess.
(Neb. RS. 77-2210)
      (5)   The cash book, register and retained receipts of the Treasurer
shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any
warrants are registered and unpaid.
(Neb. RS 77-2212)
   (D)   The Treasurer shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Treasurer’s custody and may charge a fee for providing copies of
a public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
   (E)   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the village separate
and distinct from his or her own money. He or she shall cancel all bonds,
coupons, warrants and other evidences of debt against the village, whenever
paid by him or her, by writing or stamping on the face thereof, “Paid by the
Village Treasurer,” with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. He or
she shall collect all special taxes, allocate special assessments to the
several owners and obtain from the County Treasurer a monthly report as to the
collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 31.26 VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Board of
Trustees. He or she shall commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions
necessary to be commenced, prosecuted or defended on behalf of the village, or
that may be ordered by the Board. When requested, he or she shall attend
meetings of the Board and give them his or her opinion upon any matters
submitted to him or her, either orally or in writing, as may be required. He or
she shall draft or review for legal correctness ordinances, contracts,
franchises and other instruments as may be required, and he or she shall
perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him or her by general law or
ordinance.
      (2)   The Board shall have the right to pay the Village Attorney
compensation for legal services performed by him or her for it on such terms as
the Board and Attorney may agree, and to employ additional legal assistance and
to pay for such legal assistance out of the funds of the village.
(Neb. RS 17-610)
   (B)   The Village Attorney shall also examine, when requested to do so by
the Board of Trustees, the ordinance records and advise and assist the Village
Clerk-Treasurer as much as may be necessary to the end that each procedural
step will be taken in the passage of each ordinance to ensure that it will be a
valid and subsisting local law insofar as its passage and approval are
concerned.
§ 31.27 VILLAGE ENGINEER; SPECIAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   The Village Engineer shall, when requested by the Board of Trustees,
make estimates of the cost of labor and materials which may be done or
furnished by contract with the village and make all surveys, estimates and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, the building
of culverts, sewers, electric light systems, waterworks, power plants, public
heating systems, bridges, curbing and gutters, the improvement of streets and
the erection and repair of buildings and shall perform such other duties as the
Board may require.
(Neb. RS 17-568.01)
   (B)   The Village Engineer, when ordered to do so by the Village Board of
Trustees, shall make surveys, estimates and calculations necessary to be made
for the establishment and maintenance of public works by the village.
(Neb. RS 17-213.01)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees may employ a special engineer to make, or assist
in making, any estimate necessary or to perform any other duty provided for in
Neb. RS 17-568.01. Any work executed by such special engineer shall have the
same validity and serve in all respects as though executed by the Village
Engineer.
(Neb. RS 17-568)   
   (D)   The Village Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her
surveys and of all work done for the village and, when directed by the Board of
Trustees, shall accurately make such plats, sections, profiles and maps as may
be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public
records and belong to the village and be turned over to his or her successor.
Statutory reference:
   Duties related to areas to be annexed, see Neb. RS 18-3301
   Duties related to sewerage systems, see Neb. RS 17-919
§ 31.28 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   A Utilities Superintendent shall be appointed in the event that there
is more than one municipal utility and the governing body determines that it is
in the best interest of the municipality to appoint one official to have the
immediate control over all said municipal utilities and municipal streets. The
Utilities Superintendent may be removed at any time by a two-thirds vote of the
governing body. Any vacancy occurring in said office by death, resignation or
removal may be filled in the manner hereinbefore provided for the appointment
of all municipal officials.
   (B)   The Utilities Superintendent’s duties over the following departments
shall be as stated herein.
      (1)   Water Department.
         (a)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have general supervision and
control over the municipal water system and shall be primarily responsible for
its economic operation and prudent management. Included in said water system
shall be the water plan, the pump house and all machinery and appliances used
in connection with producing and distributing water to inhabitants of the
municipality. All actions, decisions and procedures of the Superintendent shall
be subject to the general directives and control of the governing body.
         (b)   The Utilities Superintendents shall have the general control and
supervisory authority over all employees of the water system which the
governing body may from time to time hire to operate and maintain said system.
Unless some other official is specifically designated, he or she shall collect
all money received by the municipality on account of said system of water works
and shall faithfully account for and pay over to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer
all such money collected in the name of the municipality and receive a receipt
from the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for the depository evidence of his or her
faithful discharge of this duty. This receipt shall be kept by the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall make a detailed report to the governing body at
least once every six months of the condition of said water system of all mains,
pipes, hydrants, reservoirs and machinery, and such improvements, repairs and
extension thereof as he or she may think proper. This report shall show the
amount of receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six
months. No money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extensions of
said waterworks system, except upon the recommendation of the Utilities
Superintendent.
      (2)   Sewer Department.
         (a)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have general supervision and
control over the municipal sewer system and shall be primarily responsible for
its economic operation and prudent management. Included in said sewer
collection system shall be all machinery and appliances used in connection with
providing sewage disposal to inhabitants of the municipality. All actions,
decisions and procedures of the Superintendent shall be subject to the general
directives and control of the governing body. He or she shall have the general
control and supervisory authority over all employees of the sewer system which
the governing body may from time to time hire to operate and maintain said
system.
         (b)   Unless some other official is specifically designated, the
Utilities Superintendent shall collect all money received by the municipality
on account of said system of sewer works and shall faithfully account for and
pay over to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer all such money collected in the name
of the municipality and receive a receipt from the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer
for the depository evidence of his or her faithful discharge of this duty. This
receipt shall be kept by the Superintendent. He or she shall make a detailed
report to the governing body at least once every six months of the condition of
said sewer system of all mains, pipes, machinery and such improvements, repairs
and extension thereof as he or she may think proper. This report shall show the
amount of receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six
months. No money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extensions of
said sewer system except upon the recommendation of the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall perform such additional duties as may be
prescribed by the governing body.
      (3)   Electrical Department.
         (a)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have general supervision and
control over the municipal electrical system and shall be primarily responsible
for its economic operation and prudent management. Included in said electrical
system shall be the electrical plant, the electricity distribution system and
all machinery and appliances used in connection with producing and distributing
electricity to inhabitants of the municipality. All actions, decisions and
procedures of the Utilities Superintendent shall be subject to the general
directives and control of the governing body.
         (b)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the general control and
supervisory authority over all employees of the electric system which the
governing body may from time to time hire to operate and maintain said system.
Unless some other official is specifically designated, he or she shall collect
all money received by the municipality on account of said system of electric
works, and shall faithfully account of said system of electric works, and shall
faithfully account and pay over to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer all such money
collected in the name of the municipality and receive a receipt from the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for the depository evidence of his or her faithful
discharge of this duty. This receipt shall be kept by the Superintendent. He or
she shall make a detailed report to the governing body at least once every six
months of the condition of said electric system of all lines, poles, electric
generation equipment and machinery and such improvements, repairs and
extensions thereof as he or she may think proper. This report shall show the
amount of receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six
months. No money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extensions of
said electric system except upon the recommendation of the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall perform such additional duties as may be
prescribed by the governing body.
      (4)   Street Department.
         (a)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have general supervision and
control over the municipal street system and shall be primarily responsible for
its economic operation and prudent management. Included in said street system
shall be all the streets and alleys within the municipality, with the exception
of responsibilities for certain streets which may be part of the State
Department of Roads highway system, and all machinery and appliances used in
connection with the operation and maintenance of the street system for use by
inhabitants of the municipality. All actions, decisions and procedures of the
Superintendent shall be subject to the general directives and control of the
governing body.
         (b)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the general control and
supervisory authority over all employees of the street system which the
governing body may from time to time hire to operate and maintain said system.
Unless some other official is specifically designated, he or she shall collect
all money received by the municipality on account of said system of streets and
shall faithfully account for and pay over to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer all
such money collected in the name of the municipality and receive a receipt from
the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for the depository evidence of his or her
faithful discharge of this duty. This receipt shall be kept by the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall make a detailed report to the governing body at
least once every six months of the condition of said street system of all
streets and alleys and machinery and such improvements, repairs and extensions
thereof a he or she may think proper. This report shall show the amount of
receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six months. No
money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extensions of said street
system, except upon the recommendation of the Utilities Superintendent. He or
she shall perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by the governing
body.
      (5)   Municipal Solid Waste Management Department.
         (a)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have general supervision and
control over the municipal solid waste management system and shall be primarily
responsible for its economic operation and prudent management. Included in said
Municipal Solid Waste Management Department shall be the municipal solid waste
management program for the municipality. All actions, decisions and procedures
of the Superintendent shall be subject to the general directives and control of
the governing body.
         (b)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the general control and
supervisory authority over all employees of the municipal solid waste
management system which the governing body may from time to time hire to
operate and maintain said system. Unless some other official is specifically
designated, he or she shall collect all money received by the municipality on
account of said municipal solid waste management system and shall faithfully
account for and pay over to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer all such money
collected in the name of the municipality and receive a receipt from the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for the depository evidence of his or her faithful
discharge of this duty. This receipt shall be kept by the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall make a detailed report to the governing body at
least once every six months of the condition of said municipal solid waste
management system and machinery and such improvements, repairs and extensions
thereof as he or she may think proper. This report shall show the amount of
receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six months. No
money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extensions of said
municipal solid waste management system, except upon the recommendation of the
Utilities Superintendent. He or she shall perform such additional duties as may
be prescribed by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 1-209) (Ord. 110, passed 2-11-1998)
MEETINGS
§ 31.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEETING. All regular, special or called meetings, formal or informal, of any
public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business,
formation of tentative policy or the taking of any action of the public body.
   PUBLIC BODY.
      (1)   (a)   The Board of Trustees;
         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, subunits or any other bodies created by the Constitution of Nebraska,
statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law; and
         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
      (2)   PUBLIC BODY does not include subcommittees of such bodies unless a
quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless the
subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action on
behalf of their parent body.
(Neb. RS 84-1409)
§ 31.41 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   The formation of public policy is public business and may not be
conducted in secret. Every meeting of a public body shall be open the public in
order that citizens may exercise their democratic privilege of attending and
speaking at meetings of public bodies; except as otherwise provided by the
Constitution of Nebraska, federal statutes and the Open Meetings Act, being
Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.
(Neb. RS 84-1408)
   (B)   (1)   Each public body shall give reasonable advance publicized notice
of the time and place of each meeting as provided in division (B)(2) below. The
notice shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and to the
public.
      (2)   The notice shall be published by:
         (a)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
public body’s jurisdiction and, if available, on such newspaper’s website; or
         (b)   Posting written notice in three conspicuous public places in the
village. The notice shall be posted in the same three places for each meeting.
      (3)   In addition to a method of notice required by division (B)(2)
above, the notice shall also be provided by any other appropriate method
designated by the public body.
      (4)   Each public body shall record the methods and dates of the notice
in its minutes.
      (5)   The notice shall contain an agenda of subjects known at the time of
the publicized notice or a statement that the agenda, which shall be kept
continually current, is available for public inspection at the office of the
public body during normal business hours. Agenda items shall be sufficiently
descriptive to give the public reasonable notice of the matters to be
considered at the meeting. Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda
shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled commencement of
the meeting or 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a meeting of the
Board of Trustees scheduled outside the corporate limits of the village. The
public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of an
emergency nature only at such public meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
Statutory reference:
   Videoconferencing when emergency is declared by the Governor under the
Emergency Management Act, see Neb. RS 84-1411(7)
§ 31.42 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The Village Clerk-Treasurer, in the case of the Board of Trustees, and the
secretary or other designee of each other public body shall maintain a list of
the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable
efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each
meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 31.43 VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS; WHEN; WHERE; QUORUM.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Board of Trustees shall, by ordinance, fix the time
and place of holding its stated meetings and may be convened at any time by the
Chairperson.
(Neb. RS 17-204)
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by the Board, special meetings may also
be called by any three members of the Board of Trustees. The object of a
special meeting shall be submitted to the Village Clerk-Treasurer in writing.
The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon
the journal by the Clerk-Treasurer. On filing the call for a special meeting,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the members of the Board of Trustees of the
special meeting, stating the time and its purpose.
   (B)   At the hour specified for a meeting, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
proceed to call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present.
If a quorum is present, the Board shall be called to order by the Chairperson.
   (C)   (1)   At all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees, a majority of
the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller number may
adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such
manner and under such penalties as prescribed by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Neb. RS 17-205)
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by the Board, on the request of any two
members, whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent
for and compelled to attend.
§ 31.44 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in that meeting shall pertain only to the emergency.
Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of §
31.43 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes
of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any
formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by not
later than the end of the next regular business day.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 31.45 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if that individual has
not requested a public meeting. The subject matter and the reason necessitating
the closed session shall be identified in the motion to close. Closed sessions
may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if that person has
not requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
entire motion, the vote of each member on the question of holding a closed
session and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall be
recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close passes, then the presiding
officer immediately prior to the closed session shall restate on the record the
limitation of the subject matter at the closed session. The public body holding
such a closed session shall restrict its consideration of matters during the
closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the motion to close as the
reason for the closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session
before any formal action may be taken. For the purpose of this section, FORMAL
ACTION means a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to
make a decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order or
ordinance or formation of a position or policy but shall not include
negotiating guidance given by members of the public body to legal counsel or
other negotiators in closed sessions authorized under division (A)(1)(a) above.
   (C)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. The challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public.
(Neb. RS 84-1410)
§ 31.46 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter and the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. RS
84-1407 to 84-1414, the public has the right to attend and the right to speak
at meetings of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a public
body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to §
31.45, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast or recorded by any
person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, a camera, video equipment or
any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of division (A) above for any public body
to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting or recording its meetings, including meetings held by virtual
conferencing. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each
meeting, but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings.
   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting, nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior
to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body shall
require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself, including an address and the name of any organization
represented by such person unless the address requirement is waived to protect
the security of the individual.
   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter
or the Open Meetings Act, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be too
small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this
state.
   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if, a member entity of the
public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements of Neb.
RS 84-1412 are met.
   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented
at the meeting.
   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and
copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting, either in paper or electronic
form. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible to members of
the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall be informed about
the location of the posted information.
(Neb. RS 84-1412)
§ 31.47 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the
members of the Village Board, the Village Clerk-Treasurer and such other
village officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the
meeting place, and the business of the village shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the order prescribed by the official agenda on
file at the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 31.48 VOTES.
   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record
shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a
village which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and
nays of each member of the Board of Trustees to be readily seen by the public.
   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by
secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Neb. RS 84-1413)
§ 31.49 MINUTES.
   (A)   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent and the substance of all matters discussed.
   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received or
disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public inspection
during normal business hours.
   (C)   Minutes shall be written or kept as an electronic record and shall be
available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened
meeting, whichever occurs earlier, except that the village may have an
additional ten working days if the employee responsible for writing or keeping
the minutes is absent due to a serious illness or emergency.
(Neb. RS 84-1413)
§ 31.50 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall meet at the time and place of the regular
meeting in December in each election year, and the outgoing officers and the
outgoing members of the Board shall present their reports. Upon the outgoing
Board having completed its business, the outgoing Trustees shall surrender
their offices to the incoming Trustees, and the outgoing officers shall
thereupon each surrender to their successors in office all property, records,
papers and moneys belonging to the same.
   (B)   The newly elected Trustees and those continuing in office shall
convene immediately after the prior Board adjourns and proceed to organize
themselves for the ensuing year. The Chairperson pro tempore shall call the
meeting to order. The Clerk-Treasurer shall report to the Board the names of
all Trustees-elect who have qualified for their respective offices. The Board
shall examine the credentials of its members and any other elective officers of
the village to see that each has been duly and properly elected and to see that
such oaths and bonds as are required have been given. The Clerk-Treasurer’s
report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call.
   (C)   After ascertaining that all Trustees and officers are duly qualified
and after the Clerk-Treasurer has called the roll, the Board shall elect a
Chairperson and shall appoint the officers required by state law or village
ordinance. The Chairperson shall then proceed with the regular order of
business.
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Appointments
   
32.02   Village departmental equipment use
Boards, Commissions and Authorities
   
32.15   Board of Health
   
32.16   Board of Adjustment
   
32.17   Planning Commission
   
32.18   Community Redevelopment Authority
Fire Department
   
32.30   Operation and funding
   
32.31   Fire Chief
   
32.32   Membership
   
32.33   Records
   
32.34   Distant fires
   
32.35   Impersonating a firefighter
   
32.36   Power of arrest
   
32.37   Fire investigation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Board of Trustees shall appoint members of such commissions and boards
as the Board of Trustees may by ordinance and resolution create. Members of the
following boards and commissions shall be appointed or reappointed as terms of
office expire or resignations are accepted: Board of Health; Tree Board; and
Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)
§ 32.02 VILLAGE DEPARTMENTAL EQUIPMENT USE.
   (A)   Policy. Village equipment is to be used for the day-to-day operations,
construction and maintenance and repair of facilities and services owned and
operated by the village. Village equipment is not to be rented out or sold to
private individuals or enterprises.
(Prior Code, § 3-801)
   (B)   Exception. If the work or equipment is not available locally from
within the village or county, then, with the consent of a majority of the
members of the Village Board of Trustees, the work may be hired out by the
village at a rate to be established by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 3-802)
   (C)   Local government and nonprofit organizations. Local government and
nonprofit organizations may request use of village equipment. If a majority of
the Village Board of Trustees, at a Board meeting, consents, then the equipment
may be rented with the following provisions:
      (1)   A village employee operates the equipment on the particular job;
and
      (2)   The organization is responsible for the village employee’s time and
replacement of all materials (fuel, parts and the like).
(Prior Code, § 3-803)
   (D)   Mutual aid agreements. Nothing in this section shall prevent the use
of village equipment in mutual aid agreements with other local government
entities.
(Prior Code, § 3-804)
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES
§ 32.15 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Board of Health consisting
of three members: The Chairperson of the Board of Trustees, who shall be
chairperson, and two other members. One member shall be a physician or health
care provider, if one can be found who is willing to serve. Such physician or
health care provider, if appointed, shall be the Board of Health’s medical
advisor. If the Board of Trustees has appointed a Chief of Police, the Chief of
Police may be appointed to the Board of Health and serve as secretary and
quarantine officer.
      (2)   A majority of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum and
shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the force and effect of
law, to safeguard the health of the people of such village and prevent
nuisances and unsanitary conditions. The Board of Health shall enforce such
rules and regulations and provide fines and punishments for violations.
      (3)   The appointees shall hold office for one year unless removed by the
Chairperson of the Board of Trustees with the advice and consent of the
Trustees.
(Neb. RS 17-208)
   (B)   The Board of Health shall reorganize at its meeting each year after
the Board of Trustees’ meeting when appointments are regularly made and, if
necessary, select a member to serve as secretary. No member of the Board of
Health shall hold more than one Board of Health position. The secretary shall
keep full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file the same
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer where they shall be available for public
inspection during office hours.
   (C)   The Board shall meet at such times as the Board of Trustees may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any
two members of the Board of Health.
   (D)   The members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation.
The Board of Health shall be funded by the Board of Trustees from time to time
out of the General Fund.
   (E)   The Board of Health may regulate, suppress and prevent the occurrence
of nuisances and enforce all laws of the state and ordinances of the village
relating to nuisances and to matters of sanitation which affect the health and
safety of the people. The Board shall regularly inspect such premises and
businesses as the Board of Trustees may direct.
   (F)   All members of the Board of Health shall be responsible for making
such reports and performing such other duties as the Board of Trustees may,
from time to time, designate.
§ 32.16 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Village Board of Trustees shall constitute the Board of Adjustment of
the village, to exercise only those powers granted to boards of adjustment by
the statutes of the state. Such Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and
procedures that are in harmony with the statutes of the state. The concurring
vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall decide any
question upon which it is required to pass.
(Ord. 141, passed 2-11-2004)
§ 32.17 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the village, the Chairperson and Board of Trustees of the village
have created a Planning Commission to consider and recommend a comprehensive
plan consistent with Neb. RS Ch. 19, art. 9.
   (B)   The Planning Commission of the village will be empowered under Neb. RS
19-925 through 19-933. The first duty of the Planning Commission will be to
consider and recommend a comprehensive plan for the village.
   (C)   The Planning Commission for the village shall consist of five members,
each of whom shall reside in the village, with the provision that up to two
members only may reside within one mile of the village limits. One member shall
be appointed for the term of one year, two members shall have terms of two
years and two members shall have a term of three years.
(Ord. 109, passed 1-14-1998)
§ 32.18 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Findings and determinations. The Chairperson and Board of Trustees
(the “Board”) of the Village of Mullen, Nebraska (the “village”) hereby find
and determine as follows:
      (1)   The village is a village and political subdivision of the State of
Nebraska (the “state”) that has, pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2101 through 18-2157,
as amended, (the “Community Redevelopment Authority Act”), the power and
authority to create a community redevelopment authority by ordinance.
      (2)   It is expedient, necessary, desirable and advisable that the
village create a community redevelopment authority for the purpose of jointly
administering certain public infrastructure in the village, including the
village’s water system, sewer system and electrical system.
      (3)   All conditions, acts and things required to exist or to be done
precedent to the creation of the Community Redevelopment Authority do exist and
have been done as required by law.
   (B)   Authority creation. The Board ratifies, confirms and approves the
creation of a community redevelopment authority to be named the “Community
Redevelopment Authority of the Village of Mullen” (the “Authority”) including
any action previously taken with respect thereto, and delegates to the
Chairperson and the Village Clerk (the “authorized officers”), or each
individually, the authority to take any and all additional actions necessary
relating to such formation. The area of operation of the Authority shall be the
corporate limits of the village. The purpose of the Authority shall be to
approve funds for public infrastructure projects in the village, including
projects associated with the village’s water system, sewer system and
electrical system and all other lawful purposes permitted by the Community
Redevelopment Authority Act.
   (C)   Members of the Authority. There shall be five initial members of the
Authority who shall have the initial terms of office as follows: one member
shall have a five-year term; one member shall have a four-year term; one member
shall have a three-year term; one member shall have a two-year term; and one
member shall have a one-year term.
   (D)   No personal liability. No officer or employee of the village shall be
individually or personally liable for any actions or debts of the Authority.
Nothing herein contained shall, however, relieve any such officer or employee
from the performance of any duty provided or required by law.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-26-2024)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.30 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The village may operate a Fire Department through the Fire Chief and
firefighters.
   (B)   If the village has only a voluntary fire department or companies, the
Board of Trustees may levy a tax annually of not more than $0.07 on each $100
upon the taxable value of all the taxable property within the village for the
maintenance and benefit of the Fire Department or companies. The amount of such
tax shall be established at the beginning of the year and shall be included in
the adopted budget statement. Upon collection of such tax, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall disburse the same upon the order of the Fire Chief with the
approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Neb. RS 17-718)
Statutory reference:
   Fire station acquisition, construction and maintenance, see Neb. RS 17-953
et seq.
§ 32.31 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department, and it shall be his or her
duty to inform the Board of Trustees when any of the fire engines, hoses,
ladders or other apparatus need repair. Upon the written consent and directive
of the Board of Trustees, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair, improvement or
maintenance of the equipment and shall personally supervise and approve of the
same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to come before the Board of
Trustees at the regular meeting in January of each year to give an annual
report to the Board of Trustees of the general condition and the proposed
additions or improvements recommended by him or her.
§ 32.32 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided
by the Board of Trustees. The members may organize themselves in any way they
may decide, subject to the review of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The volunteer Fire Department shall not have upon its rolls at one
time more than 25 persons for each engine and hose company in the Fire
Department, and no hook and ladder company shall have upon its rolls at any one
time more than 25 members. No organization shall be deemed to be a bona fide
fire or hook and ladder company until it has procured for active service
apparatus for the extinguishment or prevention of fires, in case of a hose
company, to the value of $700, and of a hook and ladder company to the value of
$500.
(Neb. RS 35-102)
   (C)   Members in good standing are those who keep their dues promptly paid
up and are present and render active service when called out for the legitimate
purposes of the Fire Department.
(Neb. RS 35-103)
   (D)   Volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department shall be deemed
employees of the village while in the performance of their duties as members of
the Department. Members of the volunteer Fire Department, before they are
entitled to benefits under the State Workers’ Compensation Act, being Neb. RS
48-101 et seq., shall be recommended by the Fire Chief or some person
authorized to act for the Chief for membership therein to the Chairperson and
Board of Trustees and upon confirmation shall be deemed employees of the
village. Members of the Fire Department after confirmation to membership may be
removed by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees and thereafter shall not be
considered employees of the village. Firefighters of the Fire Department shall
be considered as acting in the performance and within the course and scope of
their employment when performing activities outside of the corporate limits of
the village, but only if directed to do so by the Fire Chief or some person
authorized to act for the Chief.
(Neb. RS 48-115)
   (E)   The Board of Trustees shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of
group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the active
volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person serves
more than one village or rural or suburban fire protection district, the policy
shall be purchased only by the first village or district which he or she
serves. The policy shall provide a minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death
from any cause and shall, at the option of the insured, be convertible to a
permanent form of life insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall
terminate as to any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of
the Fire Department.
(Neb. RS 35-108)
   (F)   For purposes of the prohibition on receipt of any witness fee,
attendance fee or mileage fee by an employee of the village called as a witness
in connection with his or her officially assigned duties, volunteer
firefighters and rescue squad members testifying in that capacity alone shall
not be deemed employees of the village.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01)
   (G)   The Board of Trustees may compensate or reimburse any member of the
Fire Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an
amount set by resolution.
   (H)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed or required of
them by the Fire Chief or the Board of Trustees. The members of the Fire
Department shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and
exercise the powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and
authority to arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the village code or
the laws of the state.
   (I)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social
activities with the approval of the Board of Trustees. The secretary shall,
upon request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the
Board of Trustees of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
§ 32.33 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of
the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members and a record of all
fires and shall make a full report of these records to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer during the last week in April each year. The record of any fire shall
include the cause, origin, circumstances, property involved and whether
criminal conduct may have been involved. In the event of sizable property
damage, the Fire Chief shall include the information of whether the losses were
covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. All records shall be available
to the public at any reasonable time.
§ 32.34 DISTANT FIRES.
   (A)   Upon the permission of the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees or the
Fire Chief, or pursuant to any agreement with a rural fire district for mutual
aid protection, such fire equipment of the village as may be designated by the
Board of Trustees as rural equipment may be used beyond the corporate limits to
extinguish reported fires.
   (B)   The firefighters of the village shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or saving
property or life outside the corporate limits of the village when directed to
do so by the Board of Trustees or the Fire Chief or some person authorized to
act for the Chief, and in so doing, may take such fire equipment of the village
as may be designated by the Board of Trustees.
§ 32.35 IMPERSONATING A FIREFIGHTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely impersonate a firefighter by
wearing a badge or other apparel usually worn by a firefighter for the purpose
of obtaining any benefit whatsoever. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the theatrical representation of a firefighter for bona fide
entertainment purposes when there is no intent to defraud.
(Prior Code, § 3-606) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1219
§ 32.36 POWER OF ARREST.
   The Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power, during the
time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment, to arrest
any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering or resisting the firefighting
effort, or any person who conducts himself or herself in a noisy or disorderly
manner. The officials shall be severally vested with the usual powers and
authority of village police officers to command all persons to assist them in
the performance of their duties. Failure to obey a lawful order of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief shall be an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.37 FIRE INVESTIGATION.
   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause,
origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the village by which
property has been destroyed or damaged. All fires of unknown origin shall be
reported, and such officer shall especially make an investigation and report as
to whether such fire was the result of carelessness, accident or design. The
investigation shall begin immediately after the occurrence of the fire, and the
State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise and direct the
investigation whenever he or she deems it expedient or necessary. The officer
making the investigation of fires occurring in the village shall forthwith
notify the State Fire Marshal and shall within one week of the occurrence of
the fire furnish him or her a written statement of all the facts relating to
the cause and origin of the fire and such further information as he or she may
call for.
(Neb. RS 81-506)
CHAPTER 33: ELECTIONS
Section
   
33.01   Generally
   
33.02   Notice
   
33.03   Registered voters; qualifications
   
33.04   Special elections
   
33.05   Ballots
   
33.06   Caucus candidates
   
33.07   Petition, write-in and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
33.08   Certificate of election
   
33.09   Inability to assume office
§ 33.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   All village issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide
primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of
separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if village offices or
issues can reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan ballot and state law
does not require otherwise. All village elections involving the election of
officers shall be held in accordance with the Election Act and in conjunction
with the statewide primary or general election.
(Neb. RS 32-556)
   (B)   When the village holds an election in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided in the
Election Act. Any other election held by the village shall be held as provided
in the Election Act unless otherwise provided by the charter, code or bylaws of
the village.
(Neb. RS 32-404)
Statutory reference:
   Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.
§ 33.02 NOTICE.
   The notice of election required to be published by the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk pursuant to Neb. RS 32-802 shall serve as the notice
requirement for all village elections which are held in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election.
§ 33.03 REGISTERED VOTERS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REGISTERED VOTER. An elector who has a current voter registration record
on file with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk in the county of his or
her residence.
(Neb. RS 32-115)
   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the
village on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all village
elections.
(Neb. RS 17-602)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of elector, see Neb. RS 32-110
§ 33.04 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to be submitted
to the registered voters at a special election by the village shall be
certified by the Village Clerk-Treasurer to the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk on or before the eighth Friday prior to the election. A special election
may be held by mail as provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959. Any other
special election under this section shall be subject to division (B) below.
      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the village
may submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any
scheduled county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a
statewide election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be
submitted has been certified by the Village Clerk-Treasurer to the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk by March 1 for the primary election and by
September 1 for the general election.
      (3)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received the
certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible for
all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered voters,
except that the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for the
publication or posting of any required special notice of the submission of the
issue other than the notice required to be given of the statewide election
issues. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and
issue ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the
issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on the issue. The
election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same time and in the same
manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of the vote by the
County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
certify the election results to the Board of Trustees. The canvass by the
County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made by the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   (1)   A village that has submitted an issue for a special election
under division (A)(1) above may cancel the special election if the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by
the political subdivision canceling the special election on or before the
fourth Thursday prior to the election. No cancellation shall be effective after
such date. If a special election is canceled in such manner, the village shall
be responsible for the costs incurred that are related to the canceled
election. Such costs shall include all chargeable costs as provided in Neb. RS
32-1202 associated with preparing for and conducting a special election.
      (2)   A village that has submitted an issue at a statewide primary or
general election or at any scheduled county election under division (A)(2)
above may withdraw the issue from the ballot if the Secretary of State,
Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by the
village withdrawing the issue from the ballot no later than March 1 prior to a
statewide primary election or September 1 prior to a statewide general
election. No withdrawal shall be effective after such date. Any issue withdrawn
in this manner shall not be printed on the ballot.
(Neb. RS 32-559)
   (C)   Any special election under the Election Act shall be held on the first
Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected month unless otherwise
specifically provided. No special election shall be held under the Election Act
in April, May, June, October, November or December of an even-numbered year
unless it is held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general
election. No special election shall be held under the Election Act in September
of an even-numbered year except for a special election by a political
subdivision pursuant to Neb. RS 13-519 or 77-3444 to approve a property tax
levy or exceed a property tax levy limitation.
(Neb. RS 32-405)
Statutory reference:
   Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.
§ 33.05 BALLOTS.
   It shall be the duty of the County Clerk to provide printed ballots for
every general municipal election, and the expense of printing and delivering
the ballots and cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 1-707)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-807
§ 33.06 CAUCUS CANDIDATES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may, by ordinance, call a caucus for the purpose
of nomination of candidates for offices to be filled in the village election.
This caucus shall be held at least ten days before the filing deadline for that
election, and the Board of Trustees shall publish notice of the caucus in at
least one legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the county at least
once each week for two consecutive weeks before the caucus.
(Neb. RS 17-601.01)
   (B)   The chairperson of the caucus at which candidates are nominated shall
notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer in writing of the candidates so nominated,
not later than two days following the caucus. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
then notify the persons so nominated of their nomination, this notification to
take place not later than five days after the caucus. No candidate so nominated
shall have his or her name placed upon the ballot unless, not more than ten
days after the holding of the caucus, he or she files with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer a written statement accepting the nomination of the caucus and pays
the filing fee, if any, for the office for which he or she was nominated.
(Neb. RS 17-601.02)
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not preclude in any manner any
person from filing for the offices to which this section is applicable, either
by direct filing or by petition.
(Neb. RS 17-601.03)
§ 33.07 PETITION, WRITE-IN AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of the
general election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot
for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this section and
Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or committee
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the office by
petition as prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) below, files as a write-in
candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615, or is nominated by political party
convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-710.
(Neb. RS 32-616)
   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and address
of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the party
affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be filed with
the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed by
registered voters residing in the village, if candidates are chosen at large,
or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen
by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as
provided for candidate filing forms. Petition signers and petition circulators
shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for
nomination shall be filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing
the payment of the filing fee required pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608. The
petitions shall be filed by September 1 in the year of the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-617)
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the village or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected,
not to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of the entire state, at least 4,000, and at least 750 signatures shall be
obtained in each congressional district in the state;
         (b)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a county, at least 20% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election within the county, not to exceed 2,000, except that the number of
signatures shall not be required to exceed 25% of the total number of
registered voters voting for the office at the immediately preceding general
election; and
         (c)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a political subdivision other than a county, at least 20% of the total
number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United
States at the immediately preceding general election within the political
subdivision, not to exceed 2,000.
(Neb. RS 32-618)
§ 33.08 CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION.
   After the canvass of the vote at the municipal election, the Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare a certificate of election for each person whom
the Canvassing Board has declared to have received the highest vote, and in the
form as nearly as possible prescribed by state law, which shall be signed by
the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees under the seal of the municipality and
countersigned by the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The certificate shall then be
delivered to the persons so elected.
(Prior Code, § 1-708)
§ 33.09 INABILITY TO ASSUME OFFICE.
   (A)   If there is a vacancy on the ballot for a nonpartisan office after the
time for filing and before the primary election, the vacancy may only be filled
by a petition candidate after the primary election pursuant to Neb. RS 32-617
and 32-618.
   (B)   A vacancy shall exist on the ballot for the general election when any
person ceases to be a candidate for the office for which he or she filed a
candidate filing form in the primary election and the number of candidates for
office is less than twice the number of positions to be filled; no person was
nominated for the office in the primary election; or one of the candidates who
received a certificate of nomination for a nonpartisan office as a result of a
primary election is ineligible, disqualified, deceased or for any other reason
unable to assume the office for which he or she was a candidate. If such a
vacancy exists for a nonpartisan office, such vacancy may be filled by filing
petitions for nomination pursuant to such sections no later than September 1
prior to the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-625)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Annual audit; financial statements
   
34.02   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
34.03   Orders or warrants for money; contracts; expenditures; requirements
   
34.04   Claims and accounts payable
   
34.05   Special assessment fund
   
34.06   Sinking funds
   
34.07   Deposit of funds
   
34.08   Investment of funds
   
34.09   Bond issues
Annual Budget
   
34.20   Fiscal year
   
34.21   Budget procedures
   
34.22   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction
   
34.23   Proposed budget hearing
   
34.24   Adopted budget statement; filing
   
34.25   Appropriation bill
   
34.26   Transfer of funds
Tax Levies
   
34.40   All-purpose levy; extraordinary levies; allocation; abandonment
   
34.41   Property tax levy; certification of amount; collection
   
34.42   Sales and use tax
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         ACCOUNTANT. A duly licensed public accountant or certified public
accountant who otherwise is not an employee of or connected in any way with the
village.
         ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT. The written report of the accountant and all
appended statements and schedules relating thereto presenting or recording the
findings of an examination or audit of the financial transactions, affairs or
financial condition of the village and its proprietary functions for the fiscal
year immediately prior to the making of the annual report.
         FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year for the village or the fiscal year
established in Neb. RS 18-2804 for a proprietary function if different than the
village fiscal year.
(Neb. RS 19-2902)
      (2)   The Board of Trustees shall cause an audit of the village’s
accounts to be made by a recognized independent and qualified accountant as
expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year and to cover
all financial transactions and affairs of the village for that preceding fiscal
year. The audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion of
the Board of Trustees. The audit shall be completed, and the annual audit
report made by the accountant shall be submitted, within six months after the
close of the fiscal year in any event, unless an extension of time is granted
by a written resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees
may request a waiver of the audit requirement subject to the requirements of
Neb. RS 84-304. If the village is required to conduct an audit under Neb. RS
84-304 and owns or operates any type of public utility or other enterprise
which substantially generates its own revenue, the Board of Trustees shall have
that phase of the village’s affairs reported separately from the other
functions of the village. The result of that audit shall appear separately in
the annual audit report made by the accountant to the village, and the audit
shall be on a cash or accrual basis at the discretion of the Board of Trustees.
(Neb. RS 19-2903)
      (3)   The annual audit report shall set forth, insofar as possible, the
financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or group
of accounts of the village. When the accrual method is selected for the annual
audit report, the report shall be in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. The annual audit report shall also include the
professional opinion of the accountant with respect to the financial
statements, or, if an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the
accountant is unable to express such an opinion with an explanation of the
reasons why he or she cannot do so.
(Neb. RS 19-2904)
      (4)   At least three copies of such annual audit report shall be properly
signed and attested by the accountant; two copies shall be filed with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, and one copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The annual audit report filed, together with any accompanying comment
or explanation, shall become a part of the public records of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer and shall at all times thereafter be open and subject to public
inspection.
(Neb. RS 19-2905)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall provide and file with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements showing
the village’s actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed
fiscal year.
(Neb. RS 13-606)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on audits, see Neb. RS 19-2906 through 19-2909
§ 34.02 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a public
power district to operate, renew, replace or add to the electric distribution,
transmission or generation system of the village, no contract for enlargement
or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating
systems, bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement when the
cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, costing
over $30,000, shall be made unless it is first approved by the Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the Board of Trustees
makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating systems,
bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement when the cost of the
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost
shall be made by the Village Engineer and submitted to the Board of Trustees.
In advertising for bids as provided in divisions (C) and (E) below, the Board
of Trustees may publish the amount of the estimate.
   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing
over $30,000 entered into:
      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating systems, bridges, work on streets or any other work or
improvement when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property; or
      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of the
enlargement or general improvements.
   (D)   A village electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of
equipment used for the enlargement or improvement without advertising for bids
if the price is $30,000 or less; $60,000 or less and the village electric
utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;
$90,000 or less and the village electric utility has gross annual revenue from
retail sales in excess of $5,000,000; or $120,000 or less and the village
electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of
$10,000,000.
   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) above shall be
published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper
published in or of general circulation in the village. In case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, war or an exigency or pressing necessity or
unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health or property, estimates of
costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance
authorized by Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a three-fourths vote of the Board
of Trustees and entered of record.
   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the Board
of Trustees receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids received
by the Board of Trustees contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost, the
Board of Trustees may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the
proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.
   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the Board of Trustees, no cost can be
estimated until the materials have been manufactured or assembled to the
specific qualifications of the village, the Board of Trustees may authorize the
manufacture and assemblage of those materials and may thereafter approve the
estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer.
(Neb. RS 17-568.01)
   (H)   Any village bidding procedure may be waived by the Board of Trustees:
      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and
from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been
obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145 through 81-
162;
      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or
      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan or program.
(Neb. RS 17-568.02)
   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule
charter, a village which has established, by an interlocal agreement with any
county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal property
without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been established
by the federal General Services Administration or the materiel division of the
Department of Administrative Services.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (I), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes, but is not limited to, supplies,
materials and equipment used by or furnished to any officer, office,
department, institution, board or other agency.
         PURCHASING or PURCHASE. The obtaining of personal property by sale,
lease or other contractual means.
(Neb. RS 18-1756)
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.
§ 34.03 ORDERS OR WARRANTS FOR MONEY; CONTRACTS; EXPENDITURES; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have no power to appropriate, issue or
draw any order or warrant on the Village Clerk-Treasurer for money, unless the
same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for the
payment of which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to
the provisions of §
34.04, and funds for the class or object out of which such claim is payable
have been included in the adopted budget statement or transferred according to
law.
(Neb. RS 17-708)
   (B)   No contract shall be hereafter made by the Board of Trustees, or any
committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the
officers or departments of the village, whether the object of the expenditures
shall have been ordered by the Board of Trustees or not, unless an
appropriation shall have been previously made concerning such expense, except
as otherwise expressly provided in division (A) above.
(Neb. RS 17-709)
   (C)   All warrants drawn upon the Village Clerk-Treasurer must be signed by
the Chairperson and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, stating the
particular fund to which the same is chargeable, the person to whom payable and
for what particular object. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon such
warrants so drawn. Each warrant shall specify the amount included in the
adopted budget statement for such fund upon which it is drawn and the amount
already expended of such fund.
(Neb. RS 17-711)
§ 34.04 CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   (A)   (1)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against the village shall:
         (a)   Be presented in writing;
         (b)   State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
         (c)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed or the time, place, nature and circumstances giving rise to
the claim.
      (2)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the claimant or his or her agent
or attorney by letter mailed to the claimant’s address within five days if the
claim is disallowed by the Board of Trustees.
      (4)   No costs shall be recovered against the village in any action
brought against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has not
been presented to the Board of Trustees to be audited, unless the recovery is
for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.
(Neb. RS 17-714)
   (B)   Upon the allowance of claims by the Board of Trustees, the order for
their payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which
they are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no order or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn, unless there is sufficient money in the treasury at the
credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided, that if there exists at
the time such warrant is drawn obligated funds from the federal government or
the state, or both from the federal government and the state, for the general
purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in excess
of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn to the
additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal or state funds. No claim
shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant for the payment thereof
may legally be drawn.
(Neb. RS 17-715)
§ 34.05 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
   All money received on special assessments shall be held by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which the assessment was made, and this money shall be used for
no other purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the village for money expended
for any such improvement.
(Neb. RS 17-710)
§ 34.06 SINKING FUNDS.
   (A)   The village is hereby empowered to receive money or property by
donation, bequest, gift, devise or otherwise for the benefit of any one or more
of the public purposes for which sinking funds are established by the
provisions of this section, as stipulated by the donor. Title to any money or
property so donated shall vest in the Board of Trustees, or in its successors
in office, who shall become the owners thereof in trust to the uses of the
sinking fund or funds. In the event of a donation of real estate, the Board of
Trustees may manage the real estate as in the case of real estate donated to
the village for village library purposes under the provisions of Neb. RS 51-215
and 51-216.
(Neb. RS 19-1301)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees, subject to all the limitations set forth in
this section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on
each $100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property
within the village for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the
amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted
budget statement of the village, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund
for the construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment or
repair, not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following public
improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making thereof:
Village libraries; village auditoriums or community houses for social or
recreational purposes; village halls; village public libraries, auditoriums or
community houses in a single building; village swimming pools; village jails;
village fire stations, together with firefighting equipment or apparatus;
village parks; village cemeteries; village medical buildings, together with
furnishings and equipment; or village hospitals. The village shall not be
authorized to levy the tax or to establish the sinking fund as provided in this
division (B) if, having bonded indebtedness, such village has been in default
in the payment of interest thereon or principal thereof for a period of ten
years prior to the date of the passage of the resolution providing for the
submission of the proposition for establishment of the sinking fund as required
in division (C) below.
(Neb. RS 19-1302)
   (C)   (1)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any
annual tax is levied for any such planned village improvements mentioned in
division (B) above by the village, the Board of Trustees shall declare its
purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the village at the
next general village election the proposition to provide the village with the
specific village improvement planned under this section. The resolution of
submission shall, among other things, set forth a clear description of the
improvement planned, the estimated cost according to the prevailing costs, the
amount of annual levy over a definite period of years, not exceeding ten years,
required to provide such cost, and the specific name or designation for the
sinking fund sought to be established to carry out the planned improvement,
together with a statement of the proposition for placement upon the ballot at
the election.
      (2)   Notice of the submission of the proposition, together with a copy
of the official ballot containing the same, shall be published in its entirety
three successive weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper in
or of general circulation in the village or, if no legal newspaper is in or of
general circulation in the village, in a legal newspaper in or of general
circulation in the county in which the village is located. No such sinking fund
shall be established unless the same has been authorized by a majority or more
of the legal votes of the village cast for or against the proposition. If less
than a majority of the legal votes favor the establishment of the sinking fund,
the planned improvement shall not be made, no annual tax shall be levied
therefor, and no sinking fund or sinking funds shall be established in
connection therewith, but such resolution of submission shall immediately be
repealed. If the proposition shall carry at such election in the manner
prescribed in this division, the Board of Trustees and its successors in office
shall proceed to do all things authorized under such resolution of submission
but never inconsistent with this section. The election provided for under this
section shall be conducted as provided under the Election Act.
(Neb. RS 19-1303)
   (D)   (1)   All funds received by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, by donation
or by tax levy, as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be
immediately invested by the Clerk-Treasurer, with the written approval of the
Board of Trustees, in the manner provided in §
34.08.
      (2)   Whenever investments of such sinking fund or funds are made, as
aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be reported to the Board
of Trustees, and the investment report shall be made a matter of record by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer in the proceedings of the Village Board.
      (3)   The sinking fund, or sinking funds, accumulated under the
provisions of this section, shall constitute a special fund, or funds, for the
purpose or purposes for which the same was authorized and shall not be used for
any other purpose unless authorized by 60% of the qualified electors of the
village voting at a general election favoring such change in the use of the
sinking fund or sinking funds; provided, that the question of the change in the
use of the sinking fund or sinking funds, when it fails to carry, shall not be
resubmitted in substance for a period of one year from and after the date of
such election.
(Neb. RS 19-1304)
Statutory reference:
   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. RS 17-702
   Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.
§ 34.07 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep
on deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions or
qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing,
all money collected, received or held by him or her as Village Clerk-Treasurer.
These deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by
the Board of Trustees for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a
stockholder, director or other officer of the bank, capital stock financial
institution or qualifying mutual financial institution is also serving as a
member of the Board of Trustees or as any other officer of the village shall
not disqualify the bank, capital stock financial institution or qualifying
mutual financial institution from acting as a depository for the village funds.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees shall require from all banks, capital stock
financial institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions a bond in
such penal sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit at any time less the
amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or,
in lieu thereof, security given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit
Security Act, being Neb. RS 77-2386 et seq., to secure the payment of all such
deposits and accretions. The Board of Trustees shall approve this bond or
giving of security. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall not be liable for any
loss of any money sustained by reason of the failure of any such depository so
designated and approved.
(Neb. RS 17-607)
   (B)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock financial
institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be a surety bond
or bonds to the extent that the deposits are insured or guaranteed by that
corporation, and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no other surety bond or
bonds or other security shall be required.
(Neb. RS 77-2362)
   (C)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual
financial institutions.
(Neb. RS 17-607 and 77-2362)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on deposits of public funds, see Neb. RS 77-2363 and 77-
2364
   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. RS 77-2386
§ 34.08 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   When the Village Clerk-Treasurer holds funds of the village in excess
of the amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and
improvements, the Board of Trustees may, by resolution, direct and authorize
the Clerk-Treasurer to invest the surplus funds in the outstanding bonds or
registered warrants of the village, bonds and debentures issued either singly
or collectively by any of the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit
banks or the 13 banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit
Administration, or in interest-bearing bonds or the obligations of the United
States. The interest on such bonds or warrants shall be credited to the fund
out of which the bonds or warrants were purchased.
(Neb. RS 17-608)
   (B)   All income received by the village from public utilities and from the
payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall be
applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money borrowed
and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there be any
surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the payment of
public utility bonds or for the improvements of the works, or into the General
Fund as the Board may direct. The surplus remaining, if any, may, if the Board
so directs, be invested in interest-bearing bonds or obligations of the United
States.
(Neb. RS 17-540)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, direct and authorize the
Clerk-Treasurer to dispose of the surplus electric light, water or gas funds,
or the funds arising from the sale of electric light, water or natural gas
distribution properties, by the payment of outstanding electric light, water or
gas distribution bonds or water warrants then due. The excess, if any, after
such payments, may be transferred to the General Fund of the village.
(Neb. RS 17-609)
   (D)   (1)   Whenever the village has accumulated a surplus of any fund in
excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment
of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to
pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the
current year, the Board of Trustees may invest any such surplus in excess of
current needs or such excess in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit, in
time deposits, and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer is
authorized to invest pursuant to the State Capital Expansion Act and the State
Funds Investment Act and as provided in the authorized investment guidelines of
the State Investment Council in effect on the date the investment is made. The
State Investment Officer shall, upon request, furnish a copy of current
authorized investment guidelines of the State Investment Council.
      (2)   Nothing in division (D)(1) above shall be construed to authorize
investments in venture capital.
(Neb. RS 77-2341)
Statutory reference:
   State Capital Expansion Act, see Neb. RS 72-1261 et seq.
   State Funds Investment Act, see Neb. RS 72-1237 et seq.
§ 34.09 BOND ISSUES.
   The Board of Trustees may, after meeting all the requirements of state law,
issue bonds, fund bonds and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted
by state law. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on these bonds and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805
   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143
ANNUAL BUDGET
§ 34.20 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the village and any public utility of the village
commences on October 1 and extends through the following September 30 except as
provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
(Neb. RS 17-701)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Proprietary Function Act, see Neb. RS 18-2801 et seq.
§ 34.21 BUDGET PROCEDURES.
   The budget instruction manual prepared by the Auditor of Public Accounts is
incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
§ 34.22 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to §
34.23. A proposed budget statement shall contain the following information,
except as provided by state law:
      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: The unencumbered cash balance at the
beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by
taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and
estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: The actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the
amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement
shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and
shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or
biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget
adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an
estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than
revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately
stated as to each such source: The actual or estimated unencumbered cash
balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year
or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year or
biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of
prior years or biennial periods, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued or authorized to be issued by the Board of Trustees or the legal voters
of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   For all other purposes.
      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each
proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, and a grand total
of all funds maintained by the Board of Trustees; and
      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a separate budget
statement which is approved by the Board of Trustees as provided in the
Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the village as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer
for the village and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget
statement.
   (C)   The village shall correct any material errors in the budget statement
detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.
(Neb. RS 13-504)
   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and less
the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than taxation of personal and real property, shall equal the amount to be
received from taxes, and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required
cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.
(Neb. RS 13-505)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Proprietary Function Act, see Neb. RS 18-2801 et seq.
§ 34.23 PROPOSED BUDGET HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees shall each year or biennial period conduct
a public hearing on its proposed budget statement. Such hearing shall be held
separately from any regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body and shall
not be limited by time.
      (3)   Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a
summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published at least four
calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such notice, the
four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the day of
hearing. When the total operating budget, not including reserves, does not
exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget
summary may be posted at the Board of Trustee’s principal headquarters.
      (3)   At such hearing, the governing body shall make at least three
copies of the proposed budget statement available to the public and shall make
a presentation outlining key provisions of the proposed budget statement,
including, but not limited to, a comparison with the prior year’s budget. Any
member of the public desiring to speak on the proposed budget statement shall
be allowed to address the governing body at the hearing and shall be given a
reasonable amount of time to do so.
   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of the
hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation
shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is
adopted, or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount
to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify
separately the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the Board of Trustees or the legal
voters of the political subdivision and the amount to be received for all other
purposes.
   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes shall be
published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner provided in
this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.
   (D)   Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, the budget shall be filed with
the Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors in
mathematics, improper accounting and noncompliance with the State Budget Act or
Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522. If the Auditor detects such errors, he or she
shall immediately notify the Board of such errors, and the Board shall correct
any such error. Warrants for the payment of expenditures provided in the budget
adopted under this section shall be valid notwithstanding any errors or
noncompliance for which the Auditor has notified the Board.
(Neb. RS 13-506)
   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.
(Neb. RS 13-507)
Statutory reference:
   State Budget Act, see Neb. RS 13-501 et seq.
§ 34.24 ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING.
   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the Board of Trustees shall file with
and certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 30 of each
year, or September 30 of the final year of a biennial period, and file with the
Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget statement which
complies with Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522, together with the amount of the
tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:
         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest
on bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the Board of Trustees or the
legal voters of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.
      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.
   (B)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board is 10% or
more at the time of the filing and certification required under this section,
the Board of Trustees, in certifying the amount required, may make allowance
for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or biennial period
and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated
litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or
can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For the purpose of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action being
filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the preceding year
or biennial period which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the
Board of Trustees shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or
lesser than the amount determined under §
34.22.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees shall use the certified taxable values as
provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year
in setting or certifying the levy. The Board of Trustees may designate one of
its members to perform any duty or responsibility required of the Board by this
section.
(Neb. RS 13-508)
§ 34.25 APPROPRIATION BILL.
   The Board of Trustees shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the State
Budget Act, to be termed “The Annual Appropriation Bill,” in which the Board
may appropriate those sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all
necessary expenses and liabilities of the village.
(Neb. RS 17-706)
Statutory reference:
   State Budget Act, see Neb. RS 13-501 et seq.
§ 34.26 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes apparent to the
Board of Trustees that due to unforeseen emergencies there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted
budget of expenditures for that fund, the Board may by a majority vote, unless
otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds to such fund.
   (B)   No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of the
amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized herein
or by state law.
   (C)   Any officer or officers of the Board who obligate funds contrary to
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 13-510) Penalty, see §
10.99
TAX LEVIES
§ 34.40 ALL-PURPOSE LEVY; EXTRAORDINARY LEVIES; ALLOCATION; ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions in the statutes of the state and this code
to the contrary, for any fiscal year, the Board of Trustees may decide to
certify to the County Clerk for collection one all-purpose levy required to be
raised by taxation for all village purposes instead of certifying a schedule of
levies for specific purposes added together. Subject to the limits of this
subchapter, the all-purpose levy shall not exceed an annual levy of $1.05 on
each $100 upon the taxable valuation of all the taxable property in the
village. Otherwise authorized extraordinary levies to service and pay bonded
indebtedness of the village may be made by the village in addition to such all-
purpose levy.
(Neb. RS 19-1309)
   (B)   If the method provided in division (A) above is followed in village
financing, the village shall allocate the amount so raised to the several
departments of the village in its annual budget and appropriation ordinance, or
in other legal manner, as the Board of Trustees deems wisest and best.
(Neb. RS 19-1310)
   (C)   If the village elects to follow the method provided in division (A)
above, it shall be bound by that election during the ensuing fiscal year but
may abandon such method in succeeding fiscal years.
(Neb. RS 19-1311)
   (D)   If it is necessary to certify the amount to county officers for
collection, the same shall be certified as a single amount for general fund
purposes.
(Neb. RS 19-1312)
§ 34.41 PROPERTY TAX LEVY; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT; COLLECTION.
   The Board of Trustees shall, at the time and in the manner provided by law,
cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon
the taxable value of all the taxable property of the village which the village
requires for the purposes of the adopted budget statement for the ensuing year,
including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise provided. The
County Clerk shall place the same on the property tax lists to be collected in
the manner provided by law for the collection of county taxes in the county
where the village is situated. In all sales for any delinquent taxes for
municipal purposes, if there are other delinquent taxes due from the same
person or a lien on the same property, the sale shall be for all the delinquent
taxes. Such sales and all sales made under or by virtue of this section or the
provision of law herein referred to shall be of the same validity and in all
respects be deemed and treated as though such sales had been made for the
delinquent county taxes exclusively.
(Neb. RS 17-702)
§ 34.42 SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   (1)   On and after April 1, 2009, pursuant to the provisions of Neb.
RS 77-27,142 through 77-27,148, the Local Option Revenue Act, there is hereby
imposed a sales and use tax of 1.5% upon the same transactions within the
corporate limits of the village on which the state is authorized to impose a
tax pursuant to the provisions of state statutes, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   A 0.5% sales and use tax, in addition to the village’s aggregate
1.5% sales and use tax currently in effect, is hereby imposed on the same
transactions within the village on which the State of Nebraska is authorized to
impose a sales and use tax pursuant to the Revenue Act. A certified map of the
village, clearly showing the boundaries of the village, is attached as Exhibit
A to this division (A)(2)’s enacting ordinance, on file in the Village Clerk’s
office, and is incorporated herein by this reference.
   (B)   The administration of the sales and use tax imposed by division (A)
above, the making of returns for the ascertainment, assessment and collection,
and for the distribution, of the taxes so imposed shall be as provided in Neb.
RS 77-27,142 through 77-27,148, as amended.
   (C)   (1)   The sales and use tax imposed by division (A)(1) above became
effective on April 1, 2009, in accordance with the provisions of Neb. RS 77-
27,142 through 77-27,148, as amended.
      (2)   The 0.5% sales and use tax adopted, approved and imposed by
division (A)(2) above shall become effective and shall apply to all taxable
transactions within the village, as constituted from time to time, on and after
April 1, 2025, or as otherwise required by Neb. RS 77-27,143 of the Local
Option Act. Such sales and use tax will continue for a period of ten years
after its effective date, unless bonds are issued at any time and some or all
of the additional revenues from such sales and use tax are pledged for payment
of said bonds, in which case such sales and use tax shall remain in effect and
additional revenues collected until payment in full of said bonds and any
refunding bonds, whichever is later.
   (D)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall deliver, or cause to be delivered,
on or before December 2, 2008, to the State Tax Commissioner a certified copy
of the provisions of this section and a certified map of the village clearly
showing the boundaries thereof, in addition to a certified copy of the election
results from the County Election Commissioner and a certified statement from
the County Election Commissioner that the question of imposing a sales and use
tax for the village has not failed a vote of the electors of the village within
the previous 23 months.
(Ord. 167, passed 11-12-2008; Ord. 231, passed 6-3-2024; Ord. 235, passed 11-
26-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWER
      
54.   ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Definition
   
50.02   Mandatory use of utilities
   
50.03   Responsibility for payment
   
50.04   User service fee and collection
   
50.05   Discontinuance of service; notice procedure
   
50.06   Lien
§ 50.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES. Includes water service, sewer service, electrical
service and municipal solid waste management.
(Prior Code, § 3-701)
§ 50.02 MANDATORY USE OF UTILITIES.
   All owners, occupants or lessees of any premises that is occupied and used
for any purpose, including, but not limited to, residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental, religious, civic and nonprofit, with municipal water
and/or sewer utilities connected and/or serving said premises shall be deemed
users of all municipal utilities, including water service, sewer service,
electrical service and municipal solid waste management disposal service, and
pay a service fee, established by resolution of the governing body, for such
use.
(Prior Code, § 3-702) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Service fees for use of municipal utilities shall be established by
the governing body for each service individually and combined into one
municipal utilities bill. Municipal utilities bills shall be due and payable on
the first day of each month at the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer or
designee. Bills not paid by the tenth day of the month shall be deemed to be
delinquent. Refusal or nonpayment of any part of a municipal utilities bill as
a whole is deemed to be delinquent.
   (B)   An owner of rental property, whether commercial or residential, shall
be jointly and severally responsible with tenants for payment of any delinquent
municipal utilities bills that are not promptly paid by the owner’s tenant or
tenants.
   (C)   This chapter applies to all rental properties, whether commercial,
single-family residential, apartment complex, mobile home courts or other
rental property. The owner shall be furnished a copy of the notice of
delinquency that is served upon the tenant and the owner shall have all
information afforded by §
50.05.
(Prior Code, § 3-703)
§ 50.04 USER SERVICE FEE AND COLLECTION.
   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be paid
by the users of municipal utilities. All such fees shall be on file for public
inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Municipal Clerk-
Treasurer shall bill the consumers for use of municipal utilities and collect
all money received by the municipality. Upon receipt of municipal utilities
user service fee, the Municipal Clerk shall remit said monies to the Municipal
Treasurer, who shall then credit, in the following order, the Water Department,
the Sewer Department, the Electrical Department and the Municipal Solid Waste
Management Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-704)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-539 and 19-2106
§ 50.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities, villages,
political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies or businesses of any nature.
(Neb. RS 70-1602)
   (B)   No utility owned and operated by the village furnishing water, natural
gas or electricity at retail in the village shall discontinue service to any
domestic subscriber for nonpayment of any past-due account unless the utility
first gives written notice by mail to any subscriber whose service is proposed
to be terminated at least seven days prior to termination. As to any subscriber
who has previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the utility by the
Department of Health and Human Services, the notice shall be by certified mail
and notice of such proposed termination shall be given to the department.
(Neb. RS 70-1603)
   (C)   Prior to the discontinuance of service to any domestic subscriber by a
utility owned and operated by the village, the domestic subscriber, upon
request, shall be provided a conference with the Board of Trustees. A utility
owned and operated by the village shall not be subject to Neb. RS 70-1608
through 70-1614, but the Board of Trustees shall establish a procedure to
resolve utility bills when a conference is requested by a domestic subscriber.
The procedure shall be in writing, and a copy of such procedure shall be
furnished upon the request of any domestic subscriber. The Board of Trustees
shall notify the domestic subscriber of the time, place and date scheduled for
such conference.
(Neb. RS 70-1604)
   (D)   The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for the
notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance of
service and shall advise its subscribers, including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.
(Neb. RS 70-1607)
   (E)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or
to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general
public.
(Neb. RS 70-1615)
§ 50.06 LIEN.
   (A)   Whenever a municipality removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to
be removed, from any lot or land pursuant to
Chapter 51, it shall, after a hearing conducted by the governing body, assess
the cost of the removal against such lot or land.
(Prior Code, § 4-209)
   (B)   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason
remain indebted to the municipality for electrical service furnished, the
amount due, together with any other charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent electrical bill which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was used. The delinquent electrical bill shall be
placed upon the assessment rolls for collection as a special tax. It shall be
the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer to report to the governing body on June 1 of
each year a list of all unpaid accounts due for electricity, together with a
description of the real estate upon which the same was used. The report shall
be examined and, if approved by the governing body, shall be certified by the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer to the County Clerk in the same manner as for the
collection of other special taxes to be collected by the County Treasurer. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the property owners of any delinquency that is 60
days or more overdue.
(Prior Code, § 3-307)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
Solid Waste Management System
   
51.01   Funding
   
51.02   Operation
   
51.03   Local regulations
   
51.04   Compliance with state law
Garbage and Refuse Collection
   
51.15   Definitions
   
51.16   Trash and waste
   
51.17   Hauling
   
51.18   Garbage and refuse collection authority
   
51.19   Notice
   
51.20   Nuisance
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
§ 51.01 FUNDING.
   The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management and maintenance of the solid waste management system, may each year
levy a tax, not to exceed the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as
the Municipal Solid Waste Management Fund and shall remain in the custody of
the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 3-501)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2106
§ 51.02 OPERATION.
   The governing body shall have the direct management and control of the
municipal solid waste management system. The governing body shall have the
authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient
management of said system. The governing body shall provide by resolution for
the management and operation of said system, and shall set the rates to be
charged for services rendered by resolution, and file the same in the office of
the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 3-502)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2106
§ 51.03 LOCAL REGULATIONS.
   The municipality shall adopt solid waste disposal regulations that consider
collection, transportation, storage, processing, resource recovery and disposal
of solid waste, developmental and operation plans for solid waste disposal
areas, fire prevention, groundwater protection, handling of liquid and
hazardous materials, insect and rodent control and the methods of disposing of
accumulations of junk outside of solid waste disposal areas.
(Prior Code, § 3-503)
§ 51.04 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   The municipality shall operate and manage its municipal solid waste
management system in conformance to the State Integrated Solid Waste Management
Act.
(Prior Code, § 3-504)
Statutory reference:
   State Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, see Neb. RS 13-2001 through 13-
2043
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
§ 51.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Items including, but not limited to, kitchen refuse, decayed waste,
dead animals or anything that may decompose and pose an immediate threat to the
public health.
(Prior Code, § 4-201)
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. All MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE shall be considered
garbage.
(Prior Code, § 4-203)
   WASTE. Items including, but not limited to, cinders, ashes, paper, plastic,
metal, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust or sand and the like, which do not pose
an immediate hazard to the public health.
(Prior Code, § 4-202)
§ 51.16 TRASH AND WASTE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on or about any
dwelling, building or premises, or any other place in the municipality, decayed
vegetable or animal substance, garbage or refuse matter of any kind that may be
injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of the
municipality, unless the same is kept in receptacles which are as nearly
airtight as may be practical so as to prevent the spread of garbage. It shall
be unlawful to throw or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks or other public
grounds any dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste or rubbish of
any kind.
   (B)   No person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse to collect, and
all persons shall remove the same from their property within 24 hours after
being notified to do so by a village law enforcement officer or the Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall represent the Board of Health. Any person having
garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse that is subject to decay or fermentation
within a short period of time shall be required to place the same in a standard
garbage can with a tight cover or a durable plastic container that is securely
tied at its opening.
(Prior Code, § 4-204) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106
§ 51.17 HAULING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul garbage, trash or waste within
the municipality without covering said material with a tarp or other cover
which prevents the escape of trash therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 4-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.18 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AUTHORITY.
   The governing body may provide for the collection and removal of garbage or
refuse found upon any lot or land within its corporate roads, or alleys
abutting such lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance. The governing
body may require the owner, duly authorized agent or tenant of such lot or land
to remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and streets and roads or
alleys.
(Prior Code, § 4-206)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and 18-1752
§ 51.19 NOTICE.
   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the tenant, if any. Such notice
shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail. After providing
such notice, the municipality, through its proper offices, shall, in addition
to other proper remedies, remove the garbage or refuse or cause to be removed
from such lot or land and streets, roads or alleys.
(Prior Code, § 4-207)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and 18-1752
§ 51.20 NUISANCE.
   If the Chairperson of the Board of the governing body declares that the
accumulation of such garbage or refuse upon any lot or land constitutes an
immediate nuisance and hazard to public health and safety, the municipality
shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed, from such lot or
land within 48 hours after notice by personal service or following receipt of a
certified letter, if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.
(Prior Code, § 4-208)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and 18-1720
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Definitions
   
52.002   Operating and funding
   
52.003   Consumer application
   
52.004   Water contract
   
52.005   Installation
   
52.006   Water permits
   
52.007   Single premises
   
52.008   Restricted use
   
52.009   Fire hydrants
   
52.010   Pollution
   
52.011   Mandatory hook-up
   
52.012   Water service contracts
   
52.013   Police reports
   
52.014   Destruction of property
   
52.015   Complaints
   
52.016   Service to nonresidents
   
52.017   Inspections
   
52.018   Repairs
   
52.019   Fluoride prohibited
   
52.020   Prohibition of lead pipes, solder and flux
   
52.021   Discontinuance of service; notice procedure
   
52.022   Rates; fees; collections
Cross-Connections
   
52.035   Purpose; application; policy
   
52.036   Definitions
   
52.037   Prohibited connections
   
52.038   Survey and investigations
   
52.039   Type of protection required
   
52.040   Where protection is required
Backflow Prevention Devices
   
52.055   General provisions
   
52.056   Installation
   
52.057   Inspection and maintenance
   
52.058   Violations
   
52.059   Liability claims
Water Droughts and Emergencies
   
52.070   Purpose
   
52.071   Definitions
   
52.072   Water classes
   
52.073   Declaration of water conditions
   
52.074   Conservation measures
   
52.075   Emergency water rates
   
52.076   Regulations
   
52.077   Violations and disconnections
   
52.078   Emergency termination
   
52.079   Severability
Water Wells and Other Facilities
   
52.090   Purpose
   
52.091   Registration
   
52.092   Private wells prohibited
   
52.093   Prohibited facilities
   
52.094   Permit procedure
   
52.095   State minimum standards adopted
   
52.096   Distance of facilities from water sources
   
52.097   Standards of review by village
   
52.098   Wellhead protection area
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEEMED AVAILABLE. Any water main which passes through the premises or
through a street, alley or easement adjacent to or abutting such premises.
   MAIN. Any pipe other than a service pipe that is used for the purpose of
carrying water to and dispersing the same in the municipality.
   SEPARATE PREMISES. More than one consumer procuring water from the same
service pipe. The second premises may be a separate dwelling, apartment,
building or structure used for a separate purpose.
   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe extending from the main to any point serving, or
existing on, a private property.
(Prior Code, § 3-102)
§ 52.002 OPERATING AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water Department. The
governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management
and maintenance of the Municipal Water Department, may each year levy a tax,
not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits
that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the
Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
The governing body shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by
resolution and shall file a copy of the rates in the office of the Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-531, 17-534 and 19-1305
§ 52.003 CONSUMER APPLICATION.
   Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make application
therefor to the Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer shall require each
applicant to pay a tap fee, which shall be the actual cost of the material and
labor involved in tapping the water main. The fee is to be paid to the Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 3-103)
§ 52.004 WATER CONTRACT.
   The municipality, through the Water Department, shall furnish water to
persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street, alley or
easement in which a commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The rules,
regulations and water rates hereinafter named in this chapter and on file in
the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be considered a part of every
application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part of
the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without further
formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant, or the use
or consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing
of water service to said consumer, shall constitute a contract between the
consumer and the municipality, to which said contract both parties are bound.
If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any
reasonable rules and regulations that the governing body may hereafter adopt,
the Utilities Superintendent or his or her agent may cut off or disconnect the
water service from the building or premises or place of such violation. No
further connection for water service to said building, premises or place shall
again be made save or except by order of said Superintendent or his or her
agent.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-104) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.005 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for water
service, shall pay to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer a tap fee as set by
resolution of the Village Board for the expense of processing the application
and tapping the water main. The customer shall pay the cost of all materials
required for the village to run the service to the property line. The customer
shall then be required to pay the expense of procuring the materials required,
as well as the services of a plumber, and shall pay all other costs of
installation from the property line. All water service lines shall be three-
fourths-inch lines, unless otherwise approved by action of the Village Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   All water furnished by the village shall be delivered through and
measured by permanently affixed water meters, installed by or under the
direction of the village or its agents, at the consumer’s expense, and no water
connections shall be allowed to remain or new water service furnished until
water meters have been installed to measure the water furnished.
(Prior Code, § 3-106)
§ 52.006 WATER PERMITS.
   Upon observation by the Utilities Superintendent or upon a filing of
complaint by any citizen of the municipality, any customer of the Water
Department using excessive amounts of water without first obtaining a permit
shall be issued a notice to appear before the governing body to show cause why
he or she should not be required to apply for a heavy user permit and pay
additional water fees. If said customer does not appear before the governing
body or does not satisfactorily show that his or her water use is not
excessive, he or she shall be billed an additional fee set by the governing
body and, if the customer fails to pay said additional fee, he or she shall
have his or her water service disconnected.
(Neb. RS 17-542) (Prior Code, § 3-108)
§ 52.007 SINGLE PREMISES.
   No consumer shall supply water to other families or allow them to take water
from his or her premises, nor after water is supplied into a building shall any
person make, or employ a plumber or other person to make, a tap or connection
with the pipe upon the premises for alteration, extension or attachment without
the written permission of the Utilities Superintendent. It shall further be
unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by means of any
contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe so that the
water will not pass through the meter or while passing through said meter will
cause the meter to register inaccurately.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-111) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.008 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   The governing body or the Utilities Superintendent may order a
reduction in the use of water or shut off the water on any premises in the
event of a water shortage due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. In
the event of said water shortage, the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees or
the Utilities Superintendent shall notify the customers of the Water Department
by posting in three prominent places throughout the municipality notice of said
shortage and the restrictions imposed. In the event that any person abuses his
or her privileges of use of the water system by continued and excessive use to
such an extent as to endanger the health and welfare of the residents of the
municipality, the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees or the Utilities
Superintendent shall notify said customer by personal service or by posting on
the customer’s premises, and if said excessive use is not abated within 12
hours after said notification, the Utilities Superintendent shall disconnect
said water service and shall not reconnect the water service until the customer
shall pay to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer a reconnection fee established by
resolution by the Village Board.
   (B)   The municipality shall not be liable for any damages caused by
shutting off the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any part
thereof is undergoing repairs or when there is a shortage of water due to
circumstances over which the municipality has no control.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-112) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.009 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to
be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than members
of the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief or members
of the Water Department, to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants and
draw water from the same or in any manner to interfere with the hydrants.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.010 POLLUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute any
stream or source of water for the supply of the Municipal Water Department.
(Neb. RS 17-536) (Prior Code, § 3-114) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.011 MANDATORY HOOK-UP.
   (A)   The owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land which
abuts upon a street or other public way containing a water main or a water
system, upon which lot or parcel a building shall have been constructed for
residential, commercial or industrial use in the village, shall connect such
building with such water main and shall cease to use any other source of water
supply for domestic purposes.
   (B)   Any such owner, tenant or occupant of a lot or parcel of land in the
village along a water main constructed prior to June 13, 2012, who has an
existing domestic supply or source of potable water shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section. However, when the existing water source is
insufficient or requires maintenance or upgrade, the owner, tenant or occupant
shall immediately connect to the village water system.
   (C)   Any such owner, tenant or occupant of a lot or parcel of land in the
village who has an existing domestic supply or source of potable water who is
exempted from the provisions of this section, as provided in division (B)
above, shall also be exempt from all fees normally charged for non-users of the
public water system.
   (D)   No well or other water supply shall be permitted for residential or
commercial usage when property is adjacent to the village water system.
   (E)   The owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land which
abuts upon a street or other public way containing a water main or a water
system, upon which lot or parcel a building shall have been constructed for
residential, commercial or industrial use in the village, who has an existing
water system shall be required to connect to the public water system in the
event the owner, tenant or occupant of any such lot or parcel of land shall
cease to use the existing domestic supply or source of potable water or it
requires maintenance.
   (F)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the water service line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the village from any loss or damage that may be occasioned by the installation
of the water service line.
   (G)   The materials of construction of a water service line and the methods
to be used in the excavation, placing of pipe, testing, disinfection and
backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building
Code or applicable rules and regulations of the village. All excavations
required for the water service line shall be open-trench work, unless otherwise
approved by the village. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected in accordance with this chapter.
   (H)   Nothing contained in this section shall restrict the use of existing
wells, or other sources of water supply, for uses other than for domestic water
uses; provided, that there shall be no interconnection between such water
supply and the village water system, except where the water shall be discharged
into the village wastewater collection system.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.012 WATER SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any consumer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished or if said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or she
shall at once inform the Utilities Superintendent, who shall cause the water
service to be shut off at said premises. If the consumer should fail to give
such notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the premises
until the Utilities Superintendent is otherwise advised of such circumstances.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-116) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.013 POLICE REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer of the village to
report to the Utilities Superintendent all cases of leakage and waste in the
use of water and all violations of this code relating to the Water Department.
They shall have the additional duty of enforcing the observance of all such
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-117)
§ 52.014 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the Municipal Water Department. No person may deposit anything
in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use
of any of the above mentioned property without the written permission of the
Utilities Superintendent.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-118) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.015 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent or Municipal Clerk-Treasurer may
appear before the governing body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer
who considers himself or herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge
demanded for the use of water, or for the resumption of water service after the
same shall have been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which
event, the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall write on the receipt given such
customer the words “Paid Under Protest.”
   (B)   Such consumer may then present his or her verified claim in the manner
provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a refund of the amount
so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be considered by the governing
body in this same manner as other claims against the municipality as set forth
in §
34.04.
(Prior Code, § 3-119)
§ 52.016 SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS.
   The municipality shall not supply water service to any person outside the
corporate limits without special permission from the governing body; provided,
that the entire cost of laying mains, service pipe and supply pipe shall be
paid by the consumer. All mains, service pipe and supply lines shall meet the
standards set by the governing body in regard to size of lines, material used
and workmanship, and further, be subject to inspection by the Utilities
Superintendent prior to being backfilled. Nothing herein shall be construed to
obligate the municipality to provide water service to nonresidents.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-120)
§ 52.017 INSPECTIONS.
   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agents shall have
free access at any reasonable time to all parts of each premises and building
to or in which water is delivered for the purpose of examining the pipes,
fixtures and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there is any
disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-121)
§ 52.018 REPAIRS.
   (A)   Repairs to the service pipe (any repair from the shutoff to the
structure(s)) shall be made by and at the expense of the customer. All other
repairs to the property of the Municipal Water Department, including metering
equipment, shall be made by the municipality at the expense of the customer.
   (B)   When metering equipment is worn out, it shall be replaced and reset by
the municipality at the expense of the municipality. If the customer permits or
allows water metering equipment to be damaged, injured, destroyed or removed
through his or her own recklessness, carelessness or neglect so that the
metering equipment must be repaired or replaced, the Utilities Superintendent
shall bill and collect from the customer the cost of such meter repair or
replacement in the same manner as water rent is collected. Permitting a water
meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always be considered
negligence on the part of the customer. All meters shall be tested at the
customer’s request, at the expense of the customer, any reasonable number of
times; provided, that if the test shows the water meter to be running 2% fast
or more, the expense of such test shall be borne by the municipality. The
municipality reserves the right to test any water service meter at any time,
and if said meter is found to be beyond repair, the municipality shall always
have the right to place a new meter on the customer’s water service fixtures at
municipal expense. Should a consumer’s meter fail to register properly, the
customer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of repair
on the basis of the bi-monthly consumption during the same two months of the
preceding year; provided, that if no such basis for comparison exists, the
customer shall be charged such amount as may be reasonably fixed by the
governing body.
(Prior Code, § 3-122)
Statutory reference:
   Grant of power to regulate waterworks; rates, see Neb. RS 17-542
§ 52.019 FLUORIDE PROHIBITED.
   Fluoride shall not be added to the water supply of the village.
(Neb. RS 71-3305) (Prior Code, § 3-123) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.020 PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX.
   (A)   Any pipe, solder or flux used in the installation or repair of any
residential or nonresidential facility which is connected to the public water
supply system shall be lead free.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, LEAD FREE shall mean:
      (1)   Solders and flux: Not more than 0.2% lead; and
      (2)   Wetted surfaces of pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings and
fixtures: Not more than 0.025% lead.
(Prior Code, § 3-124) Penalty, see §
52.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-5301
§ 52.021 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities, villages,
political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies or businesses of any nature.
(Neb. RS 70-1602)
   (B)   No utility owned and operated by the village furnishing water, natural
gas or electricity at retail in the village shall discontinue service to any
domestic subscriber for nonpayment of any past-due account unless the utility
first gives written notice by mail to any subscriber whose service is proposed
to be terminated at least seven days prior to termination. As to any subscriber
who has previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the utility by the
Department of Health and Human Services, the notice shall be by certified mail
and notice of such proposed termination shall be given to the department.
(Neb. RS 70-1603)
   (C)   Prior to the discontinuance of service to any domestic subscriber by a
utility owned and operated by the village, the domestic subscriber, upon
request, shall be provided a conference with the Board of Trustees. A utility
owned and operated by the village shall not be subject to Neb. RS 70-1608 to
70-1614, but the Board of Trustees shall establish a procedure to resolve
utility bills when a conference is requested by a domestic subscriber. The
procedure shall be in writing and a copy of such procedure shall be furnished
upon the request of any domestic subscriber. The Board of Trustees shall notify
the domestic subscriber of the time, place and date scheduled for such
conference.
(Neb. RS 70-1604)
   (D)   The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for the
notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance of
service and shall advise its subscribers, including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.
(Neb. RS 70-1607)
   (E)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or
to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general
public.
(Neb. RS 70-1615)
§ 52.022 RATES; FEES; COLLECTIONS.
   The governing body has the power and authority to fix by resolution the
rates to be paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water
Department. All such fees shall be on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer. The Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall collect all money received
by the municipality on the account of the Water Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) (Res. 2001-2, passed 2-14-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-538 and 17-541
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 52.035 PURPOSE; APPLICATION; POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose, application and policy.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is:
         (a)   To protect the public potable water supply of the municipal
water system from contamination or pollution by containing within the
consumer’s internal distribution system or private water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
potable water supply system;
         (b)   To promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of
existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or
consumer’s potable water systems and non-potable water systems, plumbing
fixtures and industrial process systems; and
         (c)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
      (2)   Application. This subchapter shall apply to all premises served by
the public potable water system of the municipality.
      (3)   Policy. This subchapter will be reasonably interpreted. It is the
municipality’s intent to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply
the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the
degree of hazard.
   (B)   Village responsibility and authority.
      (1)   The Municipal Water Department and governing body shall be
primarily responsible for the protection of the public potable water
distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow,
contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. The
cooperation of all consumers is required to implement and maintain the program
to control cross-connections. The consumer is responsible for preventing
contamination of the water system with the consumer’s own premises.
      (2)   If, in their judgment or that of their authorized representative,
cross-connection protection is required through either piping modification or
the installation of an approved backflow prevention device, 30 days’ notice
shall be given to the consumer. The failure, refusal or inability on the part
of the consumer to provide requested protection within 30 days shall make the
consumer subject to discontinuance of water service at the discretion of the
Municipal Water Department according to the degree of hazard without further
notice.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (Prior Code, § 3-126)
§ 52.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the overflow level rim of the
receptacle.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water source or system, other than the public
water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.
   BACKFLOW. The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or substances into the distribution system of a public
water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system, provided backflow
preventers have been tested and approved by a reputable testing laboratory.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONTAINMENT. Protection of the public water supply by installing a cross-
connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a
facility or as an installation within equipment handling potentially hazardous
materials.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process
fluids or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical link between a potable water supply and any
other substance, fluid or source which makes possible contamination of the
potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or
distribution system.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. An evaluation of the potential risk to public health and
the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
      (1)   HAZARD, HEALTH. Any condition, device or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to
the health and well-being of the water consumer.
      (2)   HAZARD, PLUMBING. A plumbing type of cross-connection in a
consumer’s potable water system that has not been properly protected by a
vacuum breaker, air gap separation or backflow prevention device.
      (3)   HAZARD, POLLUTION. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer’s potable water system, but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances but would not be dangerous to health.
      (4)   HAZARD, SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to
the physical properties of the public potable water system or of a pollutant or
contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the
potable water supply.
   INDUSTRIAL PROCESS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution which
may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form
or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or
plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water supply.
   ISOLATION. Protection of a facility service line by installing a cross-
connection control device or air gap separation on an individual fixture,
appurtenance or system.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably
affect such waters for domestic use.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the State
Department of Health.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the SERVICE
CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The owner, operator or individual in responsible charge of
a public water system.
(Prior Code, § 3-127)
§ 52.037 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public potable or
consumer’s water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water
Department and as required by the laws and regulations of the State Department
of Health.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system unless such
auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Municipal Water Department and the State
Department of Health.
   (C)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been
constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the
Municipal Water Department as necessary for the protection of health and
safety.
(Prior Code, § 3-128) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.038 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer shall provide access to the premises at reasonable times
to the Municipal Water Department or its authorized representative for the
conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system. On request by
the Municipal Water Department or its authorized representative, the consumer
shall furnish information on water use practices within his or her premises.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public
potable water system.
(Prior Code, § 3-129) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.039 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection required by this subchapter shall depend on the
degree of hazard which exists as follows.
   (A)   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a
severe health hazard.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a
health hazard.
   (C)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
(Prior Code, § 3-130) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.040 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in the
service connection line to a consumer’s water system or within any premises
where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department or the State
Department of Health, actual or potential hazards to the public potable water
system exist. The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate
with the degree of hazard.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any
premises where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department or the State
Department of Health, the nature and extent of activities on the premises or
the materials used in connection with the activities or materials stored on the
premises would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a
cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection device is required to
be installed. This includes, but is not limited to, the following situations:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of
the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the Municipal Water Department and the
State Department of Health;
      (2)   Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain
whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (3)   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist;
      (4)   Premises that, although not covered by code, are subject to
frequent modification which would change their status or premises that have had
backflow code violations;
      (5)   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply or where a cross-connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters; and
      (6)   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
such that, if backsiphonage or back pressure should occur, a serious health
hazard may result.
   (C)   The following types of facilities must install or have in operation
any approved air gap separation, atmospheric vacuum breaker or reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention device, as required by the Municipal Water
Department and the State Department of Health to protect the public water
supply, and such must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or
potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other
methods to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water Department and the State
Department of Health:
      (1)   Auxiliary water systems;
      (2)   Beverage bottling plants;
      (3)   Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants;
      (4)   Car washing facilities;
      (5)   Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment
plants;
      (6)   Chemically contaminated water systems;
      (7)   Dairies and cold storage plants;
      (8)   Film laboratories;
      (9)   Fire protection systems;
      (10)   Hazardous waste storage and disposal;
      (11)   Hospitals, mortuaries or clinics;
      (12)   Sprinkler systems and hose connections injecting directly
materials of a toxic or hazardous nature;
      (13)   Laundries and dye works;
      (14)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants;
      (15)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties;
      (16)   Plating plants;
      (17)   Printing and publishing facilities;
      (18)   Research and analytical laboratories;
      (19)   Sewage and storm drainage facilities and pumping stations;
      (20)   Zoological and horticultural gardens;
      (21)   All cemetery sprinkler systems;
      (22)   Pet grooming and veterinarian hospitals;
      (23)   Class A, B and C swimming pools;
      (24)   Cooling coil service lines (refrigeration, air conditioning and
the like);
      (25)   All hot water and steam boiler heating systems; and
      (26)   All stockyards and sale barns.
(Prior Code, § 3-131) Penalty, see §
52.999
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
§ 52.055 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention device required by this subchapter shall be of
a model or construction approved by the Municipal Water Department and the
State Department of Health.
      (1)   Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of
the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
      (2)   A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principal
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Municipal Water Department
and shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention devices
established by the Water Department.
   (B)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Municipal Water
Department at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except
for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements
of this subchapter as long as the Municipal Water Department is assured that
they will satisfactorily protect the water system. Whenever the existing device
is moved from its present location or requires more than minimum maintenance,
or when the Water Department finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-132)
§ 52.056 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter shall be
installed at a location and in a manner approved by the Municipal Water
Department and shall be installed at the expense of the water consumer.
   (B)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter as close to the meter as is reasonably practical and prior to any other
connection.
   (C)   Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily
accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing and where no
part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.
   (D)   Backflow prevention devices for underground sprinklers that have an
opening to the atmosphere shall be located at least 12 inches above the highest
ground served by the sprinkler system.
(Prior Code, § 3-133)
§ 52.057 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this subchapter are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhauls made in accordance with the following
schedule, or more often where inspections indicate a need.
      (1)   Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever
needed.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned and repaired whenever needed.
   (B)   Overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be made at the expense
of the water consumer and shall be performed by a state-certified backflow
prevention device tester.
   (C)   Backflow prevention devices designed with testing cocks shall be
inspected and tested each year, and those tests performed by the Municipal
Water Department will be at the expense of the Water Department. Tests
performed by others shall be at the expense of the consumer.
   (D)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (E)   The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device that has test cocks from purchase to retirement. Records of
inspections, test, repairs and overhauls performed by others shall be submitted
to the Municipal Water Department annually.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Municipal Water Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-134) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.058 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Municipal Water Department or water purveyor shall have the right
to deny or discontinue, after notice to the consumer thereof, the water service
to any premises wherein:
      (1)   Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed or maintained in a manner acceptable to the Municipal Water
Department;
      (2)   It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed;
      (3)   An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises;
      (4)   A low pressure cutoff required by this subchapter is not installed
and maintained in working order; and/or
      (5)   The Municipal Water Department is denied entry to determine
compliance with these regulations.
   (B)   The Municipal Water Department shall immediately deny or discontinue,
without notice to the consumer thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein a severe cross-connection exists which constitutes an immediate threat
to the safety of the public water system. The Municipal Water Department shall
notify the consumer within 24 hours of said denial or discontinuation of
service.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water
Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-135)
§ 52.059 LIABILITY CLAIMS.
   Employees of the Municipal Water Department shall be relieved from personal
liability, when acting in good faith and without malice, for any damage that
may occur to any person or property as a result of any act required or
authorized by the regulations affecting the Municipal Water Department; cross-
connections, backflow prevention devices or by any act or omission of the
employee of the Municipal Water Department in the discharge of his or her
duties hereunder. Any suit brought carrying out the provisions of these
regulations shall be defended by the municipality, or by the municipality’s
insurance carrier, if any, through final determination of such proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 3-136)
WATER DROUGHTS AND EMERGENCIES
§ 52.070 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the declaration of a water
supply watch, warning or emergency and the implementation of voluntary and
mandatory water conservation measures throughout the village in the event such
a watch, warning or emergency is declared.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTOMER. The customer of record using water for any purpose from the
village’s water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is
made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of
delivery.
   WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but is not limited to, permitting water to escape
down a gutter, ditch or other surface drain, or failure to repair a
controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.
   WATER. Water available to the village for treatment by virtue of its water
rights or any treated water introduced by the village into its water
distribution system, including water offered for sale at any coin-operated
site.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.072 WATER CLASSES.
   The following classes of uses of water are established:
   (A)   Class 1. Water used for outdoor watering, either public or private,
for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields,
swimming pools or other recreational areas, or the washing of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers or the exterior of any building or structure;
   (B)   Class 2. Water used for any commercial or industrial, including
agricultural, purposes; except water actually necessary to maintain the health
and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in
the performance of their duties at their place of employment;
   (C)   Class 3. Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in
either Class 1 or 2; and
   (D)   Class 4. Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives of
domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.073 DECLARATION OF WATER CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Declaration of water watch. Whenever the governing body of the village
finds that conditions indicate that the probability of a drought or some other
condition causing a major water supply shortage is rising, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a water watch exists and that it shall
take steps to inform the public and ask for voluntary reductions in water use.
Such a watch shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of
the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and
end of a water watch shall be effective upon their publication in the official
village newspaper.
   (B)   Declaration of water warning. Whenever the governing body of the
village finds that drought conditions or some other condition causing a major
water supply shortage are present and supplies are starting to decline, it
shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water warning exists and
that it will recommend restrictions on nonessential uses during the period of
warning. Such a warning shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by
resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the
beginning and ending of the water warning shall be effective upon their
publication in the official village newspaper.
   (C)   Declaration of water emergency. Whenever the governing body of the
village finds that an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water supply
needed for essential uses, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that
a water supply emergency exists and that it will impose mandatory restrictions
on water use during the period of the emergency. Such an emergency shall be
deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to
have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water supply
emergency shall be effective upon their publication in the official village
newspaper.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.074 CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   (A)   Voluntary conservation measures. Upon the declaration of a water watch
or water warning as provided in §
52.073, the Village Chairperson and/or the Utilities Superintendent is
authorized to call on all water consumers to employ voluntary water
conservation measures to limit or eliminate nonessential water uses including,
but not limited to, limitations on the following uses:
      (1)   Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf
courses);
      (2)   Washing of automobiles;
      (3)   Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air
conditioning systems; and
      (4)   Waste of water.
   (B)   Mandatory conservation measures. Upon the declaration of a water
supply emergency as provided in §
52.073, the Village Chairperson and/or the Utilities Superintendent is also
authorized to implement certain mandatory water conservation measures,
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Suspension of new connections to the village’s water distribution
system, except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to
agreements entered into by the village prior to the effective date of the
declaration of the emergency;
      (2)   Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water
use, wholly or in part;
      (3)   Restrictions on the sale of water at coin-operated facilities or
sites;
      (4)   The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula
including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or
per consumer restrictions;
      (5)   Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and
      (6)   Any combination of the foregoing measures.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.075 EMERGENCY WATER RATES.
   (A)   Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in §
52.073, the governing body of the village shall have the power to adopt
emergency water rates by ordinance designed to conserve water supplies.
   (B)   Such emergency rates may provide for, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Higher charges for increasing usage per unit of use (increasing
block rates);
      (2)   Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit
rate); or
      (3)   Extra charges in excess of a specified level of water use (excess
demand surcharge).
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.076 REGULATIONS.
   During the effective period of any water supply emergency as provided for in
§
52.073, the Village Chairperson and/or the Utilities Superintendent is
empowered to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this subchapter, any water supply emergency resolution or
emergency water rate ordinance. Such regulations shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body at its next regular or special meeting.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.077 VIOLATIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS.
   (A)   If the Village Chairperson and/or the Utilities Superintendent or
other village official or officials charged with the implementation and
enforcement of this subchapter or a water supply emergency resolution learn of
any violation of any water use restrictions imposed pursuant to §§
52.074(B) or 52.076, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the
property where the violation occurred and the customer of record, and any other
person known to the village who is responsible for the violation or its
correction shall be provided with either actual or mailed notice. Said notice
shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated
immediately or within such specified time as the village determines is
reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the
village may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following
procedures.
      (1)   The village shall give the customer notice by mail or actual notice
that water service will be discontinued within a specified time due to the
violation and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the
termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the village’s governing
body or a village official designated as a hearing officer by the governing
body.
      (2)   If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the
violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before
termination is ordered.
      (3)   The governing body or hearing officer shall make findings of fact
and order whether service should continue or be terminated.
   (B)   A fee of $50 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service
terminated pursuant to division (A) above. In the event of subsequent
violations, the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second reconnection and
$300 for any additional reconnections.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.078 EMERGENCY TERMINATION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the ability of any properly
authorized village official from terminating the supply of water to any or all
customers upon the determination of such village official that emergency
termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of
the public.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 52.079 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter is declared unconstitutional, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
constitutionality of the remainder of this subchapter and its applicability to
other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003)
WATER WELLS AND OTHER FACILITIES
§ 52.090 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the water system of the
village by regulating the surface and subsurface areas surrounding a water well
or well field supplying a public water system through which contaminates are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach such water well or well field.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.091 REGISTRATION.
   All private water wells located within the service area of the village water
system shall be registered with the village on forms provided by the village
within one year of the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.092 PRIVATE WELLS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to dig, drill, construct or modify a well within the
service area of the village water system.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.093 PROHIBITED FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any of the following facilities within the
corporate limits of the village without first having obtained the proper permit
from the village:
   (A)   Sewage lagoon;
   (B)   Absorption or disposal field for water;
   (C)   Cesspool;
   (D)   Livestock feedlot;
   (E)   Livestock pasture or corral;
   (F)   Chemical product storage facility;
   (G)   Petroleum product storage facility;
   (H)   Sanitary landfill;
   (I)   Septic tank; and
   (J)   Sewage treatment plant.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.094 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   To obtain a permit to operate any of the facilities listed in §
52.093, the owner of the property on which the facility is to be located must
make application on the proper form provided by the village. Such application
must be presented to the Village Manager or Utilities Superintendent. The
Manager or Utilities Superintendent shall approve or deny said permit.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.095 STATE MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   The standards promulgated by the State Health Department relative to private
wells are hereby adopted and such standards, supplements or appendices thereto
are made a part of this section as if fully set forth at length at this point.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.096 DISTANCE OF FACILITIES FROM WATER SOURCES.
   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this subchapter,
a permit to operate any of the following described facilities within the
indicated number of feet from a municipal water well shall not be granted.
Chemical or petroleum product storage                              500 feet
Corral                                                             500 feet
Feedlot or feedlot runoff                                          1,000 feet
Land application of municipal/industrial waste material            1,000 feet
Pit toilet/vault toilet                                            500 feet
Sanitary landfill/dump                                             500 feet
Sanitary sewer connection                                          100 feet
Sanitary sewer line                                                50 feet
Sanitary sewer manhole                                             100 feet
Sewage lagoon                                                      1,000 feet
Sewage treatment plant                                             500 feet
Sewage wet well                                                    500 feet
Underground disposal system (septic system, cesspool and the like) 500 feet
Wastewater holding tank                                            500 feet
 
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.097 STANDARDS OF REVIEW BY VILLAGE.
   The village shall have the power and authority to refuse to issue permits in
the event it appears to the Village Manager or Utilities Superintendent that
the plan of construction is not sound or the applicant does not have the
equipment necessary to properly construct, or it appears to the Village Manager
or Utilities Superintendent that such facility may endanger, impair or in any
way interfere with the village water system.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
§ 52.098 WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA. The surface and subsurface area surrounding a
public water supply well or well field supplying a public water supply system
through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach such
water well or well field.
   (B)   Wellhead protection area. The Village Board designates a wellhead
protection area for the purpose of protecting a public water supply system.
Such areas are based upon the wellhead protection area map presented to the
village by the State Department of Environmental Quality in July 2011. This
map, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this section and
available in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, is incorporated by
reference herein.
(Prior Code, § 3-146)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §
52.076 shall be a municipal offense and may be prosecuted in municipal court.
Any person so charged and found guilty in municipal court of violating the
provisions of §
52.076 shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Each day’s violation shall
constitute a separate offense. The penalty for an initial violation shall be a
mandatory fine of $100. In addition, such customer may be required by the court
to serve a definite term of confinement in the village or county jail, which
shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed 30 days. The penalty for
a second or subsequent conviction shall be a mandatory fine of $200. In
addition, such customer shall serve a definite term of confinement in the
village or county jail, which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not
exceed 30 days.
   (C)   In the event any of the facilities described in §§
52.090 through
52.098 are installed or operated without first having obtained a permit from
the village and/or within a designated number of feet from the municipal water
supply, then such facilities shall be deemed a nuisance, and the village may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the nuisance in the manner
provided by law, or, whenever in any action it is established that such a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case. In addition
thereto, any person violating any of the terms of §§
52.090 through
52.098 is hereby determined to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor as the same
is defined by state statute. The penalty for such violation shall be that as
defined by state law for the violation of a Class III misdemeanor.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-8-2003; Ord. 175, passed 1-12-2011)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
   
53.002   Operation and funding
   
53.003   Application for permit
   
53.004   Sewer contract
   
53.005   Service contracts
   
53.006   Classification
   
53.007   Mandatory hook-up
   
53.008   Direct connections
   
53.009   Manholes
Private Sewage Disposal System
   
53.020   When applicable
   
53.021   Permit required; fee
   
53.022   When effective; inspections
   
53.023   System specifications
   
53.024   System maintenance
   
53.025   Additional requirements
Building Sewer Installation
   
53.040   Permit required; application fee
   
53.041   Single premises
   
53.042   Use of existing sewers
   
53.043   Construction codes
   
53.044   Unlawful connections
   
53.045   Inspections
   
53.046   Excavations
Sewer Use
   
53.060   Sewer service installation and expense
   
53.061   Repairs and replacement
   
53.062   Rate setting
Wastewater Facilities
   
53.075   Special equipment
   
53.076   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, cooling water and process
water
   
53.077   Harmful and obstructive substances
   
53.078   Specific prohibitions as determined by Utilities Superintendent
   
53.079   Control of discharge rate or use fee surcharge
   
53.080   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
53.081   Maintenance by owner
   
53.082   Control manholes and sampling stations
   
53.083   Destruction of property
   
53.084   Special exceptions permitted
Enforcement
   
53.095   Inspections
   
53.096   Compliance with chapter; inspections
   
53.097   Municipal powers
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine in parts per million by weight
which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content
or to meet the requirements of some other objective in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community (the preferred term is WASTEWATER).
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. The pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent editions of Standard Methods for the Examination Water, Sewage and
Industrial Waste, published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
   STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface
water or unpolluted water from any source (sometimes termed STORM SEWER).
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent of the municipality, or his or
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied
on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration
values established as representative of normal sewage.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   TRAP. The vertical distance between the crown weir and the dip of the trap.
   UNPOLLUTED WATERS. Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 3-202)
§ 53.002 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The municipality owns and operates the municipal sewer system through
the Utilities Superintendent. The governing body shall have the authority to
adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the
Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-201)
   (B)   Provided wells drilled for monitoring purposes, as required by any
state or federal government, shall be drilled only after providing no less than
ten days written notice to the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-125)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-574 and 17-925.01
§ 53.003 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person wishing to connect with the sewer system shall make an
application therefor to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Department shall not
supply sewer service to any person outside the corporate limits without special
permission from the governing body; provided, that the entire cost of the pipe
and other installation charges shall be paid by such consumers. Nothing herein
shall be construed to obligate the municipality to provide sewer service to
nonresidents.
(Prior Code, § 3-203)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-574 and 19-2701
§ 53.004 SEWER CONTRACT.
   (A)   The municipality, through the Municipal Sewer Department, shall
furnish sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose premises
abut a street or alley in which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be
laid. The municipality may also furnish sewer service to persons whose premises
are situated outside the corporate limits of the municipality as and when,
according to law, the governing body may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations and sewer rental rates hereinafter named in this chapter shall be
considered a part of every application hereafter made for sewer service and
shall be considered a part of the contract between every customer now or
hereafter served.
   (B)   Without further formality, the making of the application on the part
of any applicant or the use of sewer service by present customers thereof shall
constitute a contract between the customer and the municipality, to which said
contract both parties are bound.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
§ 53.005 SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any customer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished or if said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or she
shall at once inform the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 3-207)
§ 53.006 CLASSIFICATION.
   The governing body may classify, for the purpose of rental fees, the
customers of the Municipal Sewer Department; provided, that such
classifications are reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any
consumer or group of consumers.
(Neb. RS 17-925.01) (Prior Code, § 3-209)
§ 53.007 MANDATORY HOOK-UP.
   (A)   Upon written notice by the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer, the property
owner, occupant or lessee of any premises that abuts a sewer main that is now
or may hereafter be laid shall, without delay, cause said building to be
connected with the sewer system and equipped with inside sewerage facilities.
   (B)   Every building hereafter erected shall be connected with the sewer
system at the time of its construction. In the event that any property owner,
occupant or lessee shall neglect, fail or refuse within a period of ten days
after notice has been given to him or her to do so by registered mail or by
publication in a newspaper in or of general circulation in the municipality to
make such connection, the governing body shall have the power to cause the same
to be done, to assess the cost thereof against the property and to collect the
assessment thus made in the manner provided for collection of other special
taxes and assessments.
(Prior Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see §
53.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-149 and 17-575
§ 53.008 DIRECT CONNECTIONS.
   Each and every building except buildings customarily incidental to the
primary building and trailers, must make a direct connection with the main
sewer line. Under no circumstances will two or more houses be allowed to make
such connections through one pipe.
(Prior Code, § 3-206) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.009 MANHOLES.
   Entrance into a manhole or opening for any purpose except by authorized
persons is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any receptacle connected with the sewer system any substance which
is not the usual and natural waste carried by the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 3-214) Penalty, see §
53.999
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 53.020 WHEN APPLICABLE.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
53.007, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
53.007, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank run gravel or dirt.
(Prior Code, § 3-217)
§ 53.021 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   Before the commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Utilities
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Utilities Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the
municipality at the time the application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 3-218)
§ 53.022 WHEN EFFECTIVE; INSPECTIONS.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Utilities Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24
hours of the receipt of notice by the Utilities Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 3-219)
§ 53.023 SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS.
   The type capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Public Health.
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities when the area of the lot is less than
12,250 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 3-220) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.024 SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-221)
§ 53.025 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 3-222)
BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION
§ 53.040 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Utilities Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 3-223)
   (B)   Classification.
      (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the municipality. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Utilities
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the municipality at the time the application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 3-224)
Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.041 SINGLE PREMISES.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
real building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 3-226)
§ 53.042 USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Utilities Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-227)
§ 53.043 CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
municipality. In the absence of code provisions, or in amplification, thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the municipality or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Utilities Superintendent before installation.
(Prior Code, § 3-228)
§ 53.044 UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make a connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 3-229) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.045 INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Utilities
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 3-230)
§ 53.046 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-231)
SEWER USE
§ 53.060 SEWER SERVICE INSTALLATION AND EXPENSE.
   (A)   The customer, upon the approval of his or her application for sewer
service, shall pay to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer a tap fee, which shall
compensate the municipality for the expense of processing the application and
tapping the sewer line. The customer shall pay the cost of all materials
required for the village to run the service lateral from the main to the
property line of the applicant. The customer shall then be required to pay the
expense of procuring the materials required, as well as the services of a
plumber, and shall pay all other costs of installation from the property line
to the point(s) of collection. All sewer service lines shall be lines of four
inches unless otherwise approved by action of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 3-208)
   (B)   The customer, upon the approval of his or her application for sewer
service, shall pay to the Utilities Superintendent a tap fee as set by
resolution of the Village Board for the expense of processing the application
and tapping the sewer main. The customer shall pay all costs of materials
required from the main to the property line. The customer shall then be
required to pay the expense of procuring the materials required, as well as the
services of a plumber, and shall pay all other costs of installation from the
property line to the point of connection. All building sewer service lines
shall be lines of four inches, unless otherwise approved by action of the
Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 3-225)
§ 53.061 REPAIRS AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The Municipal Sewer Department may require the owner of any property
which is within the municipality and connected to the public sewers or drains
to repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner’s property and
is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The property
owner’s duty to repair or replace such connection line shall include those
portions upon the owner’s property and those portions upon public property or
easements up to and including the point of junction with the public main.
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall give the property owner notice by
registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of such
owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such
connection line. If, within 30 days of mailing such notice, the property owner
fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the
Utilities Superintendent may cause such work to be done and assess the cost
upon the property served by such connection.
(Neb. RS 18-1748) (Prior Code, § 3-212)
§ 53.062 RATE SETTING.
   The governing body has the power and authority to fix by resolution the
rates to be charged for the usage of the municipal sewer line. The Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer shall bill the customers and collect all money received by the
municipality on the account of the Sewer Department. He or she shall fully
account for and pay to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer all revenue collected by
him or her, taking as his or her receipt therefor, and duplicate, filing one
with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and keeping the other on file in the Sewer
Department official’s records.
(Prior Code, § 3-210)
WASTEWATER FACILITIES
§ 53.075 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.
   In the event a customer of the Municipal Sewer Department discharges an
unusually large amount of waste daily, an unusually large amount of grease or
oil or waste with an unusually high biochemical oxygen demand, the governing
body may require said customer to install interceptors or other preliminary
treatment equipment to reduce the objectionable characteristics of the waste to
within such maximum limits as he or she shall prescribe subject to the review
of the governing body. All preliminary treatment facilities shall be purchased
and maintained continuously in satisfactory and efficient operation at the
customer’s expense. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a special
agreement or arrangement between the governing body and an industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the municipality for treatment subject to additional rental fees or other
charges.
(Prior Code, § 3-213)
§ 53.076 STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER, GROUNDWATER, COOLING WATER AND PROCESS
WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and
exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers or storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Utilities Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process water may be discharged on approval of the Utilities
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. The
contributor of any identifiable discharge of polluted water to the sanitary
sewer system shall be held responsible for reimbursing the municipality for
such costs. The costs shall be determined by the Utilities Superintendent with
the approval of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 3-232) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.077 HARMFUL AND OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders; or
      (5)   Any waters or wastes:
         (a)   Having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by
weight;
         (b)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids;
         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
sewage flow of the municipality; or
         (d)   Having a chlorine requirement greater than demanded by normal
sewage as evaluated by the municipality’s consulting engineer shall be subject
to the review of the Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   Where necessary, in the opinion of the Utilities Superintendent, the
owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may
be necessary to:
      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight;
      (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes; or
      (4)   Reduce the chlorine requirement to conform with normal sewage.
   (C)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Utilities Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall
be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(Prior Code, § 3-233) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.078 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS DETERMINED BY UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Utilities Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect upon the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Utilities Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
   (C)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 Hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Utilities Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing, iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Utilities Superintendent for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Utilities Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the foreperson in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 3-234) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.079 CONTROL OF DISCHARGE RATE OR USE FEE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
53.076 and which, in the judgment of the Utilities Superintendent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public
nuisance, the Utilities Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
53.083.
   (B)   If the Utilities Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Utilities
Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 3-235)
§ 53.080 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Utilities Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Utilities Superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 3-236)
§ 53.081 MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 3-237)
§ 53.082 CONTROL MANHOLES AND SAMPLING STATIONS.
   (A)   When required; installation and maintenance. When required by the
Utilities Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Utilities Superintendent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 3-238)
   (B)   Method. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH is determined from periodic grab
samples.
(Prior Code, § 3-239)
§ 53.083 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person or persons
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 3-240) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.084 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the municipality and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial wastes of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the municipality for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 3-241)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.095 INSPECTIONS.
   Subject to the requirements of the law relative to inspection warrants, the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her authorized agents shall have access at
reasonable times to all parts of each premises and building which is connected
with the sewer system to ascertain whether there is any disrepair or violation
of this chapter therein.
(Prior Code, § 3-215)
§ 53.096 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections generally. The Utilities Superintendent and other duly
authorized employees of the municipality bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing system in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The Utilities Superintendent or his or her
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
(Prior Code, § 3-242)
   (B)   Injury liability. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in division (A) above, the Utilities Superintendent or
duly authorized employees of the municipality shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the municipal employees, and the
municipality shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property
by municipal employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-243)
   (C)   Easements. The Utilities Superintendent and other duly authorized
employees of the municipality bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
municipality holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 3-244)
§ 53.097 MUNICIPAL POWERS.
   The municipality has the legal authority to enforce its system of user
charges and sewer use regulations on all existing or future users of the
system, whether located inside or outside the municipal corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 3-246)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
53.082(A), shall be served by the municipality with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the municipality for any expense, loss or damage caused by
reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 3-245)
CHAPTER 54: ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
Section
   
54.01   Contract and terms
   
54.02   Ownership
   
54.03   Consumer’s application
   
54.04   Installation expense
   
54.05   Repairs
   
54.06   Electric bills
   
54.07   Rate setting
   
54.08   Meter in disrepair
   
54.09   Minimum rates
   
54.10   Restricted use
   
54.11   Electrical service contracts
   
54.12   Building moving
   
54.13   Posting signs
   
54.14   Trimming trees
   
54.15   Inspections
   
54.16   Destruction of property
   
54.17   Complaints
   
54.18   Temporary service
   
54.19   Connection to village electric system
§ 54.01 CONTRACT AND TERMS.
   (A)   The municipality, through its Electrical Department, shall furnish
electric current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut on
any supply wire of the distribution system and may furnish electric current to
such other persons within or without its corporate limits as and when,
according to law, its governing body may see fit to do so. For such purposes,
said governing body may enter into agreements for the purchase of electric
energy and power and energy or capacity, or any combination thereof, upon such
terms and conditions, with such suppliers and for such periods as it may deem
are in the best interests of the village.
   (B)   The rules, regulations and rates for electric service, hereinafter
named in this chapter, shall be considered a part of every consumer application
hereafter made for electric service and shall be considered a part of a
contract with every consumer now served by the municipality. Without further
formality, the making of an application on the part of any applicant for the
use or consumption of electric energy by present customers and the furnishing
of electric service to said applicant or customer shall constitute a contract.
For any reasonable rules and regulations that the governing body may hereafter
adopt, the Utilities Superintendent or his or her agent shall cut off or
disconnect the electric service from the building or place of such violation,
and no further connection of electric service for such building or place shall
again be made save or except by order of the Utilities Superintendent or his or
her agent.
(Prior Code, § 3-301)
§ 54.02 OWNERSHIP.
   The municipality owns and operates the municipal electrical system through
the Utilities Superintendent. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management and maintenance of the municipal electrical
system, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by
state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said
tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall remain in the custody of
the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Utilities Superintendent or his or her agent
shall have the direct management and control of the municipal electrical system
and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his or her office. He or she shall
have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient
management of the electrical system subject to the supervision and review of
the governing body. The governing body shall, by resolution, set the rates to
be charged for services rendered and shall file the same in the office of the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 3-302)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906 and 17-909
§ 54.03 CONSUMER’S APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring electrical service must make application therefor to
the Utilities Superintendent. All applicants shall make a service deposit in
the sum set by resolution of the governing body. Electricity may not be
supplied to any house or building except upon the written order of the
Utilities Superintendent. The electrical system shall not supply to any person
outside the corporate limits electrical service without special permission from
the governing body; provided, that the entire cost of wire, installation and
other expenses shall be paid by the consumer beyond the corporate limits.
Nothing shall be construed to obligate the municipality to supply electrical
service to nonresidents.
(Prior Code, § 3-303)
§ 54.04 INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
   Labor, materials and the value of the use of village trucks, if any, as
determined by the village, to install electrical service up to and including
the electrical meter shall be paid by the consumer. Any cost exceeding the cost
of a 200 ampere service shall be paid by the consumer. In the event the
municipality employs outside labor to perform electrical service work for a
consumer, the cost of any such outside labor and materials shall be paid by the
consumer. The expense of installation and wiring from the meter to the points
of distribution shall be the responsibility of the consumer. In the case of
nonresident customers, the customer shall pay the expense of bridging
electrical service from the corporate limits to the place of distribution. In
the event that the customer, whether resident or nonresident, desires
underground installation, the customer shall contract with the municipality for
such installation, and the customer shall contribute to the expense of such
installation in such sum as the governing body may in each case set.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (Prior Code, § 3-304)
§ 54.05 REPAIRS.
   All repairs to the electrical system up to the meter of the customer shall
be paid by the municipality. All repairs to the wire and other appurtenances
from the lot line to the meter, except the meter and meter box, shall be paid
by the customers of the municipality. In the case of nonresidents, the
municipality shall pay for all repairs and replacements to the meter on the
customer’s premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-305)
§ 54.06 ELECTRIC BILLS.
   (A)   Electrical bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall charge and
collect from each customer the amount due to the Electric Department.
   (B)   Meters shall be read one time each month on or about the seventeenth
day of each month. It shall be the duty of customers of the electrical system
to pay their bill in net cash each month by mail or to appear at the office of
the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall charge and
collect from each customer the amount of electricity used since the last
examination, together with any other charges, properly itemized, due the
electrical system.
(Prior Code, § 3-306)
§ 54.07 RATE SETTING.
   The governing body shall set electrical rates by resolution. All rates shall
be on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection
at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 3-308)
§ 54.08 METER IN DISREPAIR.
   In the event that any customer’s meter falls out of repair or fails to
register properly, the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall charge such customer the
same amount billed one year prior to such disrepair. In the event that there is
no such basis for comparison, the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall charge the
customer such amount as he or she deems fair both to the customer and the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-309)
§ 54.09 MINIMUM RATES.
   All electrical consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided by
resolution unless and until the consumer shall, by written order, direct the
Utilities Superintendent to shut off the electricity, in which case, he or she
shall not be liable thereafter for electrical service until the electricity is
turned on again.
(Prior Code, § 3-310)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902
§ 54.10 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   The electrical system does not guarantee the delivery of electric
current over the lines of the distribution system, except when it has
sufficient power, current, equipment and machinery to do so.
   (B)   The Utilities Superintendent has the power and authority to disconnect
or discontinue such service for any good and sufficient reason without
liability. The municipality shall use due care and reasonable diligence to
provide and supply uninterrupted service to consumers but shall not be liable
for damages resulting from an interruption of service due to causes over which
the municipality has no control, and the municipality expressly reserves the
right to discontinue or disconnect any consumer’s service without preliminary
notice.
(Prior Code, § 3-311)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902
§ 54.11 ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Contracts for electrical service are nontransferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application. If any
consumer shall sell, dispose or be removed from the premises where service is
furnished in his or her name, or if said premises is destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he or she shall at once inform the Utilities Superintendent, who
shall cause the electrical service to be shut off from said premises. If the
consumer should fail to give such notice, he or she shall be charged for all
electricity used on said premises until the Utilities Superintendent is
otherwise advised of such circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 3-312)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902
§ 54.12 BUILDING MOVING.
   (A)   Should any house or building moving occur or be necessary and it
becomes necessary in said work to remove or disturb any of the property or
wires of the municipal electrical system, the same should not be done except
upon written permission received from the Utilities Superintendent, who shall
then order paid in advance the actual cost of moving said wires, and such cost
shall be paid by the applicant prior to the moving of the building or house.
   (B)   All expense of removing, changing and replacing said wires or
apparatus of the municipal electrical system shall be paid out of the deposit
made prior to moving, and any surplus remaining after all expenses are paid
shall be returned to the applicant; provided, that if, in the course of moving
said building or house, it becomes apparent that additional expense will be
incurred, such additional deposit as deemed necessary may be demanded.
(Prior Code, § 3-313)
§ 54.13 POSTING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack or fasten to the poles,
structures, fixtures or equipment of the municipal electrical system any sign,
poster, advertisement or banner without written permission from the Utilities
Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 3-314) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.14 TRIMMING TREES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof in
close proximity to the lines of the municipal electrical system shall, before
doing said work, give reasonable written notice to the Utilities Superintendent
and shall follow any and all rules and regulations which he or she may
prescribe for doing such work. It shall be unlawful for any person felling or
removing such trees or branches to disrupt or damage the lines without first
giving proper notice and receiving permission in writing to do so.
   (B)   Whenever it becomes necessary to protect the lines or property of the
municipal electrical system, the governing body shall have the power to order
cut and removed any overhanging branches or limbs of trees so that the lines
will be free and safe.
(Prior Code, § 3-315) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.15 INSPECTIONS.
   Subject to the requirements of the law relative to inspection warrants, the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her authorized agents shall have access at
reasonable times to each premises and building to or in which electricity is
supplied to ascertain whether there is any disrepair or violation of this
chapter therein; provided, that in the event of an emergency, such inspections
may take place at any time.
(Prior Code, § 3-316)
§ 54.16 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the municipal electrical system.
(Neb. RS 28-512) (Prior Code, § 3-317) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.17 COMPLAINTS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent may appear before the governing
body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who considers himself or
herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge demanded for the use of
electricity, or for the resumption of electric service after the same shall
have been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which event, the
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall write on the receipt given to such customer the
words “Paid Under Protest.” Such consumer may then present his or her verified
claim in the manner provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a
refund of the amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be
considered by the governing body in the same manner as other claims against the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-318)
§ 54.18 TEMPORARY SERVICE.
   Any customer requiring temporary electrical service shall be responsible for
paying for the supplies, labor and equipment for temporary service. Rates shall
be set by resolution of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 3-319)
§ 54.19 CONNECTION TO VILLAGE ELECTRIC SYSTEM.
   Standby generators for temporary or emergency electric service may be
connected to the village electrical system, provided, however, that in no event
shall any electric generating equipment be connected to the village electric
system without written consent granted by the Village Utilities Superintendent
upon written request fully describing the service requested to be so connected
and fully describing the safeguards proposed to guarantee that the requested
connection cannot result in a connection which may operate parallel to the
village electrical system. In no event shall any electric generating equipment
be connected in parallel to the village electrical system if such connection
has the potential to be connected in parallel to the village system without a
manual or automatic transfer switch, which shall be installed at the customer’s
expense. Any such transfer switch shall be designed so that under no conditions
will the connection to the village electrical system operate parallel. Such
connection must have a positive break-before-make design. The switch should
also incorporate a visual break or some means of determining the physical
position of the switch without removing a cover. The switch shall be installed
in compliance with this chapter and the National Electric Code, latest edition.
In the event an unauthorized connection to the village electrical system is
made without proper approval by the village, service will be disconnected
immediately until such time as the requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 3-320)
Statutory reference:
   State Electrical Board; powers enumerated, see Neb. RS 81-2104
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Right-of-way; stop and yield signs
   
70.03   Turning generally; U-turns
   
70.04   Emergency vehicles
   
70.05   Position of vehicle on highway
   
70.06   Crosswalks
   
70.07   Placement and maintenance of traffic control devices
   
70.08   Obedience to traffic control devices; exceptions
   
70.09   Traffic officers
Speed Limits
   
70.20   Basic rule
   
70.21   Maximum limits
Prohibitions and Enforcement
   
70.35   Littering
   
70.36   Signs, markers, devices or notices; prohibited acts
   
70.37   Drunken driving
   
70.38   Reckless driving
   
70.39   Careless driving
   
70.40   Negligent driving
   
70.41   Backing
   
70.42   Unnecessary stopping
   
70.43   Passing
   
70.44   Driving abreast
   
70.45   Following
   
70.46   Driving in sidewalk space
   
70.47   Vehicle muffler
   
70.48   Emergency regulations
   
70.49   Village law enforcement officers
   
70.50   Crowding; front seat
   
70.51   Loads
   
70.52   Engine braking prohibited
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions and the other
definitions in Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676 shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-607)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Such fire department vehicles, police
vehicles, rescue vehicles and ambulances as are publicly owned, such other
publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated by the Director of Motor
Vehicles and such publicly owned military vehicles of the National Guard as are
designated by the Adjutant General pursuant to Neb. RS 55-133.
(Neb. RS 60-610)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when,
within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations or public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet
of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of a highway.
(Neb. RS 60-613)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road,
avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(Neb. RS 60-624)
   MANUAL. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the
Department of Transportation pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,118.
(Neb. RS 60-631)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled land vehicle not operated upon rails,
except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by persons who are disabled
and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(Neb. RS 60-638)
   PEACE OFFICER. The Village Marshal or other chief law enforcement official,
any village police officer or any other person authorized to enforce village
ordinances. With respect to directing traffic only, PEACE OFFICER shall also
include any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-646)
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(Neb. RS 60-654)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two
or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(Neb. RS 60-656)
   SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE. The area of a roadway designated to the public by the
Board of Trustees as a school crossing zone through the use of a sign or
traffic control device as specified by the Board in conformity with the Manual,
but does not include any area of a freeway. A school crossing zone starts at
the location of the first sign or traffic control device identifying the school
crossing zone and continues until a sign or traffic control device indicates
that the school crossing zone has ended.
(Neb. RS 60-658.01)
   SHOULDER. The part of the highway contiguous to the roadway and designed for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and for lateral
support of the base and surface courses of the roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-661)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
(Neb. RS 60-669)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking or other device not
inconsistent with the State Rules of the Road placed or erected by authority of
the Board of Trustees or any official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-670)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any signal, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
(Neb. RS 60-671)
   TRAFFIC INFRACTION. The violation of any provision of the State Rules of the
Road or of any law, ordinance, order, rule or regulation regulating traffic
which is not otherwise declared to be a misdemeanor or a felony or, in this
title, an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-672)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved solely by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Neb. RS 60-676)
§ 70.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY; STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may provide for preferential right-of-way at an
intersection and indicate such by stop signs or yield signs erected by such
authorities.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a stop is
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall
stop, if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, if no crosswalk is indicated, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped,
such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such
highway as to constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or
into such intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable under the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop,
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall stop, if there is no such
line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
no crosswalk is indicated, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After
slowing or stopping, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection.
(Neb. RS 60-6,148) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 TURNING GENERALLY; U-TURNS.
   (A)   U-turns. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction, except at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to
proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal
is in operation or where a sign is posted indicating that U-turns are
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
   (B)   Turning, generally.
      (1)   Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall
approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right-hand
side of the highway and must turn the corner as near the right-hand curb as
possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the
intersection of the two streets.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach such
centerline of the highway in turning, shall pass as near as possible to the
centerline of the intersection passing as closely as practical to the right
thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For the purpose of this
section, the CENTER OF THE INTERSECTION shall mean the meeting point of the
medial lines of the highways intersecting one another.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,159
§ 70.04 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, every vehicle within
one block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately stop except
at the time they are on or crossing a street intersection, and then stop. Every
vehicle along the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a
position as near the right-hand curb as possible and remain there until such
authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed; provided, that said
vehicles are operated on official business and the drivers thereof make use of
proper visual or audible signals.
(Prior Code, § 5-105)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,131
§ 70.05 POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY.
   Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver
of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing
or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one-half of
the main traveled portion of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 5-106)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,131
§ 70.06 CROSSWALKS.
   The governing body may by resolution establish and maintain, by appropriate
devices, markers or lines upon the street, crosswalks at intersections where
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street and at such other
places as it may deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5-107)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680
§ 70.07 PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Board of Trustees shall place and maintain such traffic control devices
upon highways under its jurisdiction as it deems necessary to indicate and to
carry out the provisions of this title or to regulate, warn or guide traffic.
All such traffic control devices erected pursuant to this title shall conform
with the Manual.
(Neb. RS 60-6,121)
§ 70.08 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the State Rules of
the Road or this title, unless otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in the
Rules and this title.
   (B)   No provision of the Rules or this title for which traffic control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the
time and place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by a reasonably observant person.
Whenever any provision of the Rules or this title does not state that traffic
control devices are required, such provision shall be effective even though no
devices are erected or in place.
   (C)   Whenever traffic control devices are placed in position approximately
conforming to the requirements of the Rules or this title, such devices shall
be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.
   (D)   Any traffic control device placed pursuant to the Rules or this title
and purporting to conform with the lawful requirements pertaining to such
devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of the Rules or this
title unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.
(Neb. RS 60-6,119) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.09 TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
   The Board of Trustees or the village police may at any time detail officers,
to be known as “traffic officers,” at street intersections. All traffic
officers shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at
the intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their duty to direct
the movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any order or signal of any such traffic
officer notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or signal device that may
have been placed at any such intersection.
Penalty, see §
10.99
SPEED LIMITS
§ 70.20 BASIC RULE.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards then existing.
   (B)   A person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching
and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
(Neb. RS 60-6,185) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.21 MAXIMUM LIMITS.
   (A)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with §
70.20, the limits set forth in this section and Neb. RS 60-6,187, 60-6,188, 60-
6,305 and 60-6,313 shall be the maximum lawful speeds unless reduced pursuant
to division (B) below, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a
speed in excess of such maximum limits:
      (1)   Twenty-five mph in any residential district;
      (2)   Twenty mph in any business district;
      (3)   Fifty mph upon any highway that is gravel or not dustless-surfaced;
      (4)   Fifty-five mph upon any dustless-surfaced highway not a part of the
state highway system;
      (5)   Sixty-five mph upon any four-lane divided highway not a part of the
state highway system; and
      (6)   Sixty-five mph upon any part of the state highway system other than
an expressway, a super-two highway or a freeway.
   (B)   The maximum speed limits established in division (A) above may be
reduced by the Department of Transportation or the Board of Trustees pursuant
to Neb. RS 60-6,188.
   (C)   The Board may erect and maintain suitable signs along highways under
its jurisdiction in such number and at such locations as it deems necessary to
give adequate notice of the speed limits established pursuant to divisions (A)
or (B) above upon such highways.
(Neb. RS 60-6,186) Penalty, see §
10.99
PROHIBITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.35 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drop or cause to be left upon any
municipal highway, street or alley, except at places designated by the
governing body, any rubbish, debris or waste, and any person so doing shall be
guilty of littering.
(Prior Code, § 5-201) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 39-311
§ 70.36 SIGNS, MARKERS, DEVICES OR NOTICES; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Any person who willfully or maliciously shoots upon the public highway
and injures, defaces, damages or destroys any signs, monuments, road markers,
traffic control devices, traffic surveillance devices or other public notices
lawfully placed upon such highways shall be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   No person shall willfully or maliciously injure, deface, alter or
knock down any sign, traffic control device or traffic surveillance device.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized
representative of the Department of Transportation, the county or the village,
to remove any sign, traffic control device or traffic surveillance device
placed along a highway for traffic control, warning or informational purposes
by official action of the department, county or village. It shall be unlawful
for any person to possess a sign or device which has been removed in violation
of this division (C).
   (D)   Any person violating division (B) or (C) above shall be guilty of an
offense and shall be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of the value of
the sign, traffic control device or traffic surveillance device and the cost of
replacing it.
(Neb. RS 60-6,130) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.37 DRUNKEN DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or
of any drug. Any person who shall operate or be in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or any drug
shall be deemed guilty of a crime and, upon conviction thereof, such person
shall be punished as provided by state law. For the purpose of this section,
the determination of whether an individual is under the influence of either
alcohol or drugs shall be as prescribed in state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 5-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,196 through 60-6,203
§ 70.38 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an
indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be
guilty of reckless driving and as such shall be punished as provided by state
statute.
(Prior Code, § 5-206) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-4,182 and 60-6,215
§ 70.39 CARELESS DRIVING.
   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in a manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless driving and
shall be punished as provided by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 5-207) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,212 and 60-6,215
§ 70.40 NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a
want of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use
under like circumstances shall be guilty of negligent driving.
(Prior Code, § 5-208) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-4,182
§ 70.41 BACKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to back a motor vehicle on the municipal
streets except to park in or to remove the vehicle from a permitted parking
position, to move the vehicle from a driveway or to back to the curb for
unloading where such unloading is permitted; provided, that a vehicle shall be
backed only when such movement can be made in safety, and in no case shall the
distance of the backing exceed one and one-half lengths of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 5-209) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.42 UNNECESSARY STOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public street
or alley other than in permitted parking areas except when such a stop is
necessary for emergency situations, to comply with traffic control devices and
regulations or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 5-210) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,164
§ 70.43 PASSING.
   (A)   Intersections. The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction while traversing a street
intersection if such passing requires such overtaking vehicle to drive to the
left of the center of the street.
(Prior Code, § 5-211)
   (B)   Hindrance. The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by
another vehicle shall not increase the speed of his or her vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 5-212)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,136 and 60-6,186
§ 70.44 DRIVING ABREAST.
   Two or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing or when
traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; provided, that motorcycles may be
driven not more than two abreast in a single lane.
(Prior Code, § 5-213) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,149 and 60-6,308
§ 70.45 FOLLOWING.
   (A)   Following, distance. The operator of a vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard
for the speed of the vehicles and the traffic and condition of the street.
(Prior Code, § 5-214)
   (B)   Following, fire apparatus. The driver of any vehicle shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where a fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 5-215)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,140 and 60-6,183
§ 70.46 DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE.
   No motor vehicle shall be driven or ridden within any sidewalk space except
at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 5-216) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,178
§ 70.47 VEHICLE MUFFLER.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle operated within this municipality shall be
provided with a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual
noise or smoke.
   (B)   No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake muffler
or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle in a manner such that
the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is increased above that emitted by the
motor vehicle as originally manufactured.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to use a “muffler cut-out” on any motor vehicle
upon any streets; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not
applied to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 5-217) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,286 and 60-6,371
§ 70.48 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   Village law enforcement officers are hereby empowered to make and enforce
temporary traffic regulations to cover emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 5-218)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-683
§ 70.49 VILLAGE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   Village law enforcement officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
ordered to exercise all powers and duties with relation to the management of
street traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate and, when
necessary, temporarily divert or exclude, in the interest of public safety,
health and convenience, the movement of pedestrian, animal and vehicular
traffic of every kind in streets, parks and on bridges. The driver of any
vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-219)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-683
§ 70.50 CROWDING; FRONT SEAT.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded or when
there is in the front seat such a number of persons exceeding three as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such a position as to
interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with the
driver’s control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-6,179) (Prior Code, § 5-220) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.51 LOADS.
   (A)   Projecting. When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner that any
portion of the load extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or
the body of such vehicle, a red flag of not less than 12 inches both in length
and width shall be carried by day, and a red light after sunset, at the extreme
rear end of such load.
(Prior Code, § 5-222)
   (B)   Spilling. All vehicles used for carrying coal, earth, cinders, sand,
gravel, rock, asphalt, tar or any similar substance shall be so constructed as
to prevent the sifting or spilling of any of the contents.
(Prior Code, § 5-223)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,304 and 60-6,243
§ 70.52 ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful within the village limits for any operator of a motor
vehicle with a total gross vehicle weight rating of 7,000 pounds or more,
including its towed unit or units, to attempt to retard the forward movement of
said vehicle by initiating a device commonly known as jake brakes to contain
the engine’s compression, thus rapidly slowing the engine’s revolutions per
minute.
(Prior Code, § 5-225) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Regulation or prohibition authorized
   
71.02   Obstructing street, intersection or entrance
   
71.03   Intersections
   
71.04   Alleys
   
71.05   Display or repair of vehicle
   
71.06   Current registration
   
71.07   Time limits
   
71.08   Snow; weather emergencies; highway maintenance
   
71.09   Parallel, angle and center parking
   
71.10   Removal of illegally stopped vehicles; liability for costs
   
71.11   Unattended motor vehicle
Parking for Disabled Persons
   
71.25   Definitions
   
71.26   Designation of on-street parking spaces and access aisles; display of
permits
   
71.27   Designation of off-street parking stalls, spaces and access aisles
   
71.28   Personal permit; issuance; renewal
   
71.29   Motor vehicle permit; issuance; renewal
   
71.30   Permits; issuance; prohibitions; duplicates
   
71.31   Permits; period of validity; renewal of temporary permits
   
71.32   Permits nontransferable
   
71.33   Removal of unauthorized vehicle
   
71.34   Citation; complaint
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 REGULATION OR PROHIBITION AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees with respect to highways under its jurisdiction
and within the reasonable exercise of the police power may regulate or prohibit
stopping, standing or parking.
(Neb. RS 60-680)
   (B)   If the Board regulates or prohibits stopping, standing or parking all
vehicles or a particular kind or class of vehicles on a highway or a portion of
a highway, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle subject to such
regulation or prohibition on the highway or portion thereof longer than a
period of time necessary to load and unload freight or passengers.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.02 OBSTRUCTING STREET, INTERSECTION OR ENTRANCE.
   No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency, stop any
vehicle in any location where stopping will obstruct any street, intersection
or entrance to an alley or public or private drive.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 INTERSECTIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall park a vehicle or leave a vehicle standing for any
purpose, except momentarily to load or discharge passengers, within 25 feet of
the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines, or where the curb lines are painted red or
another color specified by the Board of Trustees to indicate such prohibition.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle with any portion thereof projecting
into any alley entrance.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in any alley, except for the purpose of
loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall
not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in an alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OR REPAIR OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any highway or public place
within the village any vehicle displayed for sale. Except when necessary due to
a breakdown or other emergency, no person shall adjust or repair, or race the
motor of, any motor vehicle or motorcycle while standing on the highways of the
village. No person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use
sidewalks or highways in the vicinity of the garage or shop for the purpose of
working on vehicles of any description.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.06 CURRENT REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful to park or place on the highways or other public
property any vehicle required to be registered by the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act that is not registered in accordance with the Act.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
§ 71.07 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on a public street for over 24
consecutive hours except where a different maximum time limit is posted.
   (B)   If the Board of Trustees adopts a resolution entirely prohibiting, or
fixing a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any highway,
it is unlawful to park or stop any vehicle in such highway for a period of time
longer than fixed in the resolution.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.08 SNOW; WEATHER EMERGENCIES; HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Unless the Board of Trustees provides otherwise, it is unlawful to
park or stand any vehicle on any highway in the village at any time within 12
hours after a snowfall of three inches or more has occurred within a 24-hour
period if the snow has not been removed within that time.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the Board of Trustees, the village police or any
other designated person may order any highway or portion thereof vacated for
weather emergencies or highway maintenance. Notice shall be given by personally
notifying the owner or operator of a vehicle parked on such highway or by
posting appropriate signs along the highway not less than four hours prior to
the time that the vacation order is to be effective. It is unlawful to park a
vehicle on a highway or portion thereof vacated in accordance with this
division (B).
   (C)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed and
parked, under the supervision of the village police, to a suitable nearby
location without further notice to the owner or operator of such vehicle.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.09 PARALLEL, ANGLE AND CENTER PARKING.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway where parking is permitted shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or edge of such roadway. No vehicle shall be parked upon a
roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway which is available for
parking.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by the Board of Trustees, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or edge of such roadway.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees may permit angle or center parking on any
roadway, except that angle or center parking shall not be permitted on any
federal-aid highway or on any part of the state highway system unless the
Director-State Engineer has determined that such roadway is of sufficient width
to permit angle or center parking without interfering with the free movement of
traffic.
   (D)   The Board of Trustees may prohibit or restrict stopping, standing or
parking on highways under its jurisdiction and erect and maintain proper and
adequate signs thereon. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Neb. RS 60-6,167)
   (E)   Where stalls are designated either on the curb or pavement, vehicles
shall be parked within those stalls.
   (F)   Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as to
prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.10 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Whenever any peace officer, or any authorized employee of a law
enforcement agency who is employed by the village and specifically empowered by
ordinance to act, finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, the individual may remove the vehicle, have
such vehicle removed or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off the roadway of the highway or
from the highway.
   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of any
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle prior
to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be entitled
to retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid. The lien
provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-6,165)
§ 71.11 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on a highway without first stopping the motor of
such vehicle, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition and
effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any roadway,
turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of such roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-6,168) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS
§ 71.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS AISLE. A space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or passenger
loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., and the
federal rules and regulations adopted and promulgated in response to the Act.
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PARKING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the use of parking spaces and access aisles that have been
designated for the exclusive use of handicapped or disabled persons.
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any individual with a severe visual,
neurological or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results
in an inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker or prosthetic, orthotic or other assistant device,
any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or
her functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any
individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON, TEMPORARILY. Any handicapped or disabled
person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such manner for no
longer than one year.
   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION. Violation of any section of this subchapter
regulating:
      (1)   The use of parking spaces, including access aisles, designated for
use by handicapped or disabled persons;
      (2)   The unauthorized possession, use or display of handicapped or
disabled parking permits; or
      (3)   The obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in
accordance and in conformity with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736 and 18-1741.01
§ 71.26 DESIGNATION OF ON-STREET PARKING SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES; DISPLAY OF
PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The governing body may designate parking spaces, including
access aisles, for exclusive use of:
         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3,113.06;
         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a
distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person by
another state;
         (c)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the village, whose motor
vehicles display the permit; and
         (d)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the village, which
display such permit.
      (2)   All such permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the
motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. The permit shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is
no rearview mirror.
   (B)   If the Board of Trustees so designates a parking space or access
aisle, it shall be indicated by posting above ground and immediately adjacent
to and visible from each space or access aisle a sign as described in Neb. RS
18-1737. In addition to such sign, the space or access aisle may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street
adjacent to the space or access aisle.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736
§ 71.27 DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING STALLS, SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES.
   The village and any person in lawful possession of any off-street parking
facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in such
facility owned or operated by the village or person for exclusive use of:
   (A)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb. RS
60-3,113.06;
   (B)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped
or disabled persons, as certified by the village, whose motor vehicles display
the permit; and
   (C)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the village, which display
such permit. Such designation shall be made by posting above ground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including access
aisles, a sign which is in conformance with the requirements in Neb. RS 18-
1737.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737
§ 71.28 PERSONAL PERMIT; ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall take an application, on a form
provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles, from a handicapped or disabled
person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent,
legal guardian or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder
thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting
such holder to park in those spaces or access aisles provided for by this
subchapter when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle
while it is parked in such spaces or access aisles. For the purposes of this
section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or
disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit, or for the renewal of a permit, shall
complete an application, shall provide proof of identity and shall submit a
completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for qualification and
signed by a physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered
nurse certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the definition of
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person.
No applicant shall be required to provide his or her social security number. In
the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying
physician, physician’s assistant or advanced practice registered nurse shall
indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or
disability will continue for a period of six months, whichever is less.
   (C)   A person may hold only one permit under this section and may hold
either a permit under this section or a permit under §
71.29 of this code, but not both.
   (D)   A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each
applicant. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.
   (E)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. The existing permit
shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.
   (F)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall not accept the application for a
permit of any person making application contrary to the provisions of the
Nebraska Revised Statutes.
§ 71.29 MOTOR VEHICLE PERMIT; ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall take an application from any person
for a motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person
driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in
those spaces or access aisles provided for by this subchapter if the motor
vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. Such parking permit
shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used
for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled person, and such person will enter or exit the motor
vehicle while it is parked in such designated spaces or access aisles.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit, or for the renewal of a permit,
pursuant to this section, shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used
for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall
demonstrate to the Village Clerk-Treasurer that each such motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons, or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. A copy of the completed
application form shall be given to each applicant.
   (C)   No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A
person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under §
71.28 of this code, but not both.
   (D)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. The existing permit
shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.
   (E)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.
   (F)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall not accept the application for a
permit of any person making application contrary to the Nebraska Revised
Statutes.
§ 71.30 PERMITS; ISSUANCE; PROHIBITIONS; DUPLICATES.
   (A)   (1)   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle
if any parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle
and such permit has been suspended, pursuant to §
71.32 of this code.
      (2)   At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed in
the manner provided for renewal in this subchapter.
   (B)   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit
is destroyed, lost or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the same
manner as the original permit, except that a newly completed medical form need
not be provided if a completed medical form submitted at the time of the most
recent application for a permit or its renewal is on file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer or the Department of Motor Vehicles. A duplicate permit shall
be valid for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was
issued.
§ 71.31 PERMITS; PERIOD OF VALIDITY; RENEWAL OF TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   All permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking
authorized by this subchapter shall be issued for a period ending on September
30 of the third year after the date of issuance and shall expire on that date.
   (B)   (1)   All permits authorized under this subchapter for temporarily
handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more
than six months after the date of issuance but may be renewed one time for a
period not to exceed six months.
      (2)   For the renewal period, there shall be submitted an additional
application with proof of a handicap or disability.
§ 71.32 PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Permits issued under this subchapter shall not be transferable and
shall be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for
which issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall
alter or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.
No person shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide false
information on an application for a permit.
   (B)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued to him or her as a handicapped or disabled person shall display a
handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a space or access aisle
designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled person.
   (C)   No person who is the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for the use of such person when transporting a handicapped or
disabled person shall display his or her handicapped or disabled parking permit
and park in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a
handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is
actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has
left the vehicle while it was parked and will return to the vehicle before it
leaves the designated space or access aisle.
   (D)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for use when a vehicle is transporting a handicapped or disabled
person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a
space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or
disabled person, unless a handicapped or disabled person is actually in the
vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has left the vehicle
while it was parked and will return to the vehicle before it leaves the
designated space or access aisle.
   (E)   (1)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a handicapped
parking infraction and shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a
period of six months and imposition of the penalty provided for violation of
this chapter. In addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than
$250, which may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all
handicapped parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are
returned to the court.
      (2)   At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit may
be renewed in the manner provided for renewal in this subchapter.
§ 71.33 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.
   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking
facility, after notifying the municipal police and the village, if it provides
on-street parking or owns, operates or provides an off-street parking facility,
may cause the removal, from a stall or space, including access aisles,
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons,
of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the distinguishing license
plates specified in this subchapter if there is posted above ground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, including access
aisles, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area so designated as
a tow-in zone.
   (B)   (1)   A person who parks a vehicle in any on-street parking space or
access aisle which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled
persons, or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, or motor vehicles for
the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking
space or access aisle in any off-street parking facility, without properly
displaying the proper permit or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom
or for whom, as the case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not
enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the designated space or access
aisle shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction and shall be subject
to the procedures set forth in §
71.34 of this code.
      (2)   The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or
permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly
constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete
defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction.
      (3)   If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation
of this section cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such
violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures
described in this section.
   (C)   In the case of a privately-owned off-street parking facility, the
village shall not require the owner or person in lawful possession of such
facility to inform the village of a violation of this section prior to the
village issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737
§ 71.34 CITATION; COMPLAINT.
   (A)   For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a
handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by any
person designated by ordinance by the Board of Trustees to exercise the
authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.
   (B)   (1)   When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a handicapped
parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking citation shall
enter thereon all required information, including the name and address of the
cited person or, if not known, the license number and description of the
offending motor vehicle, the offense charged and the time and place the person
cited is to appear in court.
      (2)   Unless the person cited requests an earlier date, the time of
appearance shall be at least three days after the issuance of the handicapped
parking citation.
      (3)   One copy of the handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to
the person cited or attached to the offending motor vehicle.
   (C)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of the cited
person, either the Village Attorney, or other person authorized by law to issue
a complaint for the particular offense, shall issue and file a complaint
charging such person with a handicapped parking infraction, or such person
shall be released from the obligation to appear as specified.
   (D)   The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction shall be
by the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped parking violation
may waive his or her right to trial.
   (E)   For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped parking
infraction by reason of the failure of a vehicle to display a handicapped
parking permit issued, the complaint shall be dismissed, if, within seven
business days after the date of issuance of the citation, the person cited
files with the court the affidavit included on the citation, signed by a peace
officer certifying that the recipient is the lawful possessor in his or her own
right of a handicapped parking permit issued under Neb. RS 18-1738 or 18-
1738.01, and that the peace officer has personally viewed the permit.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04 and 18-1741.06
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
72.001   Operation
   
72.002   Clinging to motor vehicles
Minibikes
   
72.015   Unlawful operation
   
72.016   Emergencies and parades
   
72.017   Public lands
   
72.018   Traffic laws; applicability
Snowmobiles
   
72.030   Equipment
   
72.031   Unlawful acts
   
72.032   Public lands
Mopeds
   
72.045   Definition
   
72.046   License required
   
72.047   State Rules of the Road; applicability
   
72.048   Operation
   
72.049   Operating on roadways laned for traffic
   
72.050   Protective helmets required
Motorcycles
   
72.065   Definitions
   
72.066   Lights
   
72.067   Protective helmets required
   
72.068   State Rules of the Road; applicability
All-Terrain and Utility-Type Vehicles
   
72.080   Definitions
   
72.081   Operation
   
72.082   Equipment; requirements
   
72.083   Prohibitions
   
72.084   Competition
   
72.085   Accident report
   
72.086   Enforcement
 
   
72.999   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 72.001 OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public
highway of this municipality with another person on the handlebars or in any
position in front of the operator.
   (B)   No bicycles shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
operator and any other persons upon the streets and public highways.
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at
all stop signs.
   (D)   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway
from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise without a
headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof
for not less than 500 feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle,
firmly attached to such bicycle and properly lighted or without a yellow or red
light reflector attached to and visible 500 feet from the rear thereof. Said
headlight shall give a clear, white light.
   (E)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway abreast of more than one other person riding or propelling a
bicycle.
   (F)   Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable
thereto and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the
right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing
overtaken vehicles and individuals that are slower moving and shall pass
vehicles to the right when meeting.
(Prior Code, § 5-401) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,314, 60-6,315, 60-6,317 and 60-6,318
§ 72.002 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, roller skates, skate board or scooter
shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any
roadway, and it shall be unlawful for the drive of any vehicle to suffer or
permit any person traveling upon any bicycle or roller skates to cling to or
attach himself or herself, or his or her bicycle or roller skates, to such
vehicle so driven and operated by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 5-402) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,316
MINIBIKES
§ 72.015 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike upon any
street or highway within the corporate limits of the municipality.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, MINIBIKE shall mean a two-wheel
motor vehicle which has a total wheel and tire diameter of less than 14 inches,
or an engine rated capacity of less than 45 cubic centimeters displacement, or
a seat height of less than 25 inches from the ground or any other two-wheel
motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer for off-road use only.
(Prior Code, § 5-501) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,347 and 60-6,352
§ 72.016 EMERGENCIES AND PARADES.
   Minibikes shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter during any
public emergency or while being used in parades by regularly organized units of
any recognized charitable, social, educational or community service
organization.
(Prior Code, § 5-502)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,348
§ 72.017 PUBLIC LANDS.
   Minibikes shall be prohibited upon the public lands owned by the
municipality except where allowed by resolution of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 5-503) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,348
§ 72.018 TRAFFIC LAWS; APPLICABILITY.
   Minibikes, their owners and their operators shall be exempt from the
requirements of the Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Act, being Neb. RS 60-462,
the Motor Vehicle Registration Act, being Neb. RS 60-301 and the Motor Vehicle
Safety Responsibility Act, being Neb. RS 60-569.
(Neb. RS 60-6,347) (Prior Code, § 5-504)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.030 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every snowmobile operated within the municipality shall be registered
with the state as required by law. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a
public street or highway, unless it is equipped with at least one headlamp, one
taillamp, reflector material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on
each side forward of the handlebars and with brakes as prescribed by the
Director of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   All laws applying to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply
to snowmobiles except those relating to required equipment and those which, by
their nature, have no application.
(Prior Code, § 5-601) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,335
§ 72.031 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile,
either owned or operated by him or her, to be operated:
   (A)   Within the congested area of the municipality unless weather
conditions are such that it provides the only practicable method of safe
vehicular travel or said snowmobile is engaged in responding to an emergency;
   (B)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances;
   (C)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger persons
or property;
   (D)   Without a lighted headlight and taillight when such would be required
by conditions;
   (E)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock; or
   (F)   Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the
owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
(Prior Code, § 5-602) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,335 and 60-6,337
§ 72.032 PUBLIC LANDS.
   Snowmobiles shall be prohibited from operation on the public lands owned by
the municipality, except where allowed by resolution of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 5-603) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,338
MOPEDS
§ 72.045 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOPED. A device with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power,
with an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not
exceeding 50 cubic centimeters which produces not more than two brake
horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum design speed of
not more than 30 mph on level ground. MOPEDS, their owners and their operators
shall be subject to Neb. RS Ch. 60, art. 6, and amendments thereto.
(Neb. RS 60-637) (Prior Code, § 5-701)
§ 72.046 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys or public highways
of the municipality unless such person has a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license.
(Neb. RS 60-6,310) (Prior Code, § 5-702) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.047 STATE RULES OF THE ROAD; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor
vehicle under the State Rules of the Road except for special moped regulations
in the Rules and except for those provisions of the Rules which by their nature
can have no application.
   (B)   Regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped shall be
operated upon any street, alley or public highway within the municipality or
upon any path set aside by the Department of Transportation or local authority
for the use of mopeds.
(Neb. RS 60-6,311) (Prior Code, § 5-703) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.048 OPERATION.
   (A)   Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry any other person, nor shall
any other person ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the
manufacturer to carry more than one person.
   (B)   A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward. Further, no person shall operate a moped while carrying any
package, bundle or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both
hands on the handlebars.
   (C)   No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a
position which interferes with the operation or control of the moped or the
view of the operator.
   (D)   Any moped with carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests
for such passenger.
   (E)   No person who rides upon a moped shall attach himself or herself or
the moped to any vehicle on a roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-6,312) (Prior Code, § 5-704) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.049 OPERATING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any street
or highway with an authorized speed limit of 45 mph or less, and no vehicle
shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of
such lane, except that mopeds and motorcycles may be operated two abreast in a
single lane.
   (B)   No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic or between
adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
   (C)   Mopeds shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane.
   (D)   Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized speed
limit of more than 45 mph shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway
as practicable and shall not ride more than single file.
   (E)   No person who rides on a moped shall attach himself, herself or the
moped to any other vehicle on the highway.
   (F)   Mopeds shall not be operated on sidewalks.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the maximum speed limits in excess of 25 mph
established in Neb. RS 60-6,186, no person shall operate any moped at a speed
in excess of 30 mph.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, motorcycle does not include an
autocycle.
(Neb. RS 60-6,313) (Prior Code, § 5-705) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.050 PROTECTIVE HELMETS REQUIRED.
   A person shall not operate or be a passenger on a moped on any highway in
the state unless such person is wearing a protective helmet of the type and
design manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles and unless such
helmet is secured properly on his or her head with a chin strap while the
vehicle is in motion. All such protective helmets shall be designed to reduce
injuries to the user resulting from head impacts and shall be designed to
protect the use by remaining on the user’s head, deflecting blows, resisting
penetration and spreading the force of impact. Each such helmet shall consist
of lining, padding and chin strap and shall meet or exceed the standards
established in the United States Department of Transportation’s Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218, 49 C.F.R. § 571.218, for moped helmets.
(Prior Code, § 5-706) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,278 through 60-6,282
MOTORCYCLES
§ 72.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground but excluding tractors and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
MOTORCYCLE includes an autocycle.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor which produces horsepower not to exceed five brake horsepower as measured
at the drive shaft, mopeds and every bicycle with a motor attached except for
an electric bicycle. MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE shall not include an electric personal
assistive mobility device. For purpose of this section, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE does
not include an autocycle.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-639 and 60-640
§ 72.066 LIGHTS.
   No person shall ride an autocycle or a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys
or highways from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
unless the same shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two
headlights plainly visible from the front and with a taillight exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear of such
autocycle or motorcycle; provided, that said lamps shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of state statutes.
(Neb. RS 60-6,219) (Prior Code, § 5-802) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.067 PROTECTIVE HELMETS REQUIRED.
   A person shall not operate or be a passenger on a motorcycle on any highway
in the state unless such person is wearing a protective helmet of the type and
design manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles and unless such
helmet is secured properly on his or her head with a chin strap while the
vehicle is in motion. All such protective helmets shall be designed to reduce
injuries to the user resulting from head impacts and shall be designed to
protect the user by remaining on the user’s head, deflecting blows, resisting
penetration and spreading the force of impact. Each such helmet shall consist
of lining, padding and chin strap and shall meet or exceed the standards
established in the United States Department of Transportation’s Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218, 49 C.F.R. § 571.218, for motorcycle helmets.
(Prior Code, § 5-803) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,278 through 60-6,282
§ 72.068 STATE RULES OF THE ROAD; APPLICABILITY.
   Any person who operates a motorcycle shall have all of the rights and shall
be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle
under the State Rules of the Road except for special motorcycle regulations in
the Rules and except for those provisions of the Rules which by their nature
can have no application.
(Neb. RS 60-6,306) (Prior Code, § 5-804)
ALL-TERRAIN AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES
§ 72.080 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which is 50 inches
or less in width; has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less; travels on three or
more nonhighway tires; is designed for operator use only with no passengers or
is specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one
passenger.
      GOLF CAR. A vehicle that has at least four wheels, has a maximum level
ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour, has a maximum payload capacity of
1,200 pounds, has a maximum gross vehicle weight of 2,500 pounds, has a maximum
passenger capacity of not more than four persons, and is designed and
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting and recreational
purposes, but is not being operated within the boundaries of a golf course.
      UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which is 74
inches in width or less; is not more than 180 inches, including the bumper, in
length; has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and travels on four or more
nonhighway tires. UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE shall include golf cars, as defined
above, but does not include all-terrain vehicles or low-speed vehicles.
   (B)   All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles which have been
modified or retrofitted with after-market parts to include additional equipment
not required by Neb. RS 60-3.357 and 60-6.358 shall not be registered under the
State Motor Vehicles Registration Act, nor shall such modified or retrofitted
vehicles be eligible for registration in any other category of vehicle defined
in the act.
(Prior Code, § 5-901) (Ord. 232, passed 10-3-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,355
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
§ 72.081 OPERATION.
   (A)   An all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle shall not be operated
on any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes. The
crossing of any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic
lanes shall not be permitted except as provided in divisions (I) and (J) below.
Divisions (B), (C) and (E) through (H) below authorize and apply to operation
of an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle only on a highway other
than a controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes.
   (B)   An all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle may be operated in
accordance with the operating requirements of division (C) below:
      (1)   Outside the corporate limits the village if incidental to the
vehicle’s use for agricultural purposes;
      (2)   Within the corporate limits of the village if authorized by the
village by ordinance adopted in accordance with this section; or
      (3)   Within an unincorporated village if authorized by the county board
of the county in which the unincorporated village is located by resolution in
accordance with this section.
   (C)   An all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle may be operated as
authorized in division (B) above when such operation occurs only between the
hours of sunrise and sunset. Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or a
utility-type vehicle as authorized in division (B) above shall have a valid
Class O operator’s license or a farm permit as provided in Neb. RS 60-4,126,
shall have liability insurance coverage for the all-terrain vehicle or a
utility-type vehicle while operating the all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type
vehicle on a highway, and shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess
of 30 miles per hour. The person operating the all-terrain vehicle or a
utility-type vehicle shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to any
peace officer requesting such proof within five days of such a request. When
operating an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle as authorized in
division (B) below, the headlight and taillight of the vehicle shall be on and
the vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety flag which extends not less
than five feet above ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle
safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30
square inches and shall be day-glow in color.
   (D)   All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles may be operated without
complying with division (C) below on highways in parades which have been
authorized by the state or any department, board, commission or political
subdivision of the state.
   (E)   The crossing of a highway other than a controlled-access highway with
more than two marked traffic lanes shall be permitted by an all-terrain vehicle
or a utility-type vehicle without complying with division (C) above only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees to
the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of the highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another highway; and
      (5)   Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the
crossing is made.
   (F)   All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles may be operated outside
the corporate limits of any municipality by electric utility personnel within
the course of their employment in accordance with the operation requirements of
division (C) above, except that the operation of the vehicle pursuant to this
division (F) need not be limited to the hours between sunrise and sunset.
   (G)   The village may adopt an ordinance authorizing the operation of all-
terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles within the corporate limits of the
village if the operation is in accordance with division (C) above. The village
may place other restrictions on the operation of all-terrain vehicles and
utility-type vehicles within its corporate limits.
   (H)   A county board may adopt a resolution authorizing the operation of
all-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles within any unincorporated
village within the county if the operation is in accordance with division (C)
above. The county may place other restrictions on the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and utility-type vehicles within the unincorporated village.
   (I)   Except as provided in division (J) below, the crossing of a
controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes shall be
permitted by a utility-type vehicle if the operation is in accordance with the
operation requirements of division (C) above and if the following requirements
are met:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an intersection that:
         (a)   Is controlled by a traffic control signal; or
         (b)   For any intersection located outside the corporate limits of the
village is controlled by stop signs.
      (2)   The crossing at such intersection is made in compliance with the
traffic control signal or stop signs; and
      (3)   The crossing at such intersection is specifically authorized as
follows:
         (a)   If such intersection is located within the corporate limits of
the village, by ordinance of such village;
         (b)   If such intersection is located within an unincorporated
village, by resolution of the county board of the county in which such
unincorporated village is located; or
         (c)   If such intersection is located outside the corporate limits the
or village and outside any unincorporated village, by resolution of the county
board of the county in which such intersection is located.
   (J)   When the use of the all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle is for
an agricultural purpose, the crossing of a controlled-access highway with more
than two marked traffic lanes shall be permitted if such vehicle is operated in
accordance with division (C) above.
(Neb. RS 60-6,356) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.082 EQUIPMENT; REQUIREMENTS.
   Every all-terrain vehicle and utility-type vehicle shall be equipped with:
   (A)   A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
   (B)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
   (C)   A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester.
(Prior Code, § 5-903) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,358
§ 72.083 PROHIBITIONS.
   Except for use in closed-course competition events, no person shall:
   (A)   Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type
vehicle with a cut-out, bypass or similar device;
   (B)   Operate an all-terrain or utility-type vehicle with an exhaust system
so modified; or
   (C)   Operate an all-terrain or utility-type vehicle with the spark arrester
removed or modified.
(Prior Code, § 5-904) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,359
§ 72.084 COMPETITION.
   All-terrain and utility-type vehicles participating in competitive events
may be exempted from §§
72.082 and
72.083 at the discretion of the State Department of Motor Vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 5-905)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,360
§ 72.085 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any
person which requires treatment by a physician, the operator of each all-
terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle involved in the accident shall give
notice of the accident in the same manner provided by state statutes relating
to motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 5-906)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,361
§ 72.086 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any law enforcement officer of the state or of any political subdivision,
including conservation officers of the Game and Parks Commission, shall be
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of §§
72.081 through
72.086.
(Prior Code, § 5-908)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §§
72.081 through
72.085 which is also a violation under Neb. RS Ch. 39 or Ch. 60 may be punished
under the penalty provisions of such chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-907)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,362
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
I. SPEED LIMITS.
 
Street Name        Area                              Speed Limit Ord. Date
                   500 feet north of the
State Highway N-97 intersection of Fourth Street and 35 mph      149  5-10-2006
                   State Highway N-97, thence north
                   500 feet to the point of ending
 
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Health regulations
   
90.02   Enforcement official
   
90.03   County Board of Health
Nuisances
   
90.15   Purpose
   
90.16   “Nuisances” defined
   
90.17   Abatement and notice procedures
   
90.18   Enforcement
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
village, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such
penalties and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-208
§ 90.02 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Chief of Police, or other official designated by the Board of Trustees,
as the quarantine officer, shall be the Chief Health Officer of the village. It
shall be his or her duty to notify the Board of Trustees and the Board of
Health of health nuisances within the village and its zoning jurisdiction.
Statutory reference:
   Quarantine officer, see Neb. RS 17-208
§ 90.03 COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the
village.
NUISANCES
§ 90.15 PURPOSE.
   The village in this subchapter defines its authority to define, regulate,
suppress and prevent nuisances and to declare what shall be a nuisance for its
corporate limits and extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction and to provide
services to abate the same for the health and sanitation of the village.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-2-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720
§ 90.16 “NUISANCES” DEFINED.
   (A)   General definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUISANCE. Consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing either:
         (a)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;
         (b)   Offends decency;
         (c)   Is offensive to the senses;
         (d)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street
or highway in the municipality;
         (e)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property;
         (f)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property; or
         (g)   Tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   (B)   Specific definition. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing,
leaving or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby declared to be NUISANCES:
      (1)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides,
skins, feathers, vegetable matter or the whole or any part of any dead animal,
fish or fowl;
      (2)   The emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gases, mists, odors or polluted
air from any source that is injurious or dangerous to human health and safety;
      (3)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are
not securely protected from flies or rats, or other insects and rodents, or
which are foul or malodorous;
      (4)   Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house yards, barnyards,
stable-yards, factory yards, mill yards or vacant areas in the rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises;
      (5)   Dead animals or dead animals buried within the corporate limits;
      (6)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the municipality;
      (7)   Hauling any garbage, waste or refuse matter through the streets,
alleys and public ways except when the same is loaded and conveyed in such a
way when none of the contents shall be spilled;
      (8)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings
and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a
place and manner approved by the municipality;
      (9)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron,
wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster and all trash or abandoned material, unless the
same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;
      (10)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates,
packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not
neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials
when any of the articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats
or other insects or rodents may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire
danger, or which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values in the
vicinity thereof;
      (11)   Any unsafe building, unsightly building, billboard or other
structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure,
or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, which buildings,
billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public
health or safety or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in
the vicinity thereof;
      (12)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds,
or for the wrecking and disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or
machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of
the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment
used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate
property values in the vicinity thereof;
      (13)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens
or any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of any
kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter, including grain,
is being processed, when the places in which the animals are confined or the
premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located are maintained and
kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom to the annoyance of inhabitants of the municipality or are maintained
and kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health;
      (14)   Dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets within
the corporate limits of the village or on private property within the one-mile
zoning jurisdiction beyond the corporate limits;
      (15)   Undrained lots which hold or may hold stagnant water or any other
nuisance;
      (16)   Any condition which allows the perpetuating of insects and
rodents;
      (17)   Storage, accumulation, keeping, placing or allowing to remain
trash, garbage, scrap and wrecked, worn-out, broken or inoperative or partially
destroyed or disassembled personal or real property of any kind, including any
junk or abandoned motor vehicles, tractors, trailers, machinery and equipment;
      (18)   (a)   Any vehicle which is not properly registered, or is
inoperable, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled and remaining longer than
30 days on private property. This does not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed
building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner, when necessary to the lawful operation of such
business enterprise (such as a licensed salvage dealer, motor vehicle dealer or
farm implement dealer), or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, and so long as the premises
on which said vehicle is located is not a nuisance and is maintained in a
healthful and safe condition.
         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B)(18), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            VEHICLE. As defined in Neb. RS 60-136: a motor vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, minibike, trailer or semitrailer.
            PROPERLY REGISTERED. As required by state statutes.
      (19)   Lots, pieces of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys with
growth of weeds or noxious growth; and
      (20)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in
this code.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-2-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-555 and 18-1720
§ 90.17 ABATEMENT AND NOTICE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nuisance Officer. The village shall appoint an individual or
organization to identify and enforce the abatement of nuisances within the
village. Said individual or organization shall be identified as the Nuisance
Officer and said appointment shall be identified by resolution of the village.
   (B)   Identifying nuisances.
      (1)   The village may identify suspected nuisances, in which case the
Village Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon direction of the Village Board, notify the
Nuisance Officer of the suspected location, person or persons in violation of
any provision of this subchapter and provide the address of such alleged
nuisance.
      (2)   The village may request that the Nuisance Officer audit the village
for nuisances in the village as defined by this code. The Nuisance Officer
shall then view the property or area for any violations of the nuisances of the
village. The Nuisance Officer shall not go upon private property for said audit
unless granted permission by the resident or owner of suspected property.
   (C)   Confirming, documenting and presenting nuisances. The Nuisance Officer
shall identify and confirm that in his or her opinion a nuisance exists as
defined by federal, state or village law.
      (1)   Upon confirming that a nuisance appears to exist the Nuisance
Officer shall document said nuisance with photographs and other evidence
pertinent to the situation. The Nuisance Officer will also obtain the legal
description of the property and identify the current owners and, if possible,
the occupants of the property upon which the nuisance exists.
      (2)   The Nuisance Officer shall then present this information to the
Village Board at a regular or special meeting for its confirmation that a
nuisance exists as stated in §
90.18.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-2-2021)
§ 90.18 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement procedures.
      (1)   The nuisance, health and/or sanitation violation is brought to the
governing body by the Village Nuisance Officer, or the Board of Health, or upon
the governing body’s own action. The governing body may then declare, by
resolution, a nuisance, health and/or sanitation violation.
      (2)   The nuisance, health and/or sanitation ordinances may be enforced
by:
         (a)   Village administrative procedures;
         (b)   Penal prosecutions through the courts; and
         (c)   By civil procedures in the courts.
      (3)   Any of these procedures, or any combination of these procedures may
be used to enforce the nuisance, health and/or sanitation ordinances of the
village.
   (B)   Administrative procedure. The village may proceed with abatement of
the nuisance, sanitation and/or health violation with or without court
involvement after the following procedure is followed.
      (1)   After a nuisance is declared, the Village Clerk-Treasurer notifies
the Nuisance Officer to serve notice upon the violator(s).
      (2)   The Nuisance Officer shall prepare and serve notice which shall
describe the found nuisance and state the required date of abatement and
removal of the nuisance shall be accomplished. The notice shall also provide
information as to how the interested parties may request a hearing before the
governing body described in division (B)(4) below.
      (3)   The notice shall be given to each owner or owner’s duly authorized
agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or certified mail. If
notice by personal service or certified mail is unsuccessful, said notice shall
be given by a single publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village or county and by conspicuously posting the notice on the lot or grounds
upon which the nuisance is to be abated and removed. The date of service is
determined by the later of the certified mail receipt, personal service or
publication date.
      (4)   The accused violator (owner/agent/occupant) may request in writing
a hearing before the governing body of the village within five days after
notice of violation is served or published. For tree nuisance violations, the
period for requesting a hearing is extended to 30 days after service.
      (5)   If no request for a hearing is received in the required time
period, the governing body may cause a hearing to be held. This option is at
the sole discretion of the governing body to be used in exceptional cases.
      (6)   If a hearing is requested, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall fix
the date of said hearing to be not later than 15 days from receipt of the
request for the hearing. Notice of said hearing, with the date and time, shall
be served upon the agent or owner of the nuisance property by certified and
regular mail.
      (7)   The hearing shall be a “show cause” hearing in which the agent,
owner or occupant of the nuisance property (objecting property) shall provide
evidence why the alleged condition should not be found to be a public nuisance
and remedied. This hearing shall be heard before a quorum of the governing
body. The presiding official of the governing body may conduct the hearing or
said presiding official may appoint another person as the hearing officer to
conduct the hearing (said hearing officer may be the Village Attorney or the
enforcement officer). At the hearing, the hearing officer shall mark and
receive evidence which was presented when the finding of a nuisance was made,
relevant evidence of the nuisance since that time and evidence that the notices
were properly given. The objecting party shall then provide its evidence. The
rules of evidence is not required at said hearing, but all evidence must be
relevant to the particular nuisance being heard. Testimony shall be under oath
as administered by the hearing officer or any person so designated by the
hearing officer, and the person providing the testimony is subject to the laws
of perjury. Evidence may be submitted in writing by affidavit.
      (8)   Not later than 14 days after the hearing and consideration of the
evidence, the governing body may by majority vote rescind the resolution of
violation. If the resolution of violation is not rescinded, it shall stand.
Furthermore, if the objector or its designated agent fails to appear at the
hearing or does not provide evidence, the nuisance shall stand. If the
resolution is not rescinded, the governing body may by resolution extend the
date that owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee shall abate and remedy the said
public nuisance, but in no case shall this time exceed 60 days. The findings of
the governing body shall be made not later than 14 days after the hearing and
notice of its finding shall be served upon the objecting party by regular U.S.
mail within five days of the finding. The finding of this hearing is final;
provided, that an interested party or parties may appeal such decision to the
appropriate court for adjudication.
      (9)   If the Nuisance Officer determines the nuisance is not remedied and
abated within the time period designated, the village shall cause the abatement
of the nuisance.
      (10)   If an interested party properly appeals to an appropriate court
the findings and orders of the village, the village’s actions shall be stayed
during and until such time that the legal proceedings are completed or
dismissed. In cases of appeal from an action of the village condemning real
property as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the
municipality, the owners of the adjoining property may intervene in the action
at any time before trial.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-2-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-710
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penal court enforcement procedure. If the declared nuisance, health
and/or sanitation violations are not abated within 15 days that the notice is
served upon the owner and/or occupant, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer has not
received a request for hearing, the Nuisance Officer may cause issue of a
citation for the code violation.
      (1)   The citation shall be prosecuted to the appropriate court by the
Village Attorney or other designated prosecutor for the village.
      (2)   A person or persons found guilty of these violations shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined up to $500 for each offense.
      (3)   Each day that the nuisance, as identified in the nuisance
resolution and notice, is not abated shall be a separate offense and subject to
a separate fine.
   (B)   Civil court procedure. The governing body may instruct by resolution
the Village Attorney to file a civil action for the abatement of a nuisance.
Said civil suit may commence after 15 days’ notice has been served as stated in
§
90.17 and may be filed and prosecuted at the same time any other enforcement
procedure has commenced, terminated or is in progress.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-2-2021)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Animals and fowls
   
91.02   Running at large; tethering
   
91.03   Killing, poisoning and injuring
   
91.04   Enclosures
   
91.05   Abandonment, neglect and mistreatment
   
91.06   Pitting animals prohibited
Dogs
   
91.20   Definitions
   
91.21   Running at large
   
91.22   License and tax required; exemption; tags
   
91.23   Barking and chasing; complaints
   
91.24   Fighting
   
91.25   Liability of owner
   
91.26   Collar or harness required
   
91.27   Removal of collar, harness or tags
   
91.28   Dangerous dogs
Rabies
   
91.40   Post-incident management
   
91.41   Authority to kill
   
91.42   Proclamation of danger
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ANIMALS AND FOWLS.
   (A)   Unlawful animals and fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
animals, horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, swine, chickens or other animals
within the municipality unless otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Hobby chickens. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain chickens within the corporate limits without first obtaining a permit
from the Board of Trustees of the Village. Four hen chickens may be permitted
on a 5,000-square-foot or greater lot, plus one hen chicken for each additional
5,000 square feet of lot, provided, however, that there shall at no time be
more than six hen chickens per lot or parcel. No roosters shall be permitted.
   (C)   Other fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person or property owner to
keep within the corporate limits of the village any other fowl not above
mentioned. Other fowl shall include, but is not limited to, turkeys, ducks,
peafowl, or guineafowl.
   (D)   Setbacks. Such chickens shall be maintained within enclosures and
coops that are no closer than 30 feet to a primary dwelling or commercial
building and no closer than 25 feet to an adjoining property line. For purposes
of this section, primary dwellings shall not include temporary dwellings, such
as campers, and other outbuildings. It shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant to have property lines formally surveyed in the event of
uncertainty or discrepancies in boundaries. A variance from property line
distances or 5,000-square-foot lot size requirements may be permitted, by the
Board with written permission by all adjoining landowner(s). Variances shall
not be revoked should the adjoining property change ownership. In the event an
adjoining property changes ownership, it shall be the sole responsibility of
the adjoining property owner to inform the subsequent owner of such variances.
   (E)   Enclosures and coops. The owner shall keep all chickens in enclosures
at all times. Coops shall have at minimum four square feet of floor space per
chicken. Enclosures shall provide at minimum ten square feet of run space per
bird. Enclosures shall not exceed 120 square feet of total floor area or exceed
seven feet in height. All chicken enclosures shall be constructed and
maintained to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored
underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. Sturdy materials like
hardware cloth (i.e., chicken wire) shall be used with a small mesh size (no
larger than one-half inch, and preferably one-quarter inch) for both the coop
and the enclosure run. Fencing should extend at least 12 inches below ground
level to prevent predators from digging underneath, and the top of the
enclosure should also be covered to protect against climbing or flying
predators. All openings, doors, and gates must be securely latched. Coops shall
be vented with a vent above the roosting area and an opposite secondary vent to
allow for crossflow. Vents shall be covered with hardware cloth to prevent
unwanted entry.
   (F)   Enclosure placement. To the greatest extent possible, pens or
enclosures shall be placed in the rear yard of the lot or parcel. For the
purposes of this section “rear yard” means that portion of the lot enclosed by
the property’s rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points where the
side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line established by the rear of the
dwelling or outbuilding (in the event no residential dwelling exists on the lot
or parcel) and extending to the side lot lines. If the lot does not contain a
structure, the Planning and Zoning Board in conjunction with the Village Board
of Trustees, may develop special conditions to ensure the chickens would not
pose a nuisance. A placement variance may be granted for properties with
installed privacy fencing.
   (G)   Sanitary regulations. Chickens shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition so as not to give off offensive odors which are a source of
discomfort to people residing in the vicinity thereof. The owner of any chicken
shall not allow offal, manure, or waste material of any such chicken to
accumulate or remain in the enclosures and coop areas upon which such chicken
resides or is confined in any manner which is conducive to the breeding or
attraction of flies, mosquitos, or other noxious insects or in any manner which
endangers the public health or safety or creates an unhealthy environment. The
maintenance or permitting of any of the foregoing conditions on any such lot or
parcel is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The owner of any chicken
shall, in a sanitary manner, remove or dispose of all offal, manure, and waste
material accumulating from such chicken at least once every 30 days. A waste
management plan must be provided with the permit application.
   (H)   Feed. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats,
mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other
rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with the food and other
associated items.
   (I)   Annual renewal and inspection. Permits must be renewed yearly from the
date of issue with payment of application fee and yearly inspection. A
compliance inspection shall be completed by the Planning and Zoning
subcommittee six months after the date the permit is issued. If the applicant
is in noncompliance or consistently in noncompliance with other village
ordinances, the Board of Trustees reserves the right to not issue permits to
such applicants.
   (J)   Compliance. A person who has applied for and been issued a permit
freely and voluntarily consents to a search and examination of the chicken
enclosure upon demand by any law enforcement officer or other code enforcement
officer. For the purposes of this section, other code enforcement officer shall
mean active member of the Board of Trustees, Planning and Zoning Board and
associated subcommittee, or Village Superintendent. Upon inspection, properties
in violation of this section will be given a verbal or written warning.
Corrective action must be completed within seven days of the violation, or
reasonably agreed upon timeframe (based upon the circumstances) of the
landowner and Board of Trustees. A permit may be revoked or suspended if
corrective actions are not completed within a reasonable timeframe, and/or a
landowner is consistently in noncompliance as determined by the Board of
Trustees.
   (K)   Revocation and suspension of permit. In the complete discretion of the
Board of Trustees, any permit issued to keep any chicken shall be subject to
revocation or suspension for violation of the permit or any of the provisions
of this section or other ordinances of the village now in effect or hereafter
enacted. The Board of Trustees reserves the right to revoke or suspend a permit
at any point pending the severity of the violation. In the event of revocation
or suspension of the permit, all chickens must be removed from the property
within seven days. Penalties as noted in division (J) will be applied.
   (L)   Additional conditions. The Trustees of the Board reserve the right to
impose additional conditions or requirements on permits to address unforeseen
issues or concerns that may arise after this section’s implementation. These
additional conditions shall be communicated in writing to the permit holder
and/or must be complied with within a reasonable timeframe. Examples of
unforeseen issues include, but are not limited to, public health risks,
environmental impact concerns, or community complaints.
   (M)   Slaughtering. Slaughtering of chickens on residential properties is
prohibited.
   (N)   Commercial uses. Chickens kept within the village limits may not be
used for any commercial activities, including but not limited to selling eggs,
meat, or other by-products from chickens raised within village limits; breeding
chickens for sale or other commercial ventures; offering tours, or other
services involving chickens for profit; or using chickens in any promotional or
advertising campaigns for businesses operating within or outside the village
limits.
   (O)   Preexisting rights. After July 25, 2025, the uses of land or
structures used for chickens that would be prohibited under this section of the
village ordinances shall be considered nonconforming. It is the intent of this
section to permit these nonconforming uses to continue, provided they conform
to the following provisions:
      (1)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises
in combination, is, in fact, discontinued or abandoned for a period of 30 days
or more, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of this section.
      (2)   No structure, or structure and premises in combination used for
chickens permitted by this section which has been damaged to the extent of more
than 60% of its assessed fair market value immediately prior to damage, shall
be rebuilt, altered, or repaired, except in conformity with the regulations of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 6-205) (Ord. 239, passed 7-10-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 RUNNING AT LARGE; TETHERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cow, hog, horse, mule,
sheep, goat, dog, chicken, turkey, goose or other animal except a cat to permit
the animal to run at large at any time on any of the public ways and property
or the property of another in the village or to be tethered or staked out in
such a manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way or
property or any property of another.
   (B)   The owner of a cat may permit the cat to run at large within the
corporate limits subject to any restrictions or prohibitions otherwise imposed
by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Any animal found running at large or tethered or staked out in
violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be impounded or
destroyed as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit anyone to own an
animal in the corporate limits of the village that is prohibited by the Board
of Trustees.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 17-547
   Fine for permitting collarless dog to run at large, see Neb. RS 54-607
§ 91.03 KILLING, POISONING AND INJURING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, administer or cause to be
administered poison of any sort to, or in any manner injure, maim or destroy or
attempt to injure, maim or destroy any animal or to place any poison or
poisoned food where it is accessible to an animal, except that:
   (A)   This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or animal
control officer acting within his or her power and duty;
   (B)   This section shall not apply if the animal is vicious, dangerous or
showing characteristics of rabies and cannot be captured without danger to the
persons attempting to effect a capture of the animal; and
   (C)   Any owner of a dog that he or she wishes to be destroyed may place the
dog in an animal pound or shelter or with a licensed veterinarian to be
humanely destroyed and disposed of according to the provisions in this chapter
or other provisions of law.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 ENCLOSURES.
   All pens, cages, sheds, yards or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement of animals not specifically barred within the corporate limits
shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace or
nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.
Penalty, see §
91.99 
§ 91.05 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND MISTREATMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.
      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not
include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this
section.
      BOVINE. A cow, an ox or a bison.
      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal’s health.
      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the state patrol, any county or
deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of the village or any other city
or village, or any other public official authorized by the village or any other
city or village to enforce state or local animal control laws, rules,
regulations or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also includes a special
investigator appointed as a deputy state sheriff as authorized pursuant to Neb.
RS 81-201 while acting within the authority of the Director of Agriculture.
      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds or poultry.
      OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises owned or
occupied by such person.
      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1008)
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for or
impound the animal.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of a law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or
cruelly mistreated to make prompt investigation of such violation. A law
enforcement officer may, in lieu of making an arrest, issue a citation to the
owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb. RS 29-422 through 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer’s
negligence.
(Neb. RS 28-1012)
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1009)
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Serious illness or injury to animal; death of animal; felony, see Neb. RS
28-1008 and 28-1009
   Exemptions, see Neb. RS 28-1013
§ 91.06 PITTING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BEARBAITING. The pitting of any animal against a bear.
      COCKFIGHTING. The pitting of a fowl against another fowl.
      DOGFIGHTING. Bringing animals together in combat.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)
   (B)   Pitting animals prohibited. No person shall knowingly promote, engage
in or be employed at dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting or pitting an
animal against another. Nor shall any person knowingly receive money for the
admission of another person to a place kept for such purpose. Nor shall any
person knowingly own, use, train, sell or possess any animal for the purpose of
animal pitting. Nor shall any person knowingly permit any acts as described in
this section to occur on any premises owned or controlled by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 6-207)
   (C)   Spectators prohibited. No person shall knowingly and willingly be
present at and witness as a spectator dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting or
the pitting of an animal against another as defined in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-208)
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-101
DOGS
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   KENNEL. Any building, buildings, shed or enclosure with or without a fenced
yard or run for the purpose of breeding, buying, selling, keeping or boarding
dogs by any person.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
   OWNER. Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having charge or control
of any domestic or hybrid animal or permitting any domestic or hybrid animal to
habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within such person’s house, yard
or premises. This term does not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises domestic or hybrid animals owned by
other persons for a period of not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6-101)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-606 and 71-4401
§ 91.21 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cow, hog, horse, mule,
sheep, goat, dog, chicken, turkey, goose or other animal except a cat to permit
the animal to run at large at any time on any of the public ways and property
or the property of another in the village or to be tethered or staked out in
such a manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way or
property or any property of another.
   (B)   The owner of a cat may permit the cat to run at large within the
corporate limits subject to any restrictions or prohibitions otherwise imposed
by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Any animal found running at large or tethered or staked out in
violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be impounded or
destroyed as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit anyone to own an
animal in the corporate limits of the village that is prohibited by the Board
of Trustees.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 17-547
   Fine for permitting collarless dog to run at large, see Neb. RS 54-607
§ 91.22 LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED; EXEMPTION; TAGS.
   (A)   Any owner of a dog over the age of six months within the village
shall, within 30 days after acquisition of the dog, acquire a license for the
dog annually by or before May 1 of each year. Licenses shall be issued by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer upon payment of a license tax in the amount established
by the Board of Trustees, plus the $1.25 fee required under Neb. RS 54-603(3).
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to wrongfully and knowingly license
an unspayed female dog as a male or spayed female dog if the Board has
established different license taxes for such dogs.
   (B)   The tax shall be delinquent from and after May 10. The owner of any
dog brought into or harbored within the corporate limits subsequent to May 1 of
any year shall be liable for payment of the dog tax, and such tax shall be
delinquent if not paid within ten days thereafter. The license shall not be
transferable, and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale or other
disposition of the licensed dog.
   (C)   The owner shall state, at the time the application is made and upon
printed forms provided for such purpose, his or her name and address and the
name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned by him or her. A certificate of
rabies vaccination, effective for the ensuing year of the license, shall be
presented when application for a license is made, and no license or tag shall
be issued until the certificate is shown.
   (D)   Every service animal shall be licensed as required by this section,
but no license tax shall be charged. Upon the retirement or discontinuance of
the animal as a service animal, the owner of the animal shall be liable for the
payment of the required license tax.
(Neb. RS 54-603)
   (E)   (1)   Upon the payment of the license tax, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue to the owner of the dog a license certificate and a metallic tag, which
shall be valid until April 30 following such licensing. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall issue tags of a suitable design that are different in appearance each
year.
      (2)   The metallic tag and the rabies tag shall be properly attached to
the collar or harness of the dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog
to permit or allow such dog to wear any licensing identification other than the
metallic tag issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   If a license tag is lost, upon satisfactory evidence that the
original tag was issued in accordance with the provisions of this section, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year
for which the license tax has been paid and shall charge and collect a fee
established by the Board of Trustees for each duplicate or new tag so issued.
   (F)   All license taxes, fees and other collections shall be credited to the
General Fund of the village, except as otherwise provided by Neb. RS 54-603.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose license tax, require rabies certificate and destroy
unlicensed dogs, see Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603 and 71-4412
§ 91.23 BARKING AND CHASING; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to annoy or disturb
any neighborhood or person by loud, continued or frequent barking, howling or
yelping or to habitually bark at or chase pedestrians, drivers, or owners of
horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets or alleys in
the village.
   (B)   Upon the written complaint of two or more affected persons from
different households, filed within any 30-day period with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer or animal control officer, that any dog owned by the person named in
the complaint is an annoyance or disturbance, or otherwise violates the
provisions of this section, the village police or animal control officer shall
investigate the complaint and, if in his or her opinion the situation warrants,
notify the owner to silence and restrain the dog.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to any
village animal shelter.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
§ 91.24 FIGHTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned, kept or harbored
by him or her or under his or her charge or control to injure or destroy any
real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner or possessor of any such dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon
conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured in an amount
equal to the value of the damage so sustained.
(Prior Code, § 6-109) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-601 and 54-602
§ 91.25 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to injure or destroy any
real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner of the dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, may be
made to be liable to the person injured in an amount equal to the value of the
damage sustained.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against injuries or annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
   Statutory liability for damages, see Neb. RS 54-601, 54-602 and 54-606
§ 91.26 COLLAR OR HARNESS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to securely place upon
the neck of the dog a good and sufficient collar with a metallic plate thereon.
The plate shall be plainly inscribed with the name of the owner.
(Neb. RS 54-605)
   (B)   The owner of a dog may use a harness instead of a collar as long as
the harness meets all other requirements of division (A) above.
Penalty, see §
91.99 
§ 91.27 REMOVAL OF COLLAR, HARNESS OR TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, the
collar, harness, metallic license tag or rabies tag from any dog without the
consent of the owner of the dog.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.28 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the village, and includes any local law enforcement agency or
other agency designated by the village to enforce the animal control laws of
the village.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, appointed, or authorized
by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of
this section or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of
animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals and includes
any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties in whole or
in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment of any
animal.
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   Any dog that, according to the records of the animal control
authority:
            1.   Has killed a human being;
            2.   Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical
treatment;
            3.   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
            4.   Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous
dog by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice of such
determination from an animal control authority or an animal control officer,
and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
         (b)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the individual
was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog at the time of the injury or
has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or
assaulted the dog.
         (c)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the injury,
damage, or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520 or 28-521,
was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the dog, was
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been observed
or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime.
         (d)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the dog is a
police animal as defined in Neb. RS 28-1008.
      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A cat, a dog or livestock. Livestock includes buffalo,
deer, antelope, fowl and any other animal in any zoo, wildlife park, refuge,
wildlife area or nature center intended to be on exhibit.
      MEDICAL TREATMENT. Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political subdivision
or department possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or custody of a
dog.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   Any dog that when unprovoked:
            1.   Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment;
            2.   Injures a domestic animal; or
            3.   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
         (b)   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
(Neb. RS 54-617)
   (B)   (1)   A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed
or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed
veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of both procedures
is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog. Written proof of both
procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the
animal control authority after the procedures are completed.
      (2)   No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the
property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or
leash.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) below or for a reasonable
veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such dog or
permit such dog to be transported to another county, city or village in this
state.
      (4)   An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or permit such
dog to be transported to another county, city or village in this state for the
purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has obtained written
permission prior to such relocation from the animal control authority of the
county, city or village in which the owner resides and from the county, city or
village in which the owner will reside. Each animal control authority may grant
such permission based upon a reasonable evaluation of both the owner and the
dog, including if the owner has complied with the laws of this state and of the
county, city or village in which he or she resides with regard to dangerous
dogs after the dog was declared dangerous. An animal control authority shall
not grant permission under this section if the county, city or village has an
ordinance or resolution prohibiting the relocation of dangerous dogs. After the
permanent relocation, the animal control authority of the county, city or
village in which the owner resides shall monitor the owner and such dog for a
period of at least 30 days but not to exceed 90 days to ensure the owner’s
compliance with the laws of this state and of such county, city or village with
regard to dangerous dogs. Nothing in this division shall permit the rescindment
of the declaration of dangerous dog.
(Neb. RS 54-618)
   (C)   (1)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company or
corporation shall own, keep or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises
occupied by him, her or it or under his, her or its charge or control any
dangerous dog without such dog being confined so as to protect the public from
injury.
      (2)   While unattended on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog shall be
securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young
children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have
secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to
the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at least one foot. The
pen or structure shall also protect the dog from the elements. The pen or
structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the owner. The
owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the property where the dog
is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public access and that
inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the property. Each warning sign shall
be no less than ten inches by twelve inches and shall contain the words warning
and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least three inches high on a
black background.
(Neb. RS 54-619)
   (D) Failure to comply.
      (1) Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control
officer if the owner is in violation of this section. The owner shall be
responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control authority
for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control officer or for
the destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the animal control
authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this section.
(Neb. RS 54-620)
      (2) In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal
control authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane
manner.
(Neb. RS 54-621)
   (E)   (1)   Any owner whose dangerous dog inflicts on a human being a
serious bodily injury as defined in Neb. RS 28-109 is guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor for the first offense, whether or not the same dangerous dog is
involved.
      (2)   It is a defense to a violation of division (E)(1) above that the
dangerous dog was, at the time of the infliction of the serious bodily injury,
in the custody of or under the direct control of a person other than the owner
or the owner’s immediate family.
(Neb. RS 54-622.01)
   (F)   Effect of prior conviction. If a dangerous dog of an owner with a
prior conviction under this section attacks or bites a human being or domestic
animal, in addition to any other penalty, the dangerous dog shall be
immediately confiscated by an animal control authority, placed in quarantine
for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner.
(Neb. RS 54-623) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Owner felony liability; serious bodily injury second offense, see Neb. RS
54-622.01
   Prior conviction; ownership of dangerous dog prohibited for ten years after,
see Neb. RS 54-623
RABIES
§ 91.40 POST-INCIDENT MANAGEMENT.
   Any domestic animal which has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the
skin of any person shall be subjected to post-incident management as provided
in rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the department.
(Neb. RS 71-4406) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.41 AUTHORITY TO KILL.
   The law enforcement officer shall have the authority to kill any animals
showing vicious tendencies or characteristics of rabies which make capture
impossible because of the danger involved.
(Prior Code, § 6-105)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-604
§ 91.42 PROCLAMATION OF DANGER.
   Whenever, in its opinion, the danger to the public safety from a species of
rabid animals is great or imminent, the Board of Trustees shall issue a
proclamation ordering all owners of any such species to muzzle the animal or to
confine it for a period of not less than 30 days or more than 90 days from the
date of the proclamation or until the danger is passed. The animal may be
harbored by any good and sufficient means in a house, garage or yard on the
premises on which the owner may reside. Upon issuance of a proclamation, all
owners of any such species shall muzzle or confine the animal as provided in
this section.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog found to be running at
large shall be guilty of violating §
91.21 and fined, in addition to the impoundment fees, as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $50;
      (2)   Second offense within three years: $100; and
      (3)   Third offense and all subsequent offenses within three years: $300.
(Prior Code, § 6-104)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Preservation of property
   
92.02   Disorderly spectator
   
92.03   Equipment
   
92.04   Interference
   
92.05   Obstruction
   
92.06   Assistance
   
92.07   Driving over hose
   
92.08   False alarm
Fire Prevention
   
92.20   Fire Prevention Code
   
92.21   Fire Code enforcement
   
92.22   Fire prohibited
   
92.23   Open burning ban
   
92.24   Fire limits
Hazardous Materials and Explosives
   
92.35   Explosives; storage registration
   
92.36   Explosives; bullets
   
92.37   Explosives; blasting permits
   
92.38   Poisonous and flammable gases
Fireworks
   
92.50   Definitions
   
92.51   Exception
   
92.52   Fireworks restricted
   
92.53   Sale, distribution, storage and discharge of fireworks restricted;
definitions
   
92.54   Location and make-up of fireworks retail outlets
   
92.55   Proximity to certain businesses and hazards
   
92.56   Permit for special fireworks
   
92.57   Fire extinguisher
   
92.58   Electrical service
   
92.59   Limited issuance of retail fireworks licenses
   
92.60   Village Clerk-Treasurer to issue retail licenses; application for
license
   
92.61   Bond
   
92.62   Licensing of distributors and jobbers; fees and taxes; revocation of
license
   
92.63   Inspection required; duty of licensee
   
92.64   Display of retail license
   
92.65   Duration
   
92.66   Age of sellers and purchasers
   
92.67   Statement of profits and expenses
   
92.68   Firecrackers
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate the discharge of fireworks, see Neb. RS 16-227
   Fireworks, see Neb. RS 28-1241 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   The Fire Chief or any officer in charge of the Fire Department shall have
the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection
of human life or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The
Fire Chief may direct the municipal firefighters to remove any building,
structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The
Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up or cause to be blown up with
explosives any building or structure during the progress of the same.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
§ 92.02 DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a
period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist or refuse to obey
the Municipal Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The Fire
Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during such
time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the performance of
their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 7-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 92.03 EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, destroy, handle or in any
other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and
other apparatus belonging to the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 7-103) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the Municipal Fire
Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance of their duty.
(Prior Code, § 7-104) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 92.05 OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant or
to have or place any material within 15 feet of the said hydrant. Any vehicle
or material found to be an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire
Chief or any member of the Fire Department at the risk, cost and expense of the
owner or claimant.
(Prior Code, § 7-105) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,166
§ 92.06 ASSISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in
the removal and protection of property.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 DRIVING OVER HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief
or Assistant Fire Chief to drive any vehicle over an unprotected hose of the
Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-107) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,184
§ 92.08 FALSE ALARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.
(Prior Code, § 7-108) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 92.20 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire
Marshal relating to fire prevention are incorporated by reference into this
code and made a part of this subchapter as though spread at large herein
together with all subsequent amendments thereto. Three copies of the Fire
Prevention Code shall be on file with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and shall
be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 7-201)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902 and 81-502
§ 92.21 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all municipal officials to enforce the incorporated
Fire Code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
§ 92.22 FIRE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement or
near any curb now built or hereafter to be built within the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 7-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.23 OPEN BURNING BAN.
   It shall be unlawful to build or set out any bonfires, outdoor rubbish fires
and fires for the purpose of clearing land. The Fire Chief of the Fire
Department may waive the open burning ban for an area under the local fire
department’s jurisdiction by issuing an open burning permit to a person
requesting permission to conduct open burning. The permit issued by the Fire
Chief to a person desiring to conduct open burning shall be in writing, signed
by the Fire Chief and on a form prescribed by the State Fire Marshal. The State
Fire Marshal shall provide local fire departments with the forms. The Fire
Chief may waive the open burning ban in the local fire department’s
jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone intending to
burn in such jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been waived must notify
the Fire Department of his or her intention to burn prior to starting the burn.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to, burn or cause to be burned
any garbage, animal matter or vegetable matter. Fires set while in possession
of a burning permit or at a time the open burning ban has been waived shall at
all times be attended by the person setting the fire, and said fire shall be
located at least 20 feet from any building.
(Neb. RS 81-520.01) (Prior Code, § 7-204) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.24 FIRE LIMITS.
   (A)   The north one-half of Blocks 2, 3 and 4 and the south one-half of
Blocks 14 and 15 in the original village shall be the Fire District in said
village. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, re-build or remodel,
upon any lot mentioned above, a building or buildings except that the same
shall be constructed of fireproof material, i.e., brick, stone, cement, steel
or a material approved by the State Fire Marshal.
   (B)   No building shall be erected within the fire limits of the village
until an application for a permit has been made to the Village Board of
Trustees and the permit granted.
   (C)   Wooden buildings shall not be repaired to the extent of a new roof,
foundation or undersills, and no repairs of any kind shall be made on any such
building without the consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
   (D)   No wooden building shall be moved into the fire limits or moved from
one lot to another within the fire limits.
(Prior Code, § 7-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 92.35 EXPLOSIVES; STORAGE REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation storing or keeping dynamite,
gunpowder, nitroglycerine or other high explosives within the municipality
shall comply with Neb. RS 28-1213 through 28-1239 and shall register such
information with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer within ten days after such
explosives are brought into the municipality. The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide
such information to the Municipal Fire Chief and to the governing body. The
transfer of explosives to another individual within the municipality shall
require the individual receiving the explosives to register the transfer and
the new location of the explosives with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. Also,
moving explosives to a new location by the owner shall require registration of
that fact to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   All high explosives, including dynamite, gunpowder and nitroglycerine,
shall be stored in a proper receptacle, which shall be closed at all times
except when actually in use. Such cement, metal or stone receptacle shall not
be located in any room where there is a flame or flammable materials. The area
surrounding storage facilities shall be kept clear of rubbish, brush, dry grass
or trees for not less than 25 feet in all directions. Any other combustible
materials shall be kept a distance of not less than 50 feet from outdoor
storage facilities.
(Prior Code, § 7-401) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1237
§ 92.36 EXPLOSIVES; BULLETS.
   Cartridges, shells and percussion caps shall be kept in their original
containers away from flame, flammable materials and high explosives.
(Prior Code, § 7-402)
§ 92.37 EXPLOSIVES; BLASTING PERMITS.
   Any person wishing to discharge high explosives within the municipality must
secure a permit from the governing body and shall discharge such explosives in
conformance with its direction and under its supervision, and in no case shall
any person perform blasting operations unless operating under the direct
supervision of a person in possession of a valid user’s permit issued by the
State Fire Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 7-403) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.38 POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep in the
municipality for any period of time any form of poisonous or flammable gas or
liquified petroleum gas in excess of five gallons, or add to, enlarge or
replace any facility used for the storage of such gases, must register that
fact with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer shall require the
name of the gas, the place of the storage and the amount of gas stored. Any
present use that is discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not be reviewed
without re-registering. Any change in location or ownership of the stored gas
shall also necessitate re-registration.
(Prior Code, § 7-301)
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate regarding fire prevention, see Neb. RS 17-549
FIREWORKS
§ 92.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Only sparklers, Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains,
torches, color fire cones, star and comet-type color aerial shells without
explosive charge for the purpose of making noise, lady fingers not to exceed
seven-eights of an inch in length or one-eighth inch in diameter, total
pyrotechnic composition not to exceed one-half grain in each weight, color
wheels and any other fireworks approved under the provisions of Neb. RS 28-
1241, as may be amended.
   FLYING LANTERNS. Any device that requires a flame which produces heated air
trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air.
FLYING LANTERNS shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting
persons.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1241(5)
§ 92.51 EXCEPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the discharge of any
fireworks for purposes or under the auspices of any governmental subdivision.
§ 92.52 FIREWORKS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into the village or
discharge any flying lanterns or pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks,
other than consumer fireworks, as defined by §
92.50. No person shall discharge any flying lanterns or fireworks within an
area less than 100 feet from any structure used for the exhibition or sale of
fireworks.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.53 SALE, DISTRIBUTION, STORAGE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED;
DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, hold for sale, offer for sale, or distribute or
deliver fireworks in the village as a distributor, jobber or retailer (as such
terms are defined by the laws of the state, as amended from time to time)
unless licensed by the village for such purposes; provided that such licensee
shall at all times comply with this subchapter and with any applicable laws,
regulations and rules of the state, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   (1)   No fireworks may be sold at retail in the village except, daily,
from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., June 25 through July 3 and from 8:00 a.m.
until 12:00 a.m. on July 4. Unless first expressly approved by the Board of
Trustees, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any other
pyrotechnics or pyrotechnic devices in the village other than fireworks. Unless
first expressly approved by the Board of Trustees, it shall be unlawful to
discharge fireworks in the village except between:
         (a)   8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on any day from June 25 through July 3;
         (b)   8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on July 4; and
         (c)   9:00 p.m. on December 31 to 12:30 a.m. on January 1.
      (2)   All retail fireworks sales sites shall prominently display a sign
listing the days and hours for legal discharge of fireworks in the village and
that any debris caused by the discharge of fireworks in the village must be
disposed of by the user. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
permit the discharge or other use of any fireworks or any other pyrotechnics or
pyrotechnic devices in violation of any other law of the village or the state.
   (C)   No person other than distributors or jobbers or retailers licensed by
the village shall store fireworks for retail sale, distribution or delivery in
the village. No such storage shall be permitted except between the hours of 8:
00 a.m. on June 23 through 12:00 p.m. on July 7. Such storage shall be allowed
only on sites approved for the retail sale of fireworks pursuant to the
provisions of §
92.60 in facilities complying with all applicable provisions of law.
   (D)   Unless the context shall otherwise require, whenever used in this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMUNITY BETTERMENT. A purpose which generally betters or enhances the
community of the village, including:
         (a)   The acquisition, improvement and maintenance of parks and
recreational facilities, public equipment and other items for community use;
         (b)   The recruitment and attraction of new businesses and jobs to the
village;
         (c)   Athletic programs which serve the village or neighborhoods or
other areas of the community;
         (d)   Scholarships and youth programs; and
         (e)   Other acquisitions, services or programs which generally benefit
the village and its residents.
      FIREWORKS. Only those fireworks that are permitted for sale by a retailer
under the laws of the state, as amended from time to time.
      FLYING LANTERNS. Any device that requires a flame which produces heated
air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air.
FLYING LANTERNS shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting
persons.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, the possession,
use, discharge, retail sale, offer for retail sale or explosion of flying
lanterns in the village is prohibited.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.54 LOCATION AND MAKE-UP OF FIREWORKS RETAIL OUTLETS.
   (A)   No fireworks shall be sold or exhibited except from a sales outlet
meeting the requirements of this code. All such sales outlets and all
facilities used to store fireworks shall be located and set back at least:
      (1)   Twenty-five feet from the nearest right-of-way line of any public
right-of-way;
      (2)   One hundred feet from any residential structure; and
      (3)   Fifty feet from any other structure.
   (B)   Sale outlets may consist only of the following types of temporary
building structure; provided, however, no such structure shall be located
within 20 feet of any facility used to store fireworks:
      (1)   A temporary structure that either has a booth or stand that allows
patrons to view and purchase fireworks from the outside of such structure or
that allows patrons to enter such structure to view and purchase fireworks; or
      (2)   A temporary structure that consists of an area enclosed by a tent.
   (C)   All sales outlets enclosing any area intended to be used by patrons in
connection with the sale of fireworks shall have a minimum of three doors for
patrons, each at least three feet in width and located as remotely as practical
from any other door or entryway. Each door shall be able to be opened in the
direction of egress. All sales outlets enclosing any other area to be used by
any person other than a patron shall have a minimum of one door at least three
feet in width that is able to be opened in the direction of egress.
   (D)   The floor area enclosed by any sales outlet shall be earthen, steel,
asphalt or concrete, in all instances free of any vegetation in excess of three
inches in height and all flammable or combustible materials.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.55 PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN BUSINESSES AND HAZARDS.
   (A)   No sales outlet and no facility used to store fireworks shall be
located within 100 feet from:
      (1)   Any facility or structure used for the sale, above ground storage
or dispensing of any liquefied petroleum gases or any other combustible fuel,
including diesel fuel, gasoline or propane; or
      (2)   Any container used in connection with any liquefied petroleum
gases; provided, further, that no organization holding a retail license for
sales of fireworks shall permit any motor vehicle to park within 15 feet of the
exterior of any fireworks sales outlet or facility used to store fireworks.
Such distance shall be measured from the closest point where such motor vehicle
may be situated or any hazard or material may be located or is dispensed,
vented or stored above ground.
   (B)   No vegetation (in excess of three inches in height), flammable or
combustible materials shall be allowed within ten feet from the exterior of any
sales outlet or any facility used to store fireworks.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.56 PERMIT FOR SPECIAL FIREWORKS.
   No person shall conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks without
first procuring a display permit from the State Fire Marshal and the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. All applicants for a village permit shall make application to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer and present the Village Clerk-Treasurer with a copy
of their permit issued by the State Fire Marshal. The Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall present the application for Board of Trustees approval and if approved
the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the permit.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.57 FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
   At least one multipurpose fire extinguisher shall be furnished and
maintained with a current annual inspection tag in all areas used for the sale
and storage of fireworks. The extinguisher shall have a rating of at least 4-
A for Class A fires. Two stored pressure water extinguishers with a capacity of
at least two and one-half gallons each may be substituted for multipurpose
extinguishers. The travel distance to any extinguisher required by this section
shall not exceed 25 feet. At least one person shall be present at the sales
outlet during all business hours who has been trained, and is able, to operate
the fire extinguishing equipment. Such person shall be required to demonstrate
such ability whenever requested by the Fire Department.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.58 ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
   (A)   Any electrical service used in any sales outlet shall comply with all
provisions of the National Electrical Code, as then currently adopted by the
village.
   (B)   Any extension cord used in, for or to any sales outlet or fireworks
storage facility shall be designated as heavy-duty and shall have conductors of
at least 14AWG and shall be protected from vehicle and pedestrian traffic at
all times.
   (C)   No electrical cord shall be used in, for or to any sales outlet or
fireworks storage facility in a manner that would increase the potential for
fire or electric shock.
   (D)   Any portable generator used to supply power to any sales outlet or
fireworks storage facility shall be placed at least ten feet from the sales
outlet and storage facility.
   (E)   Generators and/or fuel supplies shall not be stored in any sales
outlet or any fireworks storage facility.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.59 LIMITED ISSUANCE OF RETAIL FIREWORKS LICENSES.
   The village finds that there has been a proliferation of outlets for the
sale of fireworks within the village and that such proliferation has placed an
unacceptable burden on the Fire Marshal, the Police Department and other
village departments in regulating the businesses. In addition, an increased use
of fireworks within the village limits and surrounding areas has caused
additional safety concerns. Therefore, licenses for the retail sale of
fireworks may be issued to no more than 25 not-for-profit charitable, community
or village benevolent organizations which operate on a not-for-profit and
benevolent basis within the village and meet the criteria set forth in this
code.
§ 92.60 VILLAGE CLERK-TREASURER TO ISSUE RETAIL LICENSES; APPLICATION FOR
LICENSE.
   (A)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a single license to permit the
sale of fireworks at retail to those duly organized and existing not-for-profit
and benevolent organizations or associations meeting the criteria set forth in
division (C) below whose application has been approved for such purposes by the
village. No person issued a retailer’s license shall be authorized to purchase,
sell, store, hold for sale, offer for sale or accept delivery of any fireworks
other than fireworks sold or distributed by a jobber or distributor that has
been licensed by the village for such purposes.
   (B)   No application of any organization shall be approved by the village
and no license to sell fireworks as a retailer shall be issued except to an
organization that:
      (1)   Is a duly organized not-for-profit and benevolent organization or
association that has been operating or doing business on a not-for-profit and
benevolent basis within the village for at least one year prior to April 1 of
the year in which the application required by this section is submitted and has
actually conducted or engaged in community betterment activity during such
period;
      (2)   Has been licensed by the state as a retailer; and
      (3)   Has made application for such license required by division (E)
below.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no organization
shall be eligible to receive a village retailer’s license for the license year
following any license year during which the organization:
      (1)   Failed to satisfactorily evidence the payment of all sales taxes
applicable to the sales of fireworks by the organization for such license year
or otherwise failed to comply with §§
92.57, 92.58 and 92.67; or
      (2)   Had a village retailer’s license revoked by the village.
Thereafter, an organization that was ineligible to receive a village retailer’s
license by application of division (C)(1) above shall remain ineligible until
such organization has paid the applicable sales tax for the deficient license
year and has otherwise satisfactorily complied with §§
92.57,
92.58 and
92.67 for non-compliant license year to the extent possible.
   (D)   Application for a retailer’s license shall be made to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer between April 1 and April 30 of each year; provided that in the
event such date shall fall on a weekend or a day that is a holiday recognized
by the village, such application shall be submitted no later than the close of
business on the first business day of the village following such date. The
Village Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly forward each application to the village.
No application shall be accepted unless the full application and supporting
documentation is completed and submitted to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the
time of submission. Applications shall only be supplemented if allowed by the
village and only for good cause shown. Examples of good cause shall include,
but not be limited to, information that is an applicant is waiting on from the
State Fire Marshal, bond approval or other state requirement that may be
delayed. The application and any supplemental information shall be maintained
in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
   (E)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer for such purposes and shall include the following:
      (1)   The identity, address and telephone number of a contact person for
the organization, together with a copy of the retailer’s license issued by the
state to the organization;
      (2)   To the extent that the organization is required by law to register
its existence or make some other filing in order to be authorized to lawfully
operate or to conduct business in the state and/or the village, a certified
copy from such appropriate governmental body or agency showing that at the time
of the application the organization is existing, validly organized, in good
standing and certified to do business or operate in the state; provided,
however, that to the extent the organization is not so required (e.g., lodges,
social, civic, fraternal and beneficial entities authorized under Neb. RS 21-
608), the organization shall include such information as may be necessary or
appropriate to evidence to the village that it is validly organized, in good
standing and able to do business in the village;
      (3)   Documentation evidencing that the organization is currently
operating as a not-for-profit and benevolent organization or association within
the village and otherwise meet the eligibility requirements set forth in
division (B)(1) above;
      (4)   A verified statement identifying (by name and state license number)
all distributors or jobbers with whom such organization will do business as a
retailer during the year of application if the license is issued, with
appropriate documentation from the distributor or jobber supporting such
statement;
      (5)   Documentation evidencing the organization’s due payment of all
sales taxes applicable to the sales of fireworks by the organization in the
preceding year;
      (6)   A verified statement that, as a condition of the license, the
organization:
         (a)   Agrees to purchase fireworks only from those distributors or
jobbers that are identified in the statement submitted pursuant to division (E)
(4) above to whom a license for such purposes has been issued by the village;
         (b)   Agrees to comply with and abide by all provisions of this code,
including any directive from the village in respect to this code or to the
laws, rules or regulations of the state;
         (c)   Agrees to sell fireworks only from a single sales outlet meeting
the requirement of this code at the approved location identified in its
application by address or other suitable area description;
         (d)   Understands that any such license issued to the organization is
personal to the organization and the organization agrees that it will not
assign or transfer or attempt to assign or transfer the license in any manner;
and
         (e)   Understands and agrees that the village is authorized and
entitled, in its discretion, to revoke or suspend the organization’s village
retail license (and upon demand the organization shall immediately surrender
its license to the village and cease selling any fireworks) upon the occurrence
of any act, error or omission of the organization (including any of its
members, officers, directors or agents) that results in:
            1.   A violation of any of the agreements or understandings set
forth in this division (E)(6);
            2.   A violation of the laws, rules or regulation of the state
pertaining to the sale or storing of fireworks that may, or does, result in the
revocation or suspension of its state retailers license; or
            3.   A violation of this subchapter that constitutes an immediate
threat, in the opinion of the fire inspector, to public health, safety or
welfare.
      (7)   A verified statement that the organization understands that, in
addition to the eligibility criteria otherwise set forth in this code, as a
condition of being permitted to apply for a license, the organization shall:
         (a)   Have made the timely payment of all applicable sales and other
taxes resulting from the retail sale of fireworks, including any related
reporting obligations, under any similar license issued by the village in the
preceding year; and
         (b)   Have made a timely and true and correct filing of any statement
required by §
92.67.
      (8)   Any other information request on such form as may be appropriate in
order that the village may ascertain that the organization shall have complied
with any applicable provisions of this code.
   (F)   In any year, if more than 25 duly completed applications from eligible
organizations are received by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and have been
approved by the village, then the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses
from among such approved organizations as follows:
      (1)   Those organizations that were issued a similar license by the
village in the immediately preceding license year shall be issued a license;
and
      (2)   In the event that after expiration of the appeal time as outlined
in division (G) below for all organizations whose applications were not
approved by the village (other than by application of divisions (B) or (C)
above), there are less than 25 organizations that have been issued a license by
application of division (F)(1) above, and there remain organizations whose
applications were approved by the village, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue licenses to a number of approved organizations equal to a number that
when added to the total of licenses issued for that year pursuant to division
(F)(1) above does not exceed 25; provided that the organization who received a
license in the preceding year and whose appeal has been successful shall be
accorded the same priority as if approved by the village. The organization to
be issued a license pursuant to this division (F)(2) shall be determined by lot
in a manner the village finds to be appropriate.
   (G)   The village shall approve or deny all the applications of all
organizations by no later than the second Monday in May in the year of the
application. Any denial shall be made in writing personally delivered or sent
by regular mail addressed to the person designated in the application
specifying the reasons for the denial. Any denial may be appealed to the Board
of Trustees by written notice made to the village within ten calendar days of
the date of the denial; provided, however, no appeal shall be permitted because
denial was the result of the application of divisions (B) or (C) above and no
appeal shall be allowed to any organization denied a license by the application
of division (F)(2) above. The village shall schedule a hearing before the Board
of Trustees at the next available and regularly scheduled Board of Trustees
meeting that is at least five business days after receipt of such notice of
appeal.
   (H)   Whenever an organization has been approved by the village or by a
successful appeal to the Board of Trustees, no license shall be issued.
      (1)   Unless the organization shall first:
         (a)   Pay the village a license fee in the amount stated in the master
fee schedule in cash or by check representing then good funds;
         (b)   Furnish the bond required by §
92.61; and
         (c)   File a copy of its state retail license with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
      (2)   The inspection contemplated by §
92.63 has been successfully completed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.61 BOND.
   (A)   No license may be issued to an organization for the retail sale of
fireworks, unless the organization shall first furnish to the village a cash
bond in the amount of $1,000.
   (B)   Such bond shall be conditioned so that:
      (1)   The organization shall abide by any laws and regulations pertaining
to the sale of fireworks, including all applicable provisions of this
subchapter; and
      (2)   That the organization shall thoroughly clean the location
identified in its application where fireworks are to be stored or sold and
remove any outlet, stand, booth or other facility and all debris from such
location by 12:00 p.m. on July 7 of each year, unless July 7 falls on a
weekend, then clean-up shall be completed by 12:00 p.m. on the following
Monday.
   (C)   The bond shall be forfeited to the village in its entirety whenever
the license issued to the organization is revoked by the village for any reason
contemplated by §
92.60(E)(6) or whenever the organization shall not comply with the condition
set forth in division (B)(2) above.
§ 92.62 LICENSING OF DISTRIBUTORS AND JOBBERS; FEES AND TAXES; REVOCATION OF
LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall sell, hold for sale, offer for sale, or distribute or
deliver fireworks in the village as a distributor or jobber unless such person
is licensed as a distributor or jobber by the state and the village. No person
shall be licensed as a distributor or jobber by the village unless such person
shall register its state license with the village on a form provided by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer for such purposes on or before April 1 in the calendar
year in which such activity is to be conducted and shall first pay the license
fee imposed by division (D) below; provided however the registration shall not
be permitted to any distributor or jobber (including any affiliate, subsidiary
or other organization that is, directly or indirectly, owned, operated or
controlled by any such distributor or jobber or by any person or individual
owning, operating or controlling such distributor or jobber) if a jobber’s or
distributor’s license previously issued by the village has been revoked.
   (B)   In the event such date shall fall on a weekend or a day that is a
holiday recognized by the village, registration shall be made by no later than
the close of business on the first business day of the village following such
date.
   (C)   A village jobber’s or distributor’s license shall be valid only for
the calendar year during which the state license is issued and the registration
is made.
   (D)   Registration shall be made on a form provided by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer for such purposes and shall include:
      (1)   Identification of the license number and the pertinent nature of
the license issued by the state; and
      (2)   All other information requested by the village as may be
appropriate in order that the village may ascertain that such distributor or
jobber is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this code; provided
that such information shall be considered the confidential proprietary
information of the organization and of the applicant/distributor/jobber and not
subject to disclosure to the extent permitted by law. Such registration shall
be accompanied by payment, by certified check, of a license fee in the amount
stated in the master fee schedule.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any distributor
or jobber to engage in the sale of fireworks at retail unless such distributor
or jobber has been licensed for such sales in accordance with the provisions of
§
92.60.
   (F)   All information submitted by any distributor or jobber pursuant to
this section shall be maintained and made available in the Village Clerk-
Treasurer’s office.
   (G)   Any license issued pursuant to this section shall not be construed to
allow such distributor or jobber to sell, purchase or distribute any fireworks
except to those distributors, jobbers and retailers licensed by the village for
such activities.
   (H)   Each distributor’s or jobber’s license issued by the village shall be
subject to immediate revocation or suspension by the village whenever the
distributor or jobber shall sell, purchase or distribute fireworks to or from
any retailer, jobber or distributor that is not appropriately licensed by the
village at the time of the purchase, sale or distribution.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.63 INSPECTION REQUIRED; DUTY OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   No retail license may be issued to an organization whose application
has been approved for the retail sale of fireworks, unless an inspection
conducted by the Fire Inspector and any other appropriate inspector of the
village of its sales outlet and storage facilities has determined the
organization’s conformity to and compliance with the code, including any land
use regulations.
   (B)   The organization shall request the village in writing addressed to the
Village Clerk- Treasurer no later than 4:00 p.m. on June 23 of the appropriate
calendar year to make such inspection. The village shall attempt to conduct
such inspection within 24 hours after the request has been made. The inspector
(s) shall advise the Village Clerk-Treasurer at such time as the inspection has
determined that such organization is in compliance with the requirements of the
code.
   (C)   Nothing in this shall preclude the village from subsequently revoking,
suspending or demanding the surrender of the organization’s retail license.
§ 92.64 DISPLAY OF RETAIL LICENSE.
   Any retail license issued by the village shall be prominently displayed at
all times at the sales outlet.
§ 92.65 DURATION.
   Any retail license issued by the village shall be valid only for the
calendar year in which issued.
§ 92.66 AGE OF SELLERS AND PURCHASERS.
   (A)   Any person actually selling or offering for sale any fireworks in the
village shall be at least 14 years of age, and no licensee shall allow or
permit any person to sell or offer to sell any fireworks who is not 14 years of
age; provided, however that someone over the age of 16 shall be present at all
times.
   (B)   No person actually selling or offering for sale any fireworks in the
village shall sell or offer to sell fireworks to any person who is under 16
years of age, and no licensee shall allow or permit any person to sell or offer
to sell any fireworks to any person who is under 16 years of age.
§ 92.67 STATEMENT OF PROFITS AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   Each organization that has received a retail license pursuant to §
92.60 shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer on or before September 30, a
detailed verified statement providing the following information:
      (1)   The total dollar amount paid by all patrons for fireworks at the
sales outlet during the license period, including, separately stated, the
amount of sales tax collected by the organization and to be paid in connection
with such sales, including the manner and means of calculating the same; and
      (2)   Such other information as the village shall consider appropriate.
   (B)   Such statement shall be filed on a form that the Village Clerk-
Treasurer has prepared for such purposes.
   (C)   The form shall be maintained and made available in the office of the
Village Clerk- Treasurer.
§ 92.68 FIRECRACKERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be exploded
fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever except sparklers,
Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet
type color aerial shells without explosive charges for the purpose of making a
noise, color wheels, lady fingers not exceeding seven-eighths inch in length or
one-eighth inch in diameter and which do not contain more than one-half grain
each in weight of explosive material.
(Prior Code, § 6-312) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1241
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Operation and funding
   
93.02   Injury to property
   
93.03   Regulations
§ 93.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   If the village has already acquired or hereafter acquires land for
park purposes or recreational facilities or has already built or hereafter
builds swimming pools, recreational facilities or dams, the Board of Trustees
may each year make and levy a tax upon the taxable value of all the taxable
property in the village. The levy shall be collected and put into the village
treasury and shall constitute the Park and Recreation Fund of the village. The
funds so levied and collected shall be used for amusements, for laying out,
improving and beautifying such parks, for maintaining, improving, managing and
beautifying such swimming pools, recreational facilities or dams, and for the
payment of salaries and wages of persons employed in the performance of such
labor.
(Neb. RS 17-951)
   (B)   If the Board of Trustees creates a Board of Park Commissioners or
Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, when such Board has been appointed
and qualified, all accounts against the Park Fund or Park and Recreation Fund,
as the case may be, shall be audited by such Board, and warrants against the
Fund shall be drawn by the Chairperson of the Board, and warrants so drawn
shall be paid by the Village Clerk-Treasurer out of the Fund.
(Neb. RS 17-952)
   (C)   (1)   Whether the title to real estate for parks, public grounds,
swimming pools or dams, either for recreational or conservational purposes,
shall be acquired by gift, devise or purchase as provided in Neb. RS 17-948,
the jurisdiction of the Board of Trustees or Park Board shall at once be
extended over such real estate; and the Board of Trustees or Park Board shall
have power to enact bylaws, rules or ordinances for the protection and
preservation of any real estate acquired, and to provide rules and regulations
for the closing of the park or swimming pool, in whole or in part, to the
general public, and charge admission thereto during such closing, either by the
village or by any person, persons or corporation leasing same. They may provide
suitable penalties for the violation of such bylaws, rules or ordinances; and
the police power of the village shall be at once extended over the same.
(Neb. RS 17-949)
      (2)   The Park Board shall not enter into a contract of any nature that
involves an expenditure of funds, except for ordinary operating expenses,
unless the contract has been approved by resolution of the majority of the
members of the Board of Trustees prior to the contractual agreement.
Statutory reference:
   Levy limits, see Neb. RS 77-3442
   Parks and recreational facilities generally, see Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-
952
§ 93.02 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down,
injure or destroy any tree, plant or shrub in any village park or recreational
facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded
or planted area or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence,
bench, table or any other property of any village park or recreational area. No
person shall commit any waste on or litter the village parks or other public
grounds.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Littering of public and private property, see Neb. RS 28-523
§ 93.03 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations for park operation are hereby prescribed in order
to promote the orderly and safe use of the municipal parks and to prevent
needless injury and destruction to park property.
   (A)   Public restrooms. Restrooms will be open during special occasions.
   (B)   Park hours of operations. Parks shall be closed to the public after
10:00 p.m., except for special activities approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   Picnic areas. The use of picnic areas and facilities is on a first
come, first serve basis.
(Prior Code, § 3-402)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Unlawful acts
   
94.04   Discrimination against handicapped persons prohibited
   
94.05   Transactions related to residential real estate
   
94.06   Multiple listing services and others; discrimination prohibited
   
94.07   Exceptions
   
94.08   Information
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare of the
residents of the village by endorsing the provisions of the State Fair Housing
Act, Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-344, to the effect that there shall be no
discrimination in the village in the acquisition, ownership, possession or
enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I, § 25 of the Constitution of
Nebraska.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or believes that he or she will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The State Equal Opportunity Commission.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or
designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or more families and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more minors being domiciled with a parent or another
person having legal custody of such individual; or the designee of a parent or
other person having legal custody, with written permission of the parent or
other person.
   HANDICAP. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment, excluding the current illegal use
of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. RS 28-401, which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations,
labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   RENT. Includes lease, sublease, let and otherwise grant for consideration
the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. Any specification limiting the transfer, rental or
lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national origin,
sex, handicap, familial status or ancestry.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003)
§ 94.03 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Except as exempted by §
94.07, it shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer,
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, refuse to show or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling
to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial
status or sex;
      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status or sex;
      (3)   Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale of rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
      (4)   Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, familial status or sex that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
      (5)   Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning
the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex of
a person seeking to purchase, rent or lease any housing;
      (6)   Include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any
restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any
restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;
      (7)   Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the
compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee’s compliance
with this chapter or the State Fair Housing Act, being Neb. RS 20-301 through
20-344; and
      (8)   Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
national origin, handicap, familial status or sex.
   (B)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any minor.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   State Fair Housing Act, see Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-322
§ 94.04 DISCRIMINATION AGAINST HANDICAPPED PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as exempted by §
94.07, it shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Discriminate in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling to, any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   The buyer or renter;
         (b)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or
         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available.
      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap of:
         (a)   Such person;
         (b)   Any person associated with such person; or
         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
         (a)   Buildings consisting of four or more unites if such buildings
have one or more elevators; and
         (b)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more
units.
      DISCRIMINATION. Includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full
enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of a rental, the landlord or
landlady may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to
the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear
excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the
handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after November 12, 2003, a failure to
design and construct the dwellings in such a manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwellings;
               b.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
               d.   Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National
Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A117.1,
shall satisfy the requirements of division (B)(c)3. above.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.05 TRANSACTIONS RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction because
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL
REAL ESTATE shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status or sex.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.06 MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICES AND OTHERS; DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race,
color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a
dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to
persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national
origin, handicap, familial status or sex.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open
to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or limit the right of any
person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or
rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change
tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this exception
shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or occupancy more
than four sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or her home.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. For the purpose of this division (D),
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS shall mean housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state program that the Commission determines is
specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the
program;
      (2)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003)
§ 94.08 INFORMATION.
   The Village Clerk-Treasurer, upon request, shall make available to an
aggrieved person, or any other person, information regarding the State Fair
Housing Act and the State Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such
individual.
(Ord. 139, passed 11-12-2003)
Statutory reference:
   State Fair Housing Act, see Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-322
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Specific Business Regulations
   
110.01   Tobacco licenses
   
110.02   Railroads
Amusements
   
110.15   Public dances
SPECIFIC BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 110.01 TOBACCO LICENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to sell,
keep for sale or give away in the course of trade any cigars, tobacco
cigarettes or cigarette material to anyone without first obtaining a license
from the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer. Said applicant shall file a written
application stating the name of the applicant and exact location of the place
of business and shall deposit with such application a license fee of $10. Said
license shall then be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer and the $10 fee transferred
to the local school district.
(Prior Code, § 10-401) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1421 through 28-1429
§ 110.02 RAILROADS.
   (A)   Safe crossings. It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing
business in or traveling through the municipality to keep in a suitable and
safe condition the crossing and right-of-way in the municipality. If any such
crossing shall at any time fall into disrepair and become unsafe or
inconvenient for public travel, the governing body may, by resolution, call
upon said company to make whatever repairs that it may deem necessary to
correct the dangerous condition. Notice of said resolution shall be served upon
the local agent of said company. In the event that the railroad shall fail or
neglect to repair and correct said condition as aforesaid within 30 days,
neglect for each 24 hours thereafter shall be deemed and is hereby made a
separate and distinct offense against the provisions herein.
(Prior Code, § 10-801)
   (B)   Lighting. It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning,
operating and maintaining a railroad through the municipality to sufficiently
light all crossings and to install as many signal systems as the governing body
shall deem necessary at the expense of said company.
(Prior Code, § 10-802)
   (C)   Obstructing traffic. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company,
its employees, agents or servants operating a railroad through the municipality
to obstruct traffic on any public street, except in the event of an emergency,
for a longer period, at one time, of more than five minutes.
(Prior Code, § 10-803)
   (D)   Warning. It shall be the duty of every railroad company, its agents or
servants to ring a bell continually or to sound a whistle while crossing the
streets within the corporate limits. When any such train shall be standing
between streets, it shall be unlawful for any such company or its servants in
charge to start or permit such train or engine to be started without first
ringing a bell or sounding a whistle for at least 15 seconds before starting.
(Prior Code, § 10-804)
   (E)   Drainage. It shall be the duty of any railroad company owning,
maintaining or operating a railroad within or through the corporate limits of
the municipality to construct and keep in repair all ditches, drains and
culverts along and under its railroad tracks at all places within the municipal
corporate limits where the same may be necessary for the escape of water and
the proper draining of the territory on either side of the railroad right-of-
way. If the railroad company should fail or neglect to construct or repair the
drain, ditch or culvert and to put the same in a proper condition for the
escape of water, the governing body shall, by resolution, order the railroad to
provide for the proper drainage of water on the right-of-way. A copy of the
resolution shall be served to the local agent for the railroad, and failure or
neglect by the railroad to correct the drainage within 14 days shall constitute
a separate and distinct misdemeanor for each 24-hour period thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 10-805)
   (F)   Obstructing view at crossings prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
railroad company to obstruct or obscure the traveling public’s view by storing
or parking any railroad car on a railroad track within 40 feet of the crossing
of any such railroad track and a public road within the corporate limits of the
municipality; provided, however, in no instance shall any person who is
authorized to control the movement of such railroad car or cars within such
distance be prevented from reasonably conducting his or her business.
(Prior Code, § 10-806)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-561 and 74-1323
AMUSEMENTS
§ 110.15 PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PUBLIC DANCE. Includes any dance, rock festival, masquerade or ball given
or conducted for which a fee, contribution or collection for the purpose of
admission is charged; provided, that this term shall not be construed to
include dances, music festivals, masquerades or balls to which admission is
limited strictly to persons expressly invited by the person, organization or
society giving or holding such dance, masquerade or ball and which is not given
or conducted designedly for profit or gain to such person, organization or
society giving or conducting the same; and provided further, that the
provisions herein shall not apply to any dance conducted under the supervision
and direction of the governing body of any college or school district within
the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 10-701)
   (B)   Supervision. Any village law enforcement officer(s) shall be permitted
to enter any public dance for the purpose of inspection at any time. The
governing body is hereby empowered to appoint or designate an Inspector to be
present at any and all public dances conducted within the municipality. The
Inspector shall take the oath required of a law enforcement officer and shall
have all the powers and duties conferred upon regularly appointed law
enforcement officers. It shall be the duty of said Inspector to enforce the
provisions herein. Said Inspector may call upon any police officer or the
person or persons conducting said dance for assistance in ejecting any person
from the dance if that person is offending against the decent and peaceful
proprieties of a social gathering. The Inspector so appointed shall be entitled
to charge for his or her services at each dance and shall receive such fee as
the governing body shall, by motion, designate. Said fee shall be paid by the
person or persons conducting the public dance prior to the opening of said
public dance. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons conducting a
public dance to begin said dance until the Inspector is present, unless the
governing body waives its right to make such an appointment. Said Inspector
shall make a written report to the governing body concerning each dance
attended. The governing body may, in its discretion, designate one or more
additional peace officers to work with the Inspector during the hours of the
public dance, and the compensation of any additional peace officer so appointed
shall be equal to and paid in the same manner as the Inspector’s compensation.
(Prior Code, § 10-702)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-207
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person prohibited
   
111.03   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions
   
111.04   Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasi-public property
Licenses Required
   
111.15   Manufacture, sale, delivery and possession; general prohibitions;
exceptions
   
111.16   Licensee requirements
   
111.17   Licenses; village powers and duties
   
111.18   License renewal; village powers and duties
   
111.19   Catering licenses
   
111.20   Display of license
   
111.21   Owner of premises or agent; liability
   
111.22   Employer liability for acts of officer, agent or employee
Retail Establishments
   
111.35   Location
   
111.36   Access to dwellings
   
111.37   Sanitary conditions
   
111.38   Credit sales prohibited
   
111.39   Original package
   
111.40   Hours of sale
   
111.41   Hiring minors
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-
103.01 through 53-103.42 shall be used.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      STATE LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
§ 111.02 SALE OR GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver,
or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any
minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-180) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except when the State Liquor Control Commission has issued a license
as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,211.08, it is
unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or
controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or
conducting any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to the State Liquor Control Act. It is unlawful for any
person to consume alcoholic liquor in any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant,
café or club or any place open to the general public except as permitted by a
license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act. This division (B) does
not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in the catering of
alcoholic beverages or to limousines or buses operated under Neb. RS 60-
6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic
violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the
officer dangerous to himself, herself or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an
intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable
effort to take the intoxicated person to his or her home or to place the person
in any hospital, clinic or mental health substance use treatment center, or
with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent
injury. The effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer
contacts such facilities or doctor which have previously represented a
willingness to accept and treat such individuals and which regularly do accept
such individuals. If these efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the
officer may then place the intoxicated person in civil protective custody,
except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary
to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than
24 hours.
   (B)   The placement of the person in civil protective custody shall be
recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to
the person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.
   (C)   A law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section
shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and
shall not be criminally or civilly liable for these actions.
   (D)   The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this
section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be
made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MENTAL HEALTH SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT. As defined in Neb. RS 71-423.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or village-owned property.
      QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private or publicly owned property utilized for
proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which
invites public ingress and egress.
(Neb. RS 53-1,121) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSES REQUIRED
§ 111.15 MANUFACTURE, SALE, DELIVERY AND POSSESSION; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport,
deliver, furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes except
as specifically provided in this chapter and the State Liquor Control Act.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent:
      (1)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in
this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and his or her
family or guests;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the products thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the maker
and his or her family and guests;
      (3)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing
or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any
hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from
possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients
of that hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed
pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the compounding of
prescriptions of licensed physicians;
      (4)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an
authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of
worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual or
ceremony;
      (5)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying alcoholic
liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person not a
minor;
      (6)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling alcoholic
liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
      (7)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and disposing
of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and
customers in the course of their employment;
      (8)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from completing a transaction
for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment if they are
not handling or serving alcoholic liquor; or
      (9)   Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving or selling
alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.
(Neb. RS 53-168.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.16 LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person who is not a resident of this state, except in cases of
railroad, airline, boat or special party bus licenses;
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (3)   A person who is not a resident of this state and legally able to
work in this state;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United States;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any
Class I misdemeanor pursuant to Neb. RS Ch. 28, art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or 12,
or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another state,
except that any additional requirements imposed by this division (A)(5) on May
18, 1983, shall not prevent any person holding a license on that date from
retaining or renewing that license if the conviction or plea occurred prior to
May 18, 1983;
      (6)   A person whose license issued under the State Liquor Control Act
has been revoked for cause;
      (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under the Act would not be eligible for that license upon initial
application;
      (8)   A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident of this
state and unless all the members of that partnership are otherwise qualified to
obtain a license;
      (9)   A limited liability company, unless one of the members is a
resident of this state and unless all the members of that company are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;
      (10)   A corporation, if any officer or director of the corporation or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of that
corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any
reason other than the reasons stated in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(3) above, or
if a manager of a corporate licensee would be ineligible to receive a license
under this section for any reason. This division (A)(10) shall not apply to
railroad licenses;
      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless that manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee;
      (12)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on the premises for
the full period for which the license is to be issued;
      (13)   Except as provided in this division (A), an applicant whose spouse
is ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license. Such an
applicant shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the State Liquor
Control Commission finds from the evidence that the public interest will not be
infringed upon if the license is granted. It shall be prima facie evidence that
when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license, the applicant is also
ineligible to receive a liquor license. This prima facie evidence shall be
overcome if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commission:
         (a)   The licensed business will be the sole property of the
applicant; and
         (b)   The licensed premises will be properly operated.
      (14)   A person seeking a license for premises which do not meet the
standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal;
      (15)   A law enforcement officer, except that this division (A)(15) shall
not prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership in any nonprofit
organization holding a liquor license or from participating in any manner in
the management or administration of a nonprofit organization; or
      (16)   A person less than 21 years of age.
   (B)   When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of
the trust shall comply with the requirements of this section, but nothing in
this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from being a minor or person
who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-125)
§ 111.17 LICENSES; VILLAGE POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the State Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail,
bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery licensees carried on within the
corporate limits of the village.
(Neb. RS 53-134.03)
   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail or
electronic delivery from the State Liquor Control Commission notice and a copy
of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a craft
brewery license or a microdistillery license, the Board of Trustees may make
and submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or
refusal to grant the license to the applicant.
(Neb. RS 53-131)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees, with respect to licenses within the corporate
limits of the village, has the following powers, functions and duties with
respect to retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery licenses:
      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or bottle club
licenses issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the
right of appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under the State Liquor Control Act to
determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation adopted by the Board of Trustees has been or is being violated, and
at that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection with such
determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of
the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act or
any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the local governing
body has been or is being violated shall report such violation in writing to
the Executive Director of the Commission:
         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such violation has
occurred;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing police
investigation; or
         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution related to
such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney determines
that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would jeopardize such
prosecution, whichever is later.
      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to
act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
      (4)   To receive retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the same,
after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer;
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail,
bottle club, craft brewery or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
except as otherwise provided for bottle club licensees under state law, and to
hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the Board of
Trustees may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if it determines
that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the State Liquor
Control Act or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation duly enacted, adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor.
The order of cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission
within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with
the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided
for hearing on an application in Neb. RS 53-133;
      (7)   (a)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a
hearing at which the Board of Trustees shall receive evidence, either orally or
by affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the
propriety of the issuance of a license.
         (b)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published
in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the village, one time not
less than seven and not more than 14 days before the time of the hearing. The
notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all persons
desiring to give evidence before the Board of Trustees in support of or in
protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the time of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the date of
receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after the hearing the Board of
Trustees shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings a
resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the license.
         (c)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to the Commission by
first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state
the cost of the published notice, except that failure to comply with this
provision shall not void any license issued by the Commission. If the
Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of publication of the
notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for costs.
      (8)   To review and authorize an application by a retail, bottle club,
craft brewery, farm winery or microdistillery licensee for a temporary
expansion of its licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the local
governing body to an immediately adjacent area owned or leased by the licensee
or to an immediately adjacent street, parking lot or alley, not to exceed 50
days for calendar year 2020, and for each calendar year thereafter, not to
exceed 15 days per calendar year, as provided in Neb. RS 53-123.12 and 53-129;
and
      (9)   To review and authorize an application by a craft brewery, farm
winery or microdistillery licensee that holds a promotional farmers market
special designated license for a permit to use such promotional farmers market
special designated license to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, which the
holder is licensed to produce, at a farmers market within the jurisdiction of
the local governing body as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.17. The local governing
body shall electronically notify the commission within five days after
authorization of any permit pursuant to this subdivision.
(Neb. RS 53-134)
   (D)   (1)   When the State Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer a retail, craft brewery or microdistillery license
issued or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk-Treasurer shall deliver the
license to the licensee upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:
         (a)   The license fee if, by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124, the fee is
payable to the Village Clerk-Treasurer;
         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the Board of
Trustees upon the application for the license;
         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the village, except that
Class J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation taxes.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
village shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm
or corporation licensed under the State Liquor Control Act and doing business
within the corporate limits of the village in any sum which exceeds two times
the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain that
license.
(Neb. RS 53-132)
§ 111.18 LICENSE RENEWAL; VILLAGE POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A retail or bottle club license issued by the State Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the Board of Trustees to require the
licensee to submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises
located in an area which is annexed to the village shall file a formal
application for a license, and while the application is pending, the licensee
may continue all license privileges until the original license expires or is
canceled or revoked. If that license expires within 60 days following the
annexation date of the area, the license may be renewed by order of the
Commission for not more than one year.
(Neb. RS 53-135)
   (B)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall cause to be published in a legal
newspaper in or of general circulation in the village, one time between January
10 and January 30 of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed by law
of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license and
each bottle club license within the village, except that notice of the right of
automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall be published between the dates of
July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written protests to the issuance of
automatic renewal of a license are filed in the office of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer by three or more residents of the village on or before February 10,
or August 10 for Class C licenses, the Board of Trustees shall hold a hearing
to determine whether continuation of the license should be allowed. Upon the
conclusion of any hearing required by this section, the Board of Trustees may
request a licensee to submit an application as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.
(Neb. RS 53-135.01)
§ 111.19 CATERING LICENSES.
   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail issued
under Neb. RS 53-124, a craft brewery license, a microdistillery license or a
farm winery license may obtain an annual catering license by filing an
application and license fee with the State Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of the
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the Board of Trustees shall
process the application in the same manner as provided in §
111.17.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees, with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of
the period for which that catering license is issued. Any person whose catering
license is canceled may appeal to the District Court.
   (D)   The Board of Trustees may impose an occupation tax on the business of
a catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction of
the Board of Trustees. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a
catering license.
(Neb. RS 53-124.12)
§ 111.20 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under the State Liquor Control Act shall cause his or her
license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises.
(Neb. RS 53-148) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.21 OWNER OF PREMISES OR AGENT; LIABILITY.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of the premises, or the agent of that owner or
person, knowingly permits the licensee to use the licensed premises in
violation of the terms of the State Liquor Control Act or any village
ordinance, that owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of the Act or ordinance to the same extent as the licensee and be
subject to the same punishment.
(Neb. RS 53-1,101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 EMPLOYER LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF OFFICER, AGENT OR EMPLOYEE.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of the State Liquor Control Act or any village ordinance by
any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, if
the act is committed or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge or
approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of the
employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.
(Neb. RS 53-1,102) Penalty, see §
10.99
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.35 LOCATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, no license shall
be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or for a bottle club
within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital or home for indigent persons or
for veterans and their wives or children. This prohibition does not apply to
any location within such distance of 150 feet:
      (1)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail or for a
bottle club has been granted by the State Liquor Control Commission for two
years continuously prior to making of application for license;
      (2)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized clubs
or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is
not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted
was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935; or
      (3)   To a college or university in the state which is subject to Neb. RS
53-177.01.
   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
or for a bottle club is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued
if the commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as
prescribed in Neb. RS 53-133 if the affected church submits a written request
for a hearing.
(Neb. RS 53-177)
   (C)   Unless otherwise exempted by Neb. RS 53-177.01, no alcoholic liquor,
other than beer, shall be sold for consumption on the premises within 300 feet
from the campus of any college or university within the village, and no bottle
club shall be operated within 300 feet from the campus of any college, except
that this section:
      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by such
college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail
by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university at
student activities or events; and
      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a community college
culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.
(Neb. RS 53-177.01)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   State commission may waive 300-foot requirement, see Neb. RS 53-177.01
§ 111.36 ACCESS TO DWELLINGS.
   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which have any
access which leads from the premises to any other portion of the same building
or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and permitted to be used or
kept accessible for use by the public. This section does not prevent any
connection between the premises and such other portion of the building or
structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family or personal
guests.
(Neb. RS 53-178) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.37 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor
establishment that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities
shall be adequate and convenient for customers and patrons.
   (B)   The licensed premises shall be subject to any health inspections the
Board of Trustees or the village police may make or cause to be made. All
applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed in part from the standpoint of
the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning the sanitary conditions shall
be made at all hearings concerning the application for or renewal of a liquor
license.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate licensed premises, see Neb. RS 53-134.03
   State sanitary rules and regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 53-118
§ 111.38 CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for any
goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered, and if
any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to
be created shall not be recoverable at law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:
      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of such club;
      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from permitting
checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such
hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the accounts of such guests;
or
      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or distilled
spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.
(Neb. RS 53-183) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.39 ORIGINAL PACKAGE.
   No person, except a manufacturer or wholesaler, shall fill or refill, in
whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any
other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person
to have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other
containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the refilling of original packages of alcoholic
liquor for strictly private use and not for resale.
(Neb. RS 53-184) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.40 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OFF-SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container
for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.
      ON-SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold at retail by the drink for consumption
on the premises of the licensed establishment.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons to sell
at retail any alcoholic beverages during the hours that the polls are open on
the day in which any local, county or statewide primary or general election is
conducted.
      (2)   It shall further be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or
their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the municipality except
during the hours provided herein:
Hours of Sale
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
Hours of Sale
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
Secular days
   On-sal6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
   Off-sa6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Sundays
   On-sal12:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.
   Off-sa12:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Beer and Wine
Secular days
   On-sal6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
   Off-sa6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Beer and Wine
Sundays
   On-sal6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
   Off-sa6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
 
      (3)   Class C: Alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the premises and off
the premises, sales in original packages only except as provided in Neb. RS 53-
123.04(4). If a Class C license is held by a nonprofit corporation, it shall be
restricted to consumption on the premises only. A Class C license may have a
sampling designation restricting consumption on the premises to sampling, but
such designation shall not affect sales for consumption off the premises under
such license.
   (C)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed
herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on said premises.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-109) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-179
§ 111.41 HIRING MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor, regardless of sex,
under the age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including
beer, to said licensee’s customers.
(Prior Code, § 10-125) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-168.06
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirement
   
112.03   Application procedure
   
112.04   Standards for issuance
   
112.05   Revocation procedure
   
112.06   Standards for revocation
   
112.07   Appeal procedure
   
112.08   Exhibition of identification
   
112.09   Village policy on soliciting
   
112.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
112.12   Prohibited solicitation
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the village and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the village.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the village.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the village.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Village Clerk-Administrator. This application shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership,
or by the president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the village;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to
be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above has
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the village, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application.
§ 112.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
village after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
112.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address,
at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
112.04 or
112.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Board of Trustees, within 14 days after
notice of the decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Board of Trustees
shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall
be given to such person in the same manner as provided in §
112.05.
   (B)   The order of the Board of Trustees after the hearing shall be final.
§ 112.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the village shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The village shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed
Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the
number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such
time as he is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.09 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the occupants of
the residences in the village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 112.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 112.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
112.10 above.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PROPERTY OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 130: PROPERTY OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Criminal trespass
   
130.02   Larceny
   
130.03   Electrical interference
   
130.04   Injury to trees
   
130.05   Trash
   
130.06   Posted advertisements
   
130.07   Posting
   
130.08   Residency restrictions for sexual predators
§ 130.01 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   A person commits first degree criminal trespass if:
      (1)   He or she enters or secretly remains in any building or occupied
structure, or any separately secured or occupied portion thereof, knowing that
he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so; or
      (2)   He or she enters or remains in or on a public power infrastructure
facility knowing that he or she does not have the consent of a person who has
the right to give consent to be in or on the facility.
   (B)   First degree criminal trespass is a Class I misdemeanor.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC POWER INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY
means a power plant, an electrical station or substation or any other facility
which is used by a public power supplier as defined in Neb. RS 70-2103 to
support the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity and which
is surrounded by a fence or is otherwise enclosed.
(Neb. RS 28-520)
   (D)   (1)   A person commits second degree criminal trespass if, knowing
that he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so, to enter or remain in
any place as to which notice against trespass is given by:
         (a)   Actual communication to the actor;
         (b)   Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to
come to the attention of intruders; or
         (c)   Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude
intruders, except as otherwise provided in division (A) above.
      (2)   A person commits second degree criminal trespass if, knowing that
he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so, he or she intentionally
causes an electronic device, such as an unmanned aircraft, to enter into, upon
or above the property of another, including such property owned by such person
and leased or rented to another, with the intent to observe another person
without his or her consent in a place of solitude or seclusion.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, UNMANNED AIRCRAFT means an
aircraft, including an aircraft commonly known as a drone, which is operated
without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft.
      (4)   Second degree criminal trespass is a Class III misdemeanor, except
as provided for in division (D)(5) below.
      (5)   Second degree criminal trespass is a Class II misdemeanor if the
offender defies an order to leave personally communicated to him or her by the
owner of the premises or other authorized person.
(Neb. RS 28-521) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 LARCENY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to steal any
money, goods or chattels of any kind whatever. Any person who shall steal
property of any kind, whether the same be entirely in money or entirely
property of a value of less than $300 shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-302) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-510 and 28-511
§ 130.03 ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE.
   Any person operating, or causing to be operated, any motor, sign or other
electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall
equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate
interference; provided, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use
of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference
cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates or
causes to be operated any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually
with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Provisions on nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 28-1321
§ 130.04 INJURY TO TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or carelessly and without
lawful authority to cut down, carry away, injure, break down or destroy any
fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any land
belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the corporate
limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any tree,
except on property owned and controlled by it, shall make an application to the
Board of Trustees to do so, and the written permit of the Board of Trustees in
accordance with their decision to allow such an action shall constitute the
only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or negligently
place or throw upon the premises of another any filth, garbage, leaves, papers
or other matter to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6-304) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-523
§ 130.06 POSTED ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear,
deface, remove or cover up the posted advertisement or bill of any person, firm
or corporation when said bill or advertisement is rightfully posted and the
same remains of value.
(Prior Code, § 6-307) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 POSTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks or public
grounds of the village for signs, signposts or the posting of handbills or
advertisements without written permission of the Board of Trustees.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEXUAL PREDATORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed pursuant to the Nebraska Child
Care Licensing Act.
      RESIDE or RESIDENCE. A place where the sexual predator abides, dwells,
lives or sleeps, which may include more than one location and may be mobile or
transitory.
      SCHOOL. A public, private, denominational or parochial school which meets
the requirements for accreditation or approval prescribed by the State of
Nebraska, pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 79, and which has or includes any and all
grades kindergarten through twelfth grade.
      SEX OFFENDER. An individual who has been convicted of a crime listed in
Neb. RS § 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to
the State of Nebraska’s Sex Offender Registration Act.
      SEXUAL PREDATOR. An individual as defined by Nebraska state statute.
   (B)   Residency restrictions. It shall be unlawful for a sexual predator to
reside within 500 feet of the real property comprising a school or a child care
facility.
   (C)   Measurement of distance. For purpose of determining the minimum
distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the real property comprising a residence
to the nearest outer property line of the real property comprising the school
or child care facility.
   (D)   Penalty for violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine
of not less than $250 nor more than $500 or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (E)   Exceptions. A sexual predator residing within 500 feet of the real
property comprising a school or child care facility does not commit a violation
of this section if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The sexual predator resides within a prison or a correctional or
treatment facility operated by the state or a political subdivision.
      (2)   The sexual predator has established a residence before January 1,
2010, and has not moved from that residence.
      (3)   The sexual predator has established a residence before January 1,
2010, and the school or child care facility triggering the restriction was
established after the initial date of the sexual predator’s residence at that
location.
(Ord. 238, passed 1-3-2025)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
131.01   Disorderly conduct
   
131.02   Assaults
   
131.03   Obstructing water flow
   
131.04   Obstruction of public ways
   
131.05   Disturbing the peace
   
131.06   Removing dirt
§ 131.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which
disturbs the peace and good order of the village by clamor or noise,
intoxication, drunkenness, fighting or using obscene or profane language in the
streets or other public places or otherwise violating the public peace by
indecent or disorderly conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate noise, riots and routs, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 131.02 ASSAULTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or threaten any other person.
Any person who assaults another person shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-313) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-308 through 28-310
§ 131.03 OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water
in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe or hydrant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 17-555
   Authority to prevent water obstruction, see Neb. RS 17-920
§ 131.04 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or suffer to remain
on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display or other obstruction
inconvenient to or inconsistent with the public use of the same.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. RS 17-555 and 17-557
   Penalties for injuring or obstructing roads, see Neb. RS 39-301 and 39-302
§ 131.05 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to disturb the peace and
quiet of any person, family or neighborhood.
(Neb. RS 28-1322) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 REMOVING DIRT.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb or take
away from any street, alley or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones or other
material forming a part of such street, alley or public grounds without first
having obtained written permission to do so from the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 6-321) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Maintaining a nuisance
   
132.02   Appliances in yard
   
132.03   Prohibited fences
   
132.04   Littering
   
132.05   Weed removal
Substance Offenses
   
132.20   Minors; prohibited acts involving alcoholic liquor
   
132.21   Drinking on public property; open beverage container
Motor Vehicle and Highway Offenses
   
132.35   Abandoned automobiles
   
132.36   Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles
Weapons Offenses
   
132.50   Discharge of firearms
   
132.51   Concealed weapons
   
132.52   Slingshots, air guns, BB guns
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of maintaining a nuisance if he or she
erects, keeps up or continues and maintains any nuisance to the injury of any
part of the citizens of the village.
   (B)   The erecting, continuing, using or maintaining of any building,
structure or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment, manufacture
or other business which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, noisome or
offensive smells, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public; the obstructing or impeding, without
legal authority, of the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of
water; or the corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure of any watercourse,
stream or water; or unlawfully diverting any such watercourse from its natural
course or state to the injury or prejudice of others; and the obstructing or
encumbering by fences, building, structures or otherwise of any of the public
highways or streets or alleys of the village, shall be deemed nuisances.
   (C)   A person guilty of erecting, continuing, using, maintaining or causing
any such nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this section and in every
such case the offense shall be construed and held to have been committed in any
county whose inhabitants are or have been injured or aggrieved thereby.
   (D)   The court, in case of conviction of such offense, shall order every
such nuisance to be abated or removed.
(Neb. RS 28-1321) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 APPLIANCES IN YARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property unless the person first removes
all doors and makes the same reasonably safe.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit nuisances within zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 18-
1720
§ 132.03 PROHIBITED FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where
the fence abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Restrictions on barbed wire fences, see Neb. RS 39-307
§ 132.04 LITTERING.
   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense
of littering unless:
      (1)   The property is an area designated by law for the disposal of that
type of material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to
so use the property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on the
property for that purpose.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Includes all waste material susceptible of being dropped,
deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property
in the state, but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or
manufacturing.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of the motor
vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Neb. RS 28-523) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.05 WEED REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate in the municipality
to cut and clear such real estate, together with one-half of the streets and
alleys abutting thereon, of all weeds and worthless vegetation that are
noxious, obstruct travel on public ways or create a fire hazard. Subsequent to
the cutting of said weeds, all loose vegetation shall be immediately removed.
Upon the failure of the owner, lessee or occupant having control of any such
real estate to cut and clear said weeds and worthless vegetation, such
condition shall constitute a nuisance, and the owner, lessee or occupant may be
fined, and/or the Village Marshal or Municipal Clerk-Treasurer shall serve
notice on the owner, lessee or occupant to do so.
   (B)   In the event that the weeds and vegetation have not been removed after
a period of five days, the governing body may order the same to be done under
the direction of the Utilities Superintendent, and the cost thereof shall be
chargeable to the property owner. If the owner fails to reimburse the
municipality after being properly billed, the cost may be assessed against the
real estate and the governing body shall have the assessment certified to the
County Treasurer, and the same shall be collected in the manner provided by
law. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which
the property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to
be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the nonresident owner. The last known address shall be that
address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was
first published.
(Prior Code, § 6-322) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-563 and 18-1719
SUBSTANCE OFFENSES
§ 132.20 MINORS; PROHIBITED ACTS INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-
103.01 through 53-103.42 shall apply, including, but not limited to, the
definitions of the terms “alcoholic liquor,” “consume,” “minor,” “sale” and “to
sell.”
   (B)    Except as otherwise provided in §§
111.15 and
111.41, no minor may sell, dispense, consume or have in his or her possession
or physical control any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or in any other place,
including public streets, alleys, roads or highways, upon property owned by the
state, or any subdivision thereof, or inside any vehicle while in or on any
other place, including, but not limited to, the public streets, alleys, roads
or highways or upon property owned by the state or any subdivision thereof,
except that a minor may consume, possess or have physical control of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a bona fide religious rite, ritual or ceremony or in his or
her permanent place of residence.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to
transport, consume or knowingly possess or have under his or her control beer
or other alcoholic liquor in or transported by any motor vehicle.
(Neb. RS 53-180.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Minor Alcoholic Liquor Liability Act, see Neb. RS 53-401 through 53-409
§ 132.21 DRINKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; OPEN BEVERAGE CONTAINER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
         (a)   Beer, ale, porter, stout and other similar fermented beverages,
including sake or similar products of any name or description, containing 0.5%
or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part,
or from any substitute therefor;
         (b)   Wine of not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume; or
         (c)   Distilled spirits, which is that substance known as ethyl
alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
         (d)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE does not include trace amounts not readily
consumable as a beverage.
      HIGHWAY. A road or street, including the entire area within the right-of-
way.
      LIMOUSINE. A luxury vehicle used to provide prearranged passenger
transportation on a dedicated basis at a premium fare that has a seating
capacity of at least five and not more than 14 persons behind the driver, with
a physical partition separating the driver’s seat from the passenger
compartment. LIMOUSINE does not include taxicabs, hotel or airport buses or
shuttles or buses.
      OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Except as provided in Neb. RS 53-
123.04(3) and 53-123.11(1)(c), any bottle, can or other receptacle:
         (a)   That contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and
         (b)   1.   That is open or has a broken seal; or
            2.   The contents of which are partially removed.
      PASSENGER AREA. The area designed to seat the driver and passengers while
the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to
the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including any
compartments in the area. PASSENGER AREA does not include the area behind the
last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the area is not normally occupied by
the driver or a passenger and the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess an open alcoholic
beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a public parking area
or on any highway in this village.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
111.03 or division (D) below, it is unlawful for any person to consume an
alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   In a public parking area or on any highway in this village; or
      (2)   Inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking area or on any
highway in this village.
   (D)   This section does not apply to persons who are passengers of, but not
drivers of, a limousine or bus being used in a charter or special party service
as defined by the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the State
Public Service Commission and subject to Neb. RS Ch. 75, art. 3. Such
passengers may possess open alcoholic beverage containers and may consume
alcoholic beverages while such limousine or bus is in a public parking area or
on any highway in this village if:
      (1)   The driver of the limousine or bus is prohibited from consuming
alcoholic liquor; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor is not present in any area that is readily
accessible to the driver while in the driver’s seat, including any compartments
in such area.
(Neb. RS 60-6,211.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
MOTOR VEHICLE AND HIGHWAY OFFENSES
§ 132.35 ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid “In
Transit” stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed
thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            4.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a village law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) below; or
            6.   If removed from private property by the village pursuant to a
village ordinance or this code.
         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours after the parking of
such vehicle has become illegal if left on a portion of any public property on
which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a village law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) below; or
            5.   If removed from private property by the village pursuant to a
village ordinance or this code.
         (c)   A MOBILE HOME is an abandoned vehicle if left in place on
private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental unit,
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each of
the last registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating that
the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set forth
in Neb. RS 60-1903.
         (d)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431
shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this division (A).
      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units
that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity,
or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one
integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as defined in Neb. RS 71-
4603. MOBILE HOME does not include a mobile home or manufactured home for which
an affidavit of affixture has been recorded pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley or park
or other state, county or village-owned property.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
   (B)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license
plates of the current year or valid “In Transit” stickers issued pursuant to
Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration
the condition of the vehicle, of $500 or less, title shall immediately vest in
the village. Any certificate of title issued under this division (B) to the
village shall be issued at no cost to the village.
(Neb. RS 60-1902)
   (C)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (B) above, the village
shall make an inquiry concerning the last registered owner of such vehicle as
follows:
         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the
jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or
         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   The village shall notify the last registered owner, if any, and any
lienholder, if any, within 15 business days that the vehicle in question has
been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:
         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed; or
         (b)   Title will vest in the village 30 days after the date such
notice was mailed.
      (3)   If the agency described in division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) above
also notifies the village that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall
also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle
shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
village:
         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle
will be sold or offered at public auction under division (C)(2)(a) above;
         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the village
will retain the vehicle; or
         (c)   If the last registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice
of such fact is received.
      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to division (C)
(4) above, the village may retain for use, sell or auction the abandoned
vehicle. If the village has determined that the vehicle should be retained for
use, the village shall, at the same time that the notice, if any, is mailed,
publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction an
announcement that the village intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its
use and that title will vest in the village 30 days after the publication.
(Neb. RS 60-1903)
   (D)   (1)   If a village law enforcement agency has custody of a motor
vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in
custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the last registered
owners, if any, and lienholders, if any, within 15 calendar days stating that
the vehicle is in the custody of the law enforcement agency, that the vehicle
is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes and that after 30 days, the
agency will dispose of the vehicle.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.
      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this division
(D) unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when
it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the
offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If
a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken
into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted, the
registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)
   (E)   (1)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to remove an abandoned or
trespassing vehicle from private property upon the request of the private
property owner on whose property the vehicle is located and upon information
indicating that the vehicle is an abandoned or trespassing vehicle. After
removal, the law enforcement agency with custody of the vehicle shall follow
the procedures in Neb. RS 60-1902 and 60-1903.
      (2)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to contact a private towing
service in order to remove an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from private
property upon the request of the private property owner on whose property the
vehicle is located and upon information indicating that the vehicle is an
abandoned or trespassing vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this division (E)
is subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 through 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private
towing service which towed the vehicle.
      (3)   A private property owner is authorized to remove or cause the
removal of an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from such property and may
contact a private towing service for such removal. A private towing service
that tows the vehicle shall notify, within 24 hours, the designated law
enforcement agency in the jurisdiction from which the vehicle is removed and
provide the registration plate number, the vehicle identification number, if
available, the make, model and color of the vehicle, the name of the private
towing service and the location, if applicable, where the private towing
service is storing the vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this division (E) is
subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 through 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private towing
service that towed the vehicle.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, a TRESPASSING VEHICLE is a vehicle
that is parked without permission on private property that is not typically
made available for public parking.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.02)
   (F)   If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in this
section to be removed from public property in this village, the state agency
shall be entitled to custody of the vehicle. If a state agency caused an
abandoned vehicle described in this section to be removed from public property
in this village, the state agency shall deliver the vehicle to the village
which shall have custody.
(Neb. RS 60-1904)
   (G)   (1)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle in the
village’s custody less any expenses incurred by the village shall be held by
the village without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of
such vehicle for a period of two years.
      (2)   If not claimed within such two-year period, the proceeds shall be
paid into the General Fund of the village.
(Neb. RS 60-1905)
   (H)   Neither the owner, owner’s agent, owner’s employee or lessee, nor
occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the
village, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs
during its removal or while in the possession of the village or its contractual
agent, while in the possession of a private towing service or as a result of
any subsequent disposition.
(Neb. RS 60-1906)
   (I)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described herein.
(Neb. RS 60-1907)
   (J)   No person other than one authorized by the village or appropriate
state agency shall destroy, deface or remove any part of a vehicle which is
left unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates
affixed or which is abandoned. Anyone violating this division (J) shall be
guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-1908)
   (K)   The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to
the village for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-1909)
   (L)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
§ 132.36 UNLICENSED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the village,
other than village property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked or
discarded vehicle to remain on that property longer than 30 days.
   (B)   No unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted to remain on any private or
public property for any length of time, provided that this section shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   A vehicle bearing a valid “In Transit” sticker;
      (2)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;
      (3)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when the vehicle is necessary to the lawful operation
of the business; or
      (4)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner by the village.
   (C)   Any vehicle allowed to remain on property in violation of this section
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated, and any person violating this
section shall be guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   “In Transit” stickers, see Neb. RS 60-376
WEAPONS OFFENSES
§ 132.50 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the
discharge of official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other
fowling piece within the village, except that nothing in this section shall be
construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons
so discharging firearms have written permission from the Board of Trustees.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 132.51 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about his or her person any
concealed pistol, revolver, knife, billy club, slingshot, metal knuckles or
other dangerous weapon of any kind. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply
to a law enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-310) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-556 and 28-1202
§ 132.52 SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB
gun or the like loaded with rock or other dangerous missiles at any time or
under any circumstances within the village.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
      
152.   MOBILE HOME COURTS AND TRAILER COURTS
      
153.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   MUNICIPAL PLANNING; ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Building permits required
   
150.02   Fences
   
150.03   Codes adopted by reference
Moving of Buildings
   
150.15   Regulations
   
150.16   Deposit
Building Inspector
   
150.30   Power and authority
   
150.31   Right of entry
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct,
repair, enlarge, demolish or relocate any building or dwelling, or cause the
same to be done, shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer an application for
a building permit. The application shall be in writing on a form to be
furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer for that purpose. Every application
shall set forth the legal description of the land upon which the construction
or relocation is to take place, the nature of the use or occupancy, the
principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of the owner, architect and
contractor and such other information as may be requested thereon.
   (B)   The application, plans and specifications so filed with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall be checked and examined by the Board of Trustees, and if
they are found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and
all other ordinances applicable thereto, the Board of Trustees shall authorize
the Village Clerk-Treasurer to issue the applicant a permit upon payment of a
permit fee set by the Board by resolution. Whenever there is a discrepancy
between permit application procedures contained herein and those contained in
any building code adopted by reference, the provisions contained herein shall
govern.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.02 FENCES.
   (A)   Prohibited materials. All fences shall be constructed from approved
fencing materials and shall not be constructed from railroad ties, rubble or
salvage, corrugated building metals or other materials not compatible with
residential areas. Railroad ties may be used for retaining walls and
landscaping features.
   (B)   Fence building permit required.
      (1)   Before any fences and walls over 30 inches in height above an
established grade are erected in any zoning district along any required yard,
the property owner shall first obtain a permit from the village office. A fence
permit fee shall be charged based upon the village’s regular building permit
fee.
      (2)   The property owner is responsible for locating all property lines
on which the fence is to be constructed.
   (C)   Front yard fences. Fences constructed between the front building
setback line and the front lot line shall not exceed 36 inches in height.
Corner lots shall be considered to front on two sides.
   (D)   Side yard fences. Side yard fences back of the front setback line may
not exceed 72 inches in height.
   (E)   Rear yard fences. Rear yard fences may not exceed 72 inches in height.
   (F)   Obstruction of vision. No fence or retaining wall shall be constructed
or maintained if it will obstruct traffic vision.
   (G)   Visibility of alley approaches.
      (1)   On the street side of all lots where an alley enters the street
right-of-way, a triangular clear vision zone shall be maintained. Such zone
shall measure ten feet into the lots, as measured along the property line, and
20 feet parallel to the street, measured from the edge of any alley away from
the alley, along the property line.
      (2)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrub over 36 inches in height shall be
erected or maintained within the above defined clear vision zone.
   (H)   Fences on utility easements.
      (1)   Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, any
fence, or part thereof, erected within that part of any lot, block or other
tract of land which is subject to an easement for the construction,
maintenance, operation or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm sewer or
electric power, telephone or other utility poles, cables or lines shall be
constructed of such material and so designed as to be readily removable, as
determined by the Village Utilities Superintendent.
      (2)   Such fences shall be subject to removal by or upon request of the
owner of the easement (the village) whenever necessary to enable the owner of
the easement to enjoy the easement and, if removed or replaced, shall be
removed or replaced at the expense of the owner of the premises.
   (I)   Jurisdiction. This section shall extend to and apply to fences on land
situated in the zoning jurisdiction of the village; provided, however, that
barbed wire fencing shall be allowed on lands outside the village limits when
the land is used to pasture animals.
(Prior Code, § 9-701) (Ord. 152, passed 6-15-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.03 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building Code. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses for
materials in buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, relocated and converted, the B.O.C.A. Basic Building Code,
recommended by the Building Officials Conference of America, Inc. and printed
in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to
all amended editions as though printed in full herein. One copy of the Building
Code is on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and is available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Building
Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 9-201)
   (B)   Housing Code. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses for
materials in houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, relocated and converted, the Basic Housing Code, as published by the
Building Officials Conference of America, Inc., printed in book or pamphlet
form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions
as though printed in full herein. One copy of the Housing Code is on file at
the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Housing Code shall be
controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 9-301)
   (C)   Plumbing Code. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable installation, methods of connection and uses
of materials in the installation of plumbing and heating, the Uniform Plumbing
Code, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and printed in
book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all
amended editions as though printed in full herein, insofar as said Code does
not conflict with state statutes. One copy of the Plumbing Code is on file at
the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Plumbing Code shall be
controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 9-401)
   (D)   Electrical Code. The National Electric Code, as recommended by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters, printed in book or pamphlet form, in
addition to all amended editions as though printed in full herein are adopted
to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and
fireproof installation, methods of construction and uses of materials in the
installation of electrical wiring and appliances. One copy of the Electrical
Code is on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer and is available
for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 9-501)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132 and 18-2146
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.15 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any
building or structure within the village without a written permit to do so.
Application may be made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall include the
present and future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route,
the equipment to be used and such other information as the Board of Trustees
may require. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by
the County Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the
moving of buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the
real estate upon which the building is presently located.
   (B)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the application to the Board
of Trustees or its designee for approval of the proposed route over which the
building is to be moved. Upon approval, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue
the permit, provided that a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check or
cash in an amount set by motion of the Board of Trustees, and conditioned upon
moving the building without doing damage to any private or village property, is
filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the granting of any permit.
   (C)   No moving permit shall be required to move a building that is ten feet
wide or less, and 20 feet long or less, and when in a position to move, 15 feet
high or less.
   (D)   In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover to
interfere with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line, the
company or companies owning, using or operating the poles, wires or line shall,
upon proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by disconnecting
the poles, wires or lines relative to the building moving operation. All
expense of the disconnection, removal or related work shall be paid in advance
by the licensee unless the disconnection or work is furnished on different
terms as provided in the company’s franchise.
   (E)   Whenever the moving of any building necessitates interference with a
water main, sewer main, pipes or wire belonging to the village, notice in
writing of the time and route of the building moving operation shall be given
to the various officials in charge of the village utility departments, who
shall proceed on behalf of the village and at the expense of the mover to make
such disconnections and do such work as is necessary.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.16 DEPOSIT.
   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the Building
Inspector or other designated official shall inspect the premises and report to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer as to the extent of damages, if any, resulting from
the relocation and whether any village laws have been violated during the
operation. Upon a satisfactory report from the Building Inspector or other
designated official, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall return the corporate
surety bond, cash or check deposited by the applicant. In the event the
basement, foundation or portion thereof is not properly filled, covered or in a
clean and sanitary condition, the Board of Trustees may apply the money
deposited for the purpose of defraying the expense of correcting the condition.
If the expense of correcting the hazardous condition is greater than the amount
of the deposit set by the Board of Trustees, the Board of Trustees may recover
the excess expense by civil suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.
BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.30 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall be the village official who shall have
the duty of enforcing all village building and housing regulations, if any. He
or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the
village as often as necessary to ensure compliance with all village ordinances.
He or she shall have the power and authority to order, at the direction of the
Board of Trustees, all work stopped on any construction, alteration or
relocation which violates any provisions prescribed in any village building and
housing regulations. He or she shall, at the direction of the Board of
Trustees, issue permission to continue any construction, alteration or
relocation when the Board of Trustees is satisfied that no provision will be
violated.
   (B)   If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within one hour. This written order may be served by any village
police officer. In the event that the village has building and housing
regulations and the Board of Trustees fails to appoint a Building Inspector,
the chief village law enforcement officer shall be the Building Inspector ex
officio.
§ 150.31 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 151: WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
Section
   
151.01   Findings and purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Conditional use permit
   
151.04   Conditional use permit standards
   
151.05   Abandonment
   
151.06   Violation
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The village finds that wind energy is an abundant, renewable and non-
polluting energy resource and that its conversion to electricity will reduce
its dependence on nonrenewable energy sources and decrease the air and water
pollution that results from the use of conventional energy sources. Distributed
small wind energy systems will also enhance the reliability and power quality
of the power grid, reduce peak power demands and help diversify the village’s
energy supply portfolio.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this chapter to accommodate distributing
generation/small wind energy systems in appropriate locations while minimizing
any adverse, visual, safety and environmental impacts of the system. In
addition, this chapter provides a permitting process for small wind energy
systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and
standards established herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-801)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FALL ZONE. The potential fall area for the small wind energy system. It is
measured by using 100% of the total height as the radius around the center
point of the base of the tower.
   FLICKER. A moving shadow created by the sun shining on the rotating blades
of the wind turbine.
   METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER). Includes the tower, base plate, anchors,
guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction
vanes, booms to hold equipment for anemometers and vanes, data loggers,
instrument wiring and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or
transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for
either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a
given location.
   NET METERING. The difference between the electricity supplied over the
electric distribution system and the electricity generated by the small wind
energy system which is fed back into the electric distribution system over a
billing period.
   POWER GRID. The transmission system created to balance the supply and demand
of electricity for consumers in the village.
   SHADOW. The outline created on the surrounding area by the sun shining on
the small wind energy system.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which
has a rated capacity of 60 kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for on-
site consumption.
   TOTAL HEIGHT. A vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind
turbine blade when it is at its highest point.
   TOWER. The monopole or guyed monopole structure that supports a wind
turbine.
   TOWER HEIGHT. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower
excluding the wind turbine.
   WIND TURBINE. The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion
components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic
energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity.
(Prior Code, § 9-802)
§ 151.03 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   No small wind energy system shall be erected, constructed, installed
or modified without first receiving a conditional use permit in accordance with
the zoning regulations of the village. Small wind energy systems shall be
permitted by conditional use in all zoning districts where structures of any
sort are allowed.
   (B)   A building permit shall be required for the installation or
modification of a small wind energy system. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, a site plan shall be submitted to the Village Planning Commission. The
applicant shall follow the procedural requirements of the Planning Commission
in applying for a building permit and conditional use permit. Any site plan
shall include the following:
      (1)   Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property;
      (2)   Location, dimensions and types of existing major structures on the
property;
      (3)   Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy
anchors and associated equipment;
      (4)   Setback requirements as outlined in this chapter;
      (5)   The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property;
      (6)   Any overhead utility lines;
      (7)   Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height and tower type (free-standing or guyed);
      (8)   If the small wind energy system will be connected to the power
grid, documentation shall be provided regarding the notification of the intent
with the utility regarding the applicant’s installation of a small wind energy
system;
      (9)   Tower foundation blueprints or drawings;
      (10)   Tower blueprint or drawings;
      (11)   Sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine manufacturer or
a qualified engineer;
      (12)   Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code;
      (13)   Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation
Administration requirements; and
      (14)   A site plan must be stamped by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the state.
   (C)   The construction of a meteorological (met) tower for the purpose of
collecting data for a small wind energy system shall abide by the following
requirements.
      (1)   The construction, installation or modification of a met tower shall
require a building permit and shall conform to all applicable sections of the
B.O.C.A. Basic Building Code.
      (2)   Met towers shall be permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed
three years.
      (3)   Met towers shall adhere to the small wind energy system standards.
      (4)   A conditional use permit is not required to construct, install or
modify a met tower. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the village
shall ensure that the met tower complies with the small energy system
standards.
(Prior Code, § 9-803)
§ 151.04 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS.
   Through the conditional use permit process, the small wind energy system
shall be evaluated for compliance with the following standards.
   (A)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Small wind energy systems shall be set back a distance equal to
100% of the total height from:
         (a)   Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is
granted by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road;
         (b)   Any overhead utility lines;
         (c)   All property lines, unless the affected landowner provides
written permission through a recorded easement allowing the small wind energy
system’s fall zone to overlap with the abutting property; and
         (d)   Any travelways, to include, but not be limited to, driveways,
parking lots, nature trails or sidewalks.
      (2)   In addition to the total height setback requirement of division (A)
(1) above, small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal
structures for the zoning district in which the system is located.
      (3)   The setback shall be measured to the center of the tower’s base.
      (4)   Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind
energy system setback requirements.
   (B)   Tower.
      (1)   Wind turbines may only be attached to free-standing or guy-wired
monopole towers. Lattice towers are explicitly prohibited.
      (2)   The tower shall not exceed 80 feet in height on any parcel of one-
half acre or less. On parcels greater in size than one-half acre, height shall
be limited only by the clear fall radius or by FAA regulations.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed tower height
does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer of the wind turbine.
   (C)   Sound level. Noise generated by the small wind energy system shall not
exceed 60 decibels, measured at the property line, except during short-term
events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
   (D)   Shadowing; flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a
manner that does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts. The
applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does not have significant
adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through siting or
mitigation.
   (E)   Signs. All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the
small wind energy system, except as follows:
      (1)   Manufacturer’s or installer’s identification on the wind turbine;
and
      (2)   Appropriate warning signs and placards.
   (F)   Code compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the B.O.C.A. Basic Building Code.
   (G)   Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with
all applicable Federal Aviation Administration limitations and requirements
regarding installations close to airports. Evidence of compliance or non-
applicability shall be submitted with the application.
   (H)   Visual impacts. It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose
some visual impact due to the tower height needed to access the wind resources.
The purpose of this division (H) is to reduce the visual impacts without
restricting the owner’s access to the wind resources.
      (1)   The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system’s visual impact will be
minimized for surrounding neighbors and the community. This may include, but
not be limited to, information regarding site selection, turbine design or
appearance and buffering and screening of ground mounted electrical and control
equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground.
      (2)   The color of the small energy wind system shall either be the stock
color from the manufacturer or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color
that blends in with the surrounding environment.
      (3)   A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless
such lighting is required, and the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA
determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small
wind energy system.
   (I)   Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is to be
connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to all
applicable state statutes.
   (J)   Access.
      (1)   All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
      (2)   A tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step
bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of
eight feet above the ground.
(Prior Code, § 9-804) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be
abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the village by certified
U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuance of operations.
   (B)   (1)   Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of
abandonment or discontinuance of use. This period may be extended at the
request of the owner at the discretion of the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, PHYSICALLY REMOVE shall include,
but not be limited to:
         (a)   Removal of the wind turbine and tower and related aboveground
structures; and
         (b)   Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to
its natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below grade
foundation may remain in the after conditions.
   (C)   In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system
shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out of service
for a continuous 12-month period. After the 12 months of non-service or
inoperability, the Village Board of Trustees may issue a notice of abandonment
to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the right to
respond to the notice of abandonment within 30 days from notice receipt date.
The Village Board of Trustees shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and
notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides
information that demonstrates the small wind energy system has not been
abandoned.
   (D)   If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment, or if
after review and a determination by a designated member of the Board of
Trustees that a small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued,
the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind turbine and
tower at the owner’s sole expense within three months of receipt of the notice
of abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small wind energy
system after the notice of abandonment procedure, the village shall have the
authority to enter the subject property, physically remove the small wind
energy system and assess the cost of removal to the property upon which the
system was located in the manner provided for assessing nuisance abatement
costs.
(Prior Code, § 9-805)
§ 151.06 VIOLATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a small wind
energy system that is not in compliance with this chapter or with any condition
contained in the conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-806) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   In the event of violation of this chapter, any structure constructed in
violation shall be deemed a nuisance, and the village may proceed by a suit in
equity to enjoin and abate the nuisance in the manner provided by law, or,
whenever in any action it is established that such a nuisance exists, the court
may, together with the fine and penalty imposed, enter an order of abatement as
part of the judgment in the case. In addition thereto, any person violating any
of the terms of this chapter shall be fined $100 for each day that the
violation continues.
(Prior Code, § 9-807)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOME COURTS AND TRAILER COURTS
Section
   
152.01   Standards adopted by reference
   
152.02   Permit required
   
152.03   Certificate of compliance
   
152.04   Register
   
152.05   Site requirements
   
152.06   Refuse
   
152.07   Supervision
§ 152.01 STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements to
establish, operate and maintain a mobile home park in the municipality, the
Uniform Standard Code For Mobile Home Parks, being 178 Neb. Admin. Code §§ 001
et seq., as published by the State Department of Health and printed in pamphlet
form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as
though printed in full herein.
   (B)   The provisions of the Uniform Standard Code For Mobile Home Parks and
the requirements of this chapter shall be controlling throughout the
municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. One copy of the Uniform
Standard Code For Mobile Home Parks is on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk-Treasurer and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 10-201)
§ 152.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate
any trailer court or mobile home court within the limits of the municipality,
unless he or she holds a valid permit issued by the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer
in the name of such person for the specific trailer court or mobile home court.
Applications for permits shall be made to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer, who
shall issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of
this chapter, as evidenced by a certificate of compliance, which certificate
shall show compliance with applicable legal requirements. No permit shall be
transferable. Every person holding a trailer court or mobile home court permit
shall give notice in writing to the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer within 72 hours
after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of any
interest in or control of any trailer court or mobile home court. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of the trailer court or mobile home court.
   (B)   Presently operating trailer courts and mobile home courts as of the
effective date of this chapter may continue their operation; provided, that
they meet the court development standards herein provided and, further, that
they fully comply with the mobile home or trailer stand requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-202) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.03 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   A certificate of compliance with all resolutions, ordinances and regulations
regarding mobile home park licensing and zoning, health, plumbing, electrical,
building, fire prevention and all other applicable ordinances and regulations
shall be a prior requirement for granting a certificate of occupancy to the
owner of the park.
(Prior Code, § 10-203)
§ 152.04 REGISTER.
   A mobile home park operator shall keep a register containing the following
information for each occupied mobile home:
   (A)   Full name of the mobile home owner and principal occupant;
   (B)   Make, model, year and size of mobile home;
   (C)   State and number of vehicle registration;
   (D)   Number and date of lot rental and/or vacancy; and
   (E)   Whether or not the owner is in the military service.
(Prior Code, § 10-204)
§ 152.05 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
    The following site requirements apply to mobile home courts and trailer
courts within the municipality.
   (A)   The park site shall be graded to ensure drainage of surface and
subsurface water and sewage and freedom from stagnant pools, erosion or
flooding.
   (B)   Each lot shall be defined by permanent corner stakes and identified
with a permanent marker showing the lot number corresponding to the approved
plot plan.
   (C)   Screening shall be provided and maintained between the park and
adjacent properties and roadways in the form of shrubbery or fencing, as the
governing body requires.
   (D)   There shall be two off-street parking spaces per unit.
   (E)   Minimum street width shall be as follows:
      (1)   No parking on street: 25-foot minimum improved width;
      (2)   Parking, one side only: 30-foot minimum improved width; and
      (3)   Parking, both sides: 36-foot minimum improved width.
   (F)   All mobile home drives will be maintained by the owner in a
satisfactory and safe condition with access to dedicated streets provided.
Parks of over 50 units may be required to provide additional access points for
emergency access safety.
   (G)   Trash collection receptacles shall be provided for each unit and
properly screened from view.
   (H)   Walkways shall be provided adjacent to streets on an interior system.
   (I)   Lighting shall be provided with a minimum of 0.3 footcandles on all
driveways and walks.
   (J)   The mobile home or trailer stand shall be provided with anchors and
tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete “dead men” eyelets imbedded in
concrete foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other
devices securing the stability of the mobile home or trailer. The tie-down
devices shall be compatible with the foundation system provided for the mobile
home or trailer such that the tie-downs are designed to resist the action of
frost in the same manner as the foundation system.
   (K)   The skirting of all mobile homes and trailers is required. Such
skirting shall not attach a mobile home or trailer permanently to the ground
but shall be sufficient to withstand wind load requirements and shall not
provide a harborage for junk or rodents nor create a fire hazard. Such skirting
shall be provided with removable access panels sufficient to provide easy
access to all utility connection points of the mobile home or trailer and its
subsequent connection to the utility risers if they are located within the
skirted area.
(Prior Code, § 10-205) (Ord. 152, passed 6-15-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06 REFUSE.
   (A)   Refuse, generally. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a
trailer or mobile home court shall be managed so as not to create health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or
air pollution.
(Prior Code, § 10-206)
   (B)   Refuse storage.
      (1)   Refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof
containers which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any trailer or
mobile home.
      (2)    Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
store properly all refuse and otherwise in conformity with §§
51.15 through
51.20.
(Prior Code, § 10-207) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 SUPERVISION.
   The person to whom a permit for a trailer court or mobile home court is
issued shall provide adequate personnel to maintain the court, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 10-208)
CHAPTER 153: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
Village Property
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Maintenance and control
   
153.03   Permitted use of public street space
   
153.04   Prohibited obstructions
   
153.05   Overhanging branches
   
153.06   Cutting into paving, curb or sidewalk
Sale and Acquisition of Property; Public Works
   
153.20   Sale and conveyance; real property
   
153.21   Sale and conveyance; personal property
Sidewalks
   
153.35   Requirement to keep clean
   
153.36   Construction at owner’s initiative
   
153.37   Construction and repair at village direction
Streets and Alleys
   
153.50   Opening, widening, improving or vacating
   
153.51   Construction notice
   
153.52   Maintenance; graveling
   
153.53   Names and numbers
   
153.54   Excavation
   
153.55   Driving stakes
   
153.56   Mixing concrete
   
153.57   Harmful liquids
   
153.58   Snow, debris and the like on street prohibited
   
153.59   Placement of culverts in street right-of-way
VILLAGE PROPERTY
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SIDEWALK SPACE. The portion of a street between curb lines and adjacent
property lines.
   UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT. The village official with general charge,
direction and control of streets and sidewalks. If one official is responsible
for streets and another official is responsible for sidewalks, UTILITIES
SUPERINTENDENT shall mean whichever one is appropriate in the context the term
is used.
§ 153.02 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   The Board of Trustees shall have the care, supervision and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within
the village and shall cause such highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public
squares and commons to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances.
(Neb. RS 17-567)
§ 153.03 PERMITTED USE OF PUBLIC STREET SPACE.
   Any person engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking
or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along
any street, may occupy the public street space with the building material and
equipment as long as is necessary if such person makes application to and
receives a permit to do so in writing from the Utilities Superintendent. No
permit shall authorize the occupancy of more than one-third of the roadway of
the public space adjacent to the real estate on which the building or sidewalk
is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, wrecked or repaired. A suitable
passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public space included
in the permit, which passageway shall be protected and lighted in the manner
required by the Utilities Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.04 PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, or encumber, by
fences, gates, buildings, structures or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys
or sidewalks.
   (B)   The public ways and property shall be considered to be obstructed when
the owner or occupant of the adjacent property permits or suffers to remain on
any premises owned or controlled by him or her any hedge, shrubbery, bush or
similar growth within two feet adjacent to the lot line, whether there is a
sidewalk abutting or adjoining the premises or not. It shall be the duty of
owners and occupants to at all times keep trimmed and pruned all such similar
growth.
   (C)   Trees and shrubs growing upon the lot line partially on public ground
and partially upon the abutting property, or wholly upon the abutting property,
and interfering with the use, making or construction of any public improvement
or so that the roots thereof interfere with any utility wire or pipe shall be
deemed an obstruction. Such trees and shrubs and their roots may be removed by
the village at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the trees or
shrubs are partially or wholly located if the owner fails or neglects, after
notice, to do so.
   (D)   When any obstruction described in this section is determined to exist,
the village may proceed against the owner or occupant of the property adjacent
to the sidewalk space as provided in §
90.17.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.05 OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting
or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extend the branches of
trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the
height of at least eight feet above the surface of the walk and at least 14
feet above the surface of the street or to the heights otherwise specified by
the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Whenever the branches or limbs of any tree extend over streets or
sidewalks contrary to such provisions so as to interfere with the lighting of
the street from street lights or with the convenience of the public using the
street or sidewalk, the village may proceed against the owner or occupant of
the property abutting or adjacent to the street or sidewalk as provided in §
90.17.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.06 CUTTING INTO PAVING, CURB OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the Board of
Trustees. Before any person obtains a permit, he or she shall inform the
Village Clerk-Treasurer of the place where such cutting is to be done, and it
shall be the duty of the Utilities Superintendent to inspect the proposed place
of entry into the paving, sidewalk or curb.
   (B)   When cutting into any paving, curb or sidewalk, it shall be the duty
of the party to comply with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by
the Board or the Village Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the
opening made, he or she shall inform the Utilities Superintendent, who shall
supervise and inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the
opening.
   (C)   It shall be discretionary with the Board to order the Utilities
Superintendent, under the supervision and inspection of the Village Engineer or
the Committee of the Board on Streets and Alleys, to do the cutting and closing
of the paving, curb or sidewalk and charge the costs thereof to the party who
obtained the permit. The Board may consent to the cutting and closing of the
paving, curb or sidewalk by the party holding the permit.
   (D)   Before any permit is issued by the Board, the applicant for the permit
shall deposit with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the
Board for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a
per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by
the village for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk in the
event the work is done by the village. If the Board elects to require the
applicant to replace the paving, curb or sidewalk, the deposit shall be
retained by the village until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the
Utilities Superintendent or of the Committee of the Board on Streets and
Alleys.
   (E)   In addition to making the deposit, the applicant shall, before any
permit is issued, execute a bond to the village with a good and sufficient
surety to be approved by the Board in a sum set by resolution.
Penalty, see §
10.99
SALE AND ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; PUBLIC WORKS
§ 153.20 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) below, the power of the village to
convey any real property owned by it, including land used for park purposes and
public squares, except real property used in the operation of public utilities,
shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at public auction or by
sealed bid of that property and the manner and terms of such sales, except that
the property shall not be sold at public auction or by sealed bid when:
      (1)   The property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
      (2)   The property is being conveyed to another public agency; or
      (3)   The property consists of streets and alleys.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may establish a minimum price for real property
at which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a sealed bid.
   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of property described in division (A) above and the terms of
such sales shall be published once each week for three consecutive weeks in a
legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the village.
   (D)   (1)   If, within 30 days after the third publication of the notice, a
remonstrance petition against the sale conforming to Neb. RS 32-628 is signed
by registered voters of the village equal in number to 30% of the registered
voters of the village voting at the last regular village election held therein
and is filed with the Board of Trustees, that property shall not then, nor
within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the petition falls
upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected
within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or
postmarked on or before the next business day.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the petition, the Board of Trustees, with the
aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the petition. The Board
of Trustees shall deliver the petition to the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall issue to the Board of Trustees a written receipt that the petition
is in the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each person signing
the petition with the voter registration records to determine if each signer
was a registered voter on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the Board of Trustees. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
also compare the signer’s printed name, street and number or voting precinct
and village or post office address with the voter registration records to
determine whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address
shall be presumed to be valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct and
village or post office address match the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the Board of Trustees. The determinations of the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the Board of
Trustees finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and
addresses with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to
determine the validity of the petition, the sufficiency of the petition and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception and
misrepresentation in the petition process.
      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and
address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the
invalidity of the signature or address is other than the nonregistration of the
signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall set forth the reason
for the invalidity of the signature. If the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more than once
to the petition and that only one person is registered by that name, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification
under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and shall count
only the earliest dated signature.
      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the
Board of Trustees the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a
valid petition. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the
petition and the certifications to the Board of Trustees within 40 days after
the receipt of the remonstrance from the Board of Trustees. The delivery shall
be by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page
shall be counted.
      (6)   The Board of Trustees shall, within 30 days after the receipt of
the petition and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive
testimony regarding them. The Board of Trustees shall, following the hearing,
vote on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the petition
if sufficient valid signatures have been received.
   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the village may be
conveyed without consideration to the state for state armory sites or, if
acquired for state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with
the conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 through 18-1006.
   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale, publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale and passing of the 30-day right-of-remonstrance
period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall be confirmed by passage
of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and terms of the sale.
(Neb. RS 17-503)
   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) above shall not apply to the sale of real
property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real property the
total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following passage of the
resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the sale shall be
posted in three prominent places within the village for a period of not less
than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a
general description of the property offered for sale and state the terms and
conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an ordinance may be
required.
(Neb. RS 17-503.01)
§ 153.21 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The power of the village to convey any personal property owned by it
shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms of
the sale. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the
property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places within
the village for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the
property. If the fair market value of the property is greater than $5,000,
notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in the village at least seven days prior to the sale of the
property. The notice shall give a general description of the property offered
for sale and state the terms and conditions of the sale.
   (B)   Personal property may be conveyed notwithstanding the procedure in
division (A) above when:
      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs; or
      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency.
(Neb. RS 17-503.02)
SIDEWALKS
§ 153.35 REQUIREMENT TO KEEP CLEAN.
   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any
vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice
or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any snow, sleet,
ice, mud or other substance to remain upon the sidewalk. Unless the Board of
Trustees has provided otherwise, all sidewalks within the business district
shall be cleaned within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the
storm or fall of snow shall have taken place during the night, in which case
the sidewalk shall be cleaned before 9:00 a.m. the following day, and sidewalks
within the residential areas of the village shall be cleaned within 24 hours
after the cessation of the storm.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.36 CONSTRUCTION AT OWNER’S INITIATIVE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk shall do so only as provided in this section. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The permit shall give
a description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The Utilities Superintendent shall issue the desired permit unless
good cause appears why the permit should be denied, except that if it is
desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed
location, grade or elevation, the Utilities Superintendent shall submit the
application to the Board of Trustees for determination as to whether the permit
should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
or cause to be constructed, such sidewalk at any other location, grade or
elevation than so designated by the village. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade or elevation, and if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the Utilities
Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.37 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR AT VILLAGE DIRECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees may construct and repair sidewalks or
cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Board of
Trustees deems necessary and assess the expense of such construction or repairs
on the property in front of which such construction or repairs are made, after
having given notice:
         (a)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in the village; and
         (b)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such construction or repair.
      (2)   The powers conferred under this section are in addition to those
provided in Neb. RS 17-509 through 17-521 and may be exercised without creating
an improvement district.
      (3)   If the owner of any property abutting any street or avenue or part
thereof fails to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of the owner’s
property within the time and in the manner as directed and requested by the
Board of Trustees, after having received due notice to do so, the Board of
Trustees may cause the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and may assess
the cost of such construction or repairs against the property.
(Neb. RS 17-522)
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired in conformity with
such plans and specifications as may be approved by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Assessments made under the provisions of this section shall be made
and assessed in the following manner.
      (1)   Such assessment shall be made by the Board of Trustees at a special
meeting, by a resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries
sustained in consequence of such improvements, and the amount charged against
the same, which, with the vote, shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the
time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the village
at least four weeks before the same shall be held or, in lieu thereof, personal
service may be made upon persons owning or occupying property to be assessed.
      (2)   All such assessments shall be known as special assessments for
improvements and shall be levied and collected as a separate tax, in addition
to the taxes for general revenue purposes, and shall be placed on the tax roll
for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as
other village taxes.
(Neb. RS 17-524)
Statutory reference:
    Authority to improve through sidewalk district, see Neb. RS 19-2417 through
19-2419
STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 153.50 OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING OR VACATING.
   (A)   (1)   The village shall have the power to open, widen or otherwise
improve or vacate any street, avenue, alley or lane within the limits of the
village and also to create, open and improve any new street, avenue, alley or
lane. All damages sustained by the citizens of the village, or by the owners of
the property therein, shall be ascertained in that manner as shall be provided
by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated, such street,
avenue, alley or lane shall revert to the owners of the abutting real estate,
one-half on each side thereof, and become a part of that property, unless the
village reserves title in the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title
is retained by the village, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or
leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests
of the village.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to the land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of that property, unless the
village reserves title in the ordinance vacating a portion of such street,
avenue, alley or lane. If title is retained by the village, such property may
be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall
be deemed in the best interests of the village.
      (4)   When the village vacates all or any portion of a street, avenue,
alley or lane, the village shall, within 30 days after the effective date of
the vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the Register
of Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is located to be indexed
against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following.
         (a)   There is reserved to the village the right to maintain, operate,
repair and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property is
vacated there.
         (b)   There is reserved to the village, any public utilities and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew and operate water
mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines, sound
and signal transmission lines, and other similar services and equipment and
appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, above, on or
below the surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the
time title to the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general
public or the abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish
such purposes at any and all reasonable times.
(Neb. RS 17-558)
   (B)   The village shall have the power to create, open, widen or extend any
street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area or other public way, or annul,
vacate or discontinue such street, avenue, alley, area or public way.
(Neb. RS 17-559)
§ 153.51 CONSTRUCTION NOTICE.
   The Utilities Superintendent shall notify the owners in fee simple of real
estate abutting a street, alley or part thereof which is to be put under
contract for paving or repaving. Notice shall also be given to all gas,
electric service and telephone companies. Notice shall also be given to all
consumers of gas, water and sewer services which will be discontinued during
such construction. Said notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper
at least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party
undertaking such construction, and said notice shall state at what date
connections must be made and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer and
underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving of the
street under the condition that after the expiration of such time, permits for
excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after the
completion of the pavement in said street or alley and the formal final
acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 8-307)
§ 153.52 MAINTENANCE; GRAVELING.
   It shall be the duty of the municipality, through the Utilities
Superintendent, to keep all streets properly maintained and supplied with
adequate gravel or other material in such a manner as to allow for the free
flowing of traffic throughout the municipality. It shall be unlawful for any
person other than officials of the municipality to spread gravel or other
material on the municipal streets or to alter the condition of the roadways in
any manner other than what would occur during the normal use of said streets
and roads.
(Prior Code, § 8-308) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.53 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   The Board of Trustees may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or
provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business
purposes and located along those streets shall retain those numbers as the
Board of Trustees may require. It shall be the duty of the Utilities
Superintendent, upon the erection of any new building, to assign the proper
numbers to the building and give notice to the owner and occupant of the same.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.54 EXCAVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or
streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the
Utilities Superintendent authorizing those excavations.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.55 DRIVING STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind
into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written
consent of the Utilities Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.56 MIXING CONCRETE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.57 HARMFUL LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street any waste gasoline, kerosene or high lubricating oils, which
damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.58 SNOW, DEBRIS AND THE LIKE ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to place, push or deposit snow, sleet, ice or mud, or
any debris, including leaves, grass and branches, from private property onto
the streets of the village.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference: 
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-557
§ 153.59 PLACEMENT OF CULVERTS IN STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The municipality may by resolution require any property owner to place a
culvert in the ditch beneath any driveway or access road onto a resident’s
property. Said culvert shall be located and constructed in a manner specified
by the Utilities Superintendent. Any person desiring to place a culvert in the
road ditch adjacent to his or her property shall first request permission to do
so and shall agree to construct said culvert in the manner designated by the
Utilities Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 8-309)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Findings of fact
   
154.03   Statement of purpose
   
154.04   Designation of current maps
   
154.05   Definitions
   
154.06   Storage of material and equipment
   
154.07   Flood-carrying capacity within any watercourse
   
154.08   Nonconforming use
   
154.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.10   Interpretation
   
154.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.12   Conflicting ordinances
Administration
   
154.25   Floodplain Administrator designation; duties; responsibilities
   
154.26   Permit procedures
   
154.27   Floodplain development permit application
   
154.28   Application review
   
154.29   Variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.40   Standards for subdivisions and other new developments
   
154.41   Water and sewage systems
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has in Neb. RS 31-1001 through 31-1022 assigned the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
Therefore, the Village Board of Trustees ordains as follows.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood hazard
areas of the village are subject to inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   General causes of flood losses. These flood losses are caused by:
      (1)   The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing
increases in flood heights and velocities; and
      (2)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §
154.02 by applying the provisions of this chapter to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for the
intended purposes because of flood hazard; and
   (D)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.04 DESIGNATION OF CURRENT MAPS.
   Until a flood hazard boundary map/flood insurance rate map has been
published, any development permit application shall meet the appropriate
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION OF EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the
risk premium applicable to the community.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. This term does
not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. The condition of flooding having a 1% chance of annual
occurrence.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The water surface elevation of the 100-year
flood.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. No. 97-348))
includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued; provided the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a
historic structure; provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the terms of a floodplain
management ordinance.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.06 STORAGE OF MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT.
   The storage or processing of materials that are in times of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if
not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation
or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.07 FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY WITHIN ANY WATERCOURSE.
   The governing body of the village will ensure that the flood-carrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained. The village will notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the state’s coordinating office (State Natural Resources
Commission) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and the
village will submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Moreover, the village will work with appropriate state and
federal agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood
Insurance Program in accordance with the National Disaster Protection Act of
1973.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   National Disaster Protection Act of 1973, see 42 U.S.C. Ch. 50
§ 154.08 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 36 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The utility
departments shall notify the Village Board in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period
of 36 months.
      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, except if it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the
cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existent easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances or resolutions inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions, or the flood
height may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that areas outside floodplain district
boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.12 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall take precedence over conflicting ordinances or
resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions. The governing body of the
village may, from time to time, amend this chapter to reflect any and all
changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations
of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, as published in 44 C.F.R. and the 1983 State Floodplain Management
Act.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   National Disaster Protection Act of 1973, see 42 U.S.C. Ch. 50
   1983 State Floodplain Management Act, see Neb. RS 31-1002 et seq.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.25 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATION; DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Local administrator responsibilities. The Village Clerk-Treasurer
hereby has these added responsibilities and is authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances or
resolutions of the village now in force or hereafter adopted, related to
zoning, subdivision or building codes.
   (B)   Additional responsibilities. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be
appointed to these additional responsibilities by resolution of the governing
body, and his or her appointment shall continue during good behavior and
satisfactory service. During temporary absence or disability of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, the governing body of the village shall designate an acting
administrator.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain
development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this chapter.
      (2)   Within special flood hazard areas, separate floodplain development
permits are required for all new construction, substantial improvements and
other developments, including the placement of manufactured homes.
   (B)   Application. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant
shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for
that purpose. Every such application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the
floodplain development permit for which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done
by lot, block, tract and house and street address or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or
development;
      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction;
      (5)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent who may
be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
      (6)   Within designated floodplain areas, be accompanied by elevations of
the lowest floor, including basement, or in the case of floodproofed
nonresidential structures, the elevation to which it shall be floodproofed.
Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer; and
      (7)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer (i.e., require a statement from the applicant that he
or she is aware that elevating or floodproofing structures above the minimum
levels will result in premium reduction, especially in the case of
nonresidential floodproofing when a minus one foot penalty is assessed at the
time of rating the structure for the policy premium.)
(Ord. 106, passed - -) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.27 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall review all development permit applications
to determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from
flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by
federal or state law.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.28 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   The Village Clerk-Treasurer, in reviewing all applications for new
construction, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of
manufactured homes and other development(s) (as defined in §
154.05) will:
   (A)   Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory
flood elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state or other
sources, until such other data is provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a flood insurance study, and require within special flood
hazard areas that the following performance standards be met.
      (1)   Prior to a floodway being designated. No development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within the identified floodplain unless the
applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial
improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated
developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any location.
      (2)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one
foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below such a level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the standards of this division (A)(3) are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the local administrator.
      (4)   Requirements for all new construction and substantial improvements.
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   (B)   Require the use of construction materials that are resistant to flood
damage;
   (C)   Require the use of construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage;
   (D)   Require that new structures be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
   (E)   New structures be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
   (F)   (1)   Assure that all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in
accordance with state laws, local building codes and FEMA guidelines.
      (2)   In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are
used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
         (a)   Over-the-top ties are provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at the intermediate
locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one
additional tie per side;
         (b)   Frame ties are provided at each corner of the home, with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
         (c)   All components of the anchoring system are capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
         (d)   Any additions to manufactured homes are similarly anchored.
   (G)   Assure that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas on sites:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      (4)   In all existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions on which a
manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of division (F) above.
   (H)   Assure that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within special
flood hazard areas that are not subject to the provisions of division (G) above
be elevated so that either:
      (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot
above the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of division (F)
above.
   (I)   Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within the
identified special flood hazard areas either be on the site for fewer than 180
consecutive days; be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or meet the
permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in this chapter. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
(Ord. 106, passed - -) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.29 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Village Board, as established by the village, shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Village Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by
the Village Clerk-Treasurer in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Neb. RS
19-912.
   (D)   In passing upon such applications, the Village Board shall consider:
      (1)   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards
specified in other sections of this chapter;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (3)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (12)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the following items (divisions (E)(2)
through (E)(5) below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances or resolutions.
      (5)   The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of
a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and such
construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions
as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.40 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   The governing body of the village shall review all subdivision applications
and other proposed new developments (including manufactured home parks or
subdivisions) and shall make findings of fact and assure that:
   (A)   All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
   (B)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than five acres
or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals regulatory flood
elevation data in special flood hazard areas;
   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
   (D)   All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.41 WATER AND SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   New and replacement water and sewage systems shall be constructed to
eliminate or minimize infiltration or discharge into floodwaters. Moreover, on-
site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or
contamination during flooding.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $100 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village or other
appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 106, passed - -)
CHAPTER 155: MUNICIPAL PLANNING; ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
   
155.02   Comprehensive development plan adopted by reference
Municipal Limits
   
155.15   Definition
   
155.16   Original plats
Subdivisions and Additions
   
155.30   Subdivisions and additions generally
   
155.31   Survey and plat
   
155.32   Surveyor’s certificate
   
155.33   Dedication
   
155.34   Streets and alleys
   
155.35   Approval of plat
   
155.36   Recording plat
   
155.37   Additions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning regulations for the village are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference for this code of ordinances. At least one copy of said document,
in book form marked or stamped “Official Copy,” as adopted in this section, and
to which shall be attached a published copy of the ordinance codified in this
section, to be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, shall be open to
inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. 115, passed 10-13-1999; Ord. 227, passed 3-11-2024)
§ 155.02 COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The updated comprehensive plan is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference for the village, to be known as “Comprehensive Plan 2110,” prepared
and published in book form. At least one copy of said document, in book form
marked or stamped “Official Copy,” as adopted in this section, and to which
shall be attached a published copy of the ordinance codified in this section,
to be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be open to inspection and
available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. 112, passed 4-14-1999)
MUNICIPAL LIMITS
§ 155.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPAL LIMITS. All additions, lots, lands, subdivisions and parcels of
ground included within the official municipal map and plat on file at the
office of the County Register of Deeds, having been by act or ordinance of the
governing body or by law duly annexed to, or made a part of, this municipality,
or having been by the act, authority, acquiescence, consent, platting and
dedication of their respective owners, created either as the original townsite,
or as additions to the municipality, are hereby declared to be within the
corporate limits of the municipality. Lawfully constituted additions or changes
in said municipal limits shall be indicated upon said map and plat by the
governing body after such addition or changes have been completed in accordance
with the ordinances of this municipality and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 11-101)
§ 155.16 ORIGINAL PLATS.
   Each and all plats, lots, blocks, additions, subdivisions, outlots and
parcels of ground included within the corporate limits of the municipality and
not vacated of record prior to the enactment of this chapter, including the
original plat of the municipality, are hereby accepted, approved and confirmed
as valid, and each and all of said lots, blocks, additions, subdivisions and
outlots as heretofore platted and recorded in the office of the County Register
of Deeds and not heretofore vacated, and all other parcels of ground included
within said corporate limits, are hereby declared to be within said
municipality and an integral part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 11-102)
SUBDIVISIONS AND ADDITIONS
§ 155.30 SUBDIVISIONS AND ADDITIONS GENERALLY.
   The owner of any tract of land within the corporate limits of the
municipality may lay out said land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues and
alleys as a suburban development or as an addition to the municipality upon
conformance to and compliance with the conditions herein and with state
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 11-201)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1002, 18-3301, 18-3307 and 19-902
§ 155.31 SURVEY AND PLAT.
   (A)   The owner or proprietor of any tract or parcel of land within the
corporate limits or within one mile thereof desiring to subdivide or lay out
said tract of land shall cause the same to be accurately surveyed and an
accurate map or plat thereof made with reference to known or permanent
monuments, and said map or plat shall explicitly describe the land so laid out.
The map or plat shall designate the tract as the “                Addition to
the Village of Mullen, Nebraska,” or “Subdivision of the Village of Mullen,
Nebraska,” whichever is appropriate.
   (B)   The lots and blocks shall be designated by numbers and the streets and
avenues by names coinciding with the streets and avenues of the municipality of
which they form continuations. The plat shall show the length and depth of the
lots and width and course of all streets, avenues and alleys, together with an
accurate plat of all lots, blocks and streets.
(Prior Code, § 11-202)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1003, 18-3301 and 19-902
§ 155.32 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   The map or plat shall be accompanied by a certificate from the surveyor
making said survey and plat stating that he or she accurately surveyed said
tract and the lots, blocks, streets, avenues and alleys are accurately shown
upon said map or plat.
(Prior Code, § 11-203)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1003 and 18-3301
§ 155.33 DEDICATION.
   Said map or plat shall have written thereon or attached thereto a dedication
to this municipality, for the use of the public, of all streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, squares and commons and all land set apart for public use or
dedicated to charitable, religious and educational purposes as therein
mentioned and described. Such dedication shall be signed by the owner of the
tract of land and shall be duly acknowledged as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 11-204)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1003 and 18-3306
§ 155.34 STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Streets and alleys laid out in any addition to or in any suburban
development of the municipality shall be continuous with and correspond in
direction and width to the streets and alleys of the municipality to which they
are an addition.
(Prior Code, § 11-205)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1003 and 18-3307
§ 155.35 APPROVAL OF PLAT.
   Before any such map or plat shall have any validity, it must first be
submitted to and be approved and accepted by the governing body of this
municipality and must have such acceptance and approval endorsed thereon;
provided, that, before any such map or plat shall be considered, approved or
accepted, the owner or proprietor shall pay or cause to be paid all taxes,
special taxes and assessments due thereon and shall produce a certificate
showing that all such taxes and assessments have been paid or canceled.
(Prior Code, § 11-206)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1002 and 19-902
§ 155.36 RECORDING PLAT.
   If a majority of all members of the governing body shall vote in favor of
such suburban development or annexation, an ordinance shall be prepared and
passed by the governing body granting such approval or declaring the annexation
of such territory to the corporate limits of this municipality and extending
the limits thereof accordingly, whichever is appropriate. An accurate map or
plat of such territory and said dedication as hereinbefore described, certified
by the engineer or surveyor and acknowledged and approved as provided by law in
such cases, shall at once be filed and recorded by the owner or proprietor of
such land in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County, together with a
certified copy of the ordinance granting approval or declaring such annexation,
under the seal of said municipality.
(Prior Code, § 11-207)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-916
§ 155.37 ADDITIONS.
   All additions to this municipality which have heretofore been approved and
accepted or which may hereafter be laid out in accordance with the provisions
herein and accepted and approved shall be and become incorporated in this
municipality for all purposes whatsoever, and inhabitants of such additions
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and be subject to all the
laws and regulations of said municipality.
(Prior Code, § 11-208)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-916
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   STREET VACATIONS
      
III.   ANNEXATIONS
      
IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Granting community antenna service/cable television franchise to
            the Consolidated Telephone Company. Actual details of the agreement
     - -    and the present rates, charges and fees are available at the
            Municipal Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
            (Prior Code, § 12-101)
            Granting cable television franchise to Galaxy Telecom, Inc. Actual
    - -    details of the agreement and the present rates, charges and fees
            are available at the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
            (Prior Code, § 12-201)
           
 
TABLE II: STREET VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Vacating part of the east-and-west 20-foot public alley
208      - -         lying between the west halves of Lot 3 and Lot 8, both in
                     Block 30 of the Original Town.
132      7-10-2002   Vacating the north half of southwest Fourth Street
                     adjacent to Block 7 in the Lillie C. Lowe Addition.
164      7-28-2008   Vacating a portion of the street crossing Block 8, Lillie
                     C. Lowe Addition.
225      8-3-2023    Vacating alley right-of- way in Block 32 in the Original
                     Town.
                    
 
TABLE III: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexing to the village the following described property:
121      11-14-2001  A tract of land located in Lot 2 and the northwest quarter
                     of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 24 North,
                     Range 32 West of the sixth PM of the village.
123      12-12-2001  Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
125      1-9-2002    Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
126      2-13-2002   Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
127      3-13-2002   Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
129      4-10-2002   Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
130      6-12-2002   Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
131      6-12-2002   Annexing to the village the property described in Exhibit
                     A of this ordinance.
                     Annexing to the village the following described property:
220      5-4-2022    A tract of land located in Lots 2 and 3, Section 17,
                     Township 24 North, Range 32 West of the sixth PM of the
                     village.
                    
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     3-15-  Rezoning the following described property from residential to
142  2004   commercial: The west 100 feet of Lot 3, Block 11, Cleavenger
            Addition to the Original Town.
158  2-15-  Rezoning the following described property from institutional to
     2007   industrial: All of Lot 8 of L.C. Lowe Addition.
171  5-17-  Rezoning the following described property from residential to
     2010   commercial: Lot 11, Block 3 of Humphrey’s Addition.
     4-5-   Rezoning the following described property from commercial to
196  2018   residential: Lot 1 and 2 and the east 15 feet of Lot 3 of Block 13
            of the Original Town.
     12-6-  Rezoning the following described property from commercial to
200  2018   residential: Lot 11 and 12, Block 3 of Humphrey’s Addition to the
            Original Town.
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Section Code Section
Neb. RS Section              Code Section
10-101 through 10-143        34.09
11-101                       30.03;
                             31.02
11-104                       31.01
11-105                       31.01
11-109                       31.01
11-110                       31.01
11-111                       31.01
11-112                       31.01
11-113                       31.01
11-114                       31.01
11-115                       31.01
11-116                       31.01
11-117                       31.01
11-118                       31.01
13-501 et seq.               34.23;
                             34.25
13-504                       34.22
13-505                       34.22
13-506                       34.23
13-507                       34.23
13-508                       34.24
13-509                       34.24
13-510                       34.26
13-518 through 13-522        34.23;
                             34.24
13-519                       33.04
13-606                       34.01
13-801 through 13-827        31.05
13-903                       34.04
13-2001 through 13-2043      51.04
16-227                       Ch. 92
16-230                       51.18—
                             51.20
16-231                       51.18—
                             51.20
16-246                       51.18—
                             51.20
16-318(3)                    31.25
16-901                       51.18—
                             51.20
17-149                       53.003;
                             53.007
17-149.01                    53.007
17-202                       30.01
17-203                       30.01
17-204                       30.03;
                             31.43
17-205                       31.43
17-207                       30.02;
                             110.15
                             31.20;
17-208                       32.15;
                             90.01;
                             90.02
17-209                       31.03
                             30.01;
17-209.02                    31.03;
                             31.22
17-210                       30.04;
                             30.25
17-213.01                    31.27
17-502                       11.01
17-503                       153.20
17-503.01                    153.20
17-503.02                    153.21
17-505                       10.99;
                             30.20
17-509 through 17-521        153.37
17-522                       153.37
17-524                       153.37
                             91.02;
                             91.21;
17-526                       91.22;
                             91.23;
                             91.25
17-531                       52.002
17-534                       52.002
17-536                       52.010
                             52.004;
                             52.007;
                             52.008;
17-537                       52.012;
                             52.014;
                             52.016;
                             52.017;
                             52.035
17-538                       52.022
17-539                       50.04
17-540                       34.08
17-541                       52.022
17-542                       52.006;
                             52.018
17-547                       91.02
17-549                       92.38
                             90.16;
17-555                       131.03;
                             131.04
                             131.01;
17-556                       132.50;
                             132.51
17-557                       131.04;
                             153.58
17-558                       153.50
17-559                       153.50
17-561                       110.02
17-563                       132.05
17-567                       153.02
17-568                       31.27
17-568.01                    31.27;
                             34.02
17-568.02                    34.02
17-574                       53.003
17-601.01                    33.06
17-601.02                    33.06
17-601.03                    33.06
17-602                       33.03
                             31.01;
17-604                       31.03;
                             31.20
17-605                       31.24
17-606                       31.25
17-606(2)                    31.25
17-607                       34.07
17-608                       34.08
17-609                       34.08
17-610                       31.26
17-611                       31.03
17-612                       31.03
                             30.23;
17-613                       30.25;
                             30.26;
                             34.02
                             10.15;
17-614                       30.23;
                             30.24;
                             30.27
17-614(3)                    30.24
17-616                       30.24
17-701                       34.20
17-702                       34.06;
                             34.41
17-706                       34.25
17-708                       34.03
17-709                       34.03
17-710                       34.05
17-711                       34.03
17-714                       34.04
17-715                       34.04
17-718                       32.30
17-902                       54.09—
                             54.11
17-902 through 19-904        54.02
17-906                       54.02
17-909                       54.02
17-919                       31.27
17-920                       131.03
17-925.01                    53.002;
                             53.006
17-948                       93.01
17-948 through 17-952        93.01
17-949                       93.01
17-951                       93.01
17-952                       93.01
17-953 et seq.               32.30
17-1001                      150.03
17-1002                      155.30;
                             155.35
17-1003                      155.31—
                             155.34
18-131                       30.25
                             30.20;
18-132                       92.20;
                             150.03
18-305 through 18-312        31.04
18-412.01                    34.02
18-1001 through 18-1006      153.20
18-1701                      31.24
18-1719                      132.05
                             30.02;
                             90.15;
18-1720                      90.16;
                             130.03;
                             132.02
18-1736                      71.25
                             71.26;
18-1737                      71.27;
                             71.33
18-1738                      71.34
18-1738.01                   71.34
18-1741.01                   71.25;
                             71.34
18-1741.04                   71.34
18-1741.06                   71.34
18-1748                      53.061
18-1752                      51.18
18-1756                      34.02
18-1801 through 18-1805      34.09
18-2101 through 18-2157      32.18
18-2146                      150.03
18-2801 et seq.              34.20;
                             34.22
18-2804                      34.01
                             31.27;
18-3301                      155.30—
                             155.32
18-3306                      155.33
18-3307                      155.30;
                             155.34
19-710                       90.18
Ch. 19, art. 9               32.17
                             92.20;
19-902                       155.30;
                             155.31;
                             155.35
19-912                       154.29
19-915                       30.27
19-916                       155.36;
                             155.37
19-922                       30.20
19-925 through 19-933        32.17
19-1101                      31.25
19-1102                      31.24
19-1103                      31.24;
                             31.25
19-1301                      34.06
19-1302                      34.06
19-1303                      34.06
19-1304                      34.06
19-1305                      52.002
19-1309                      34.40
19-1310                      34.40
19-1311                      34.40
19-1312                      34.40
19-2101 through 19-2106      51.01;
                             51.02
19-2106                      50.04;
                             51.16
19-2417 through 19-2419      153.37
19-2701                      53.003
19-2902                      34.01
19-2903                      34.01
19-2904                      34.01
19-2905                      34.01
19-2906 through 19-2909      34.01
19-3701                      30.26
20-203                       91.28
20-301 through 20-322        94.08
20-301 through 20-344        94.01
21-608                       92.60
23-122                       31.24
25-2703                      30.20
28-101                       91.06
28-109                       91.28
Ch. 28, art. 3               111.16
28-301 through 28-322        94.03;
                             94.08
28-301 through 28-344        94.03
28-308 through 28-310        131.02
Ch. 28, art. 4               111.16
28-401                       94.02
28-431                       132.35
28-510                       130.02
28-511                       130.02
28-512                       54.16
28-520                       91.28;
                             130.01
28-521                       91.28;
                             130.01
                             93.02;
28-523                       130.05;
                             132.04
Ch. 28, art. 7               111.16
Ch. 28, art. 8               111.16
28-907                       92.08
28-908                       92.02;
                             92.04
Ch. 28, art. 10              111.16
28-1008                      91.05;
                             91.28
28-1009                      91.05
28-1012                      91.05
28-1013                      91.05
Ch. 28, art. 11              111.16
Ch. 28, art. 12              111.16
28-1202                      132.51
28-1213 through 28-1239      92.35
28-1219                      32.35
28-1237                      92.35
28-1241 et seq.              Ch. 92
28-1241                      92.50;
                             92.68
28-1241(5)                   92.50
28-1321                      130.03;
                             132.01
28-1322                      131.05
28-1421 through 28-1429      110.01
29-422 through 29-429        91.05
29-4003                      130.08
31-1001 through 31-1022      154.01
31-1002 et seq.              154.12
                             30.01;
32-101 et seq.               33.01;
                             33.04;
                             34.06
32-110                       33.03
32-115                       33.03
32-404                       33.01
32-405                       33.04
32-532                       30.01
32-554                       30.01
32-556                       33.01
32-557                       30.01
32-559                       33.04
32-560                       30.06
32-560 through 32-572        30.06
32-561                       30.06
32-569                       30.06
32-602                       30.01
32-604                       30.01
32-608                       33.07
32-615                       33.07
32-616                       33.07
32-617                       33.07;
                             33.09
32-618                       33.07;
                             33.09
32-621                       33.07
32-625                       33.09
32-625(2)                    33.07
32-627                       33.07
32-628                       33.07;
                             153.20
32-629                       33.07
32-630                       33.07
32-710                       33.07
32-802                       33.02
32-807                       33.05
32-952 through 32-959        33.04
32-1202                      33.04
32-1308                      30.06
33-139.01                    32.32
33-141                       31.25
35-102                       32.32
35-103                       32.32
35-108                       32.32
Ch. 39                       72.999
39-301                       131.04
39-302                       131.04
39-307                       132.03
39-311                       70.35
48-101 et seq.               32.32
48-115                       32.32
48-1503                      34.02
49-801(16)                   10.05
49-1408                      31.04
49-1425                      31.04
49-1499.03 through 49-14,103 31.04
49-1499.04                   31.04
49-14,102                    31.04
49-14,103.01                 31.04
49-14,103.02                 31.04
49-14,103.03                 31.04
49-14,103.04                 31.04
49-14,103.05                 31.04
49-14,103.06                 31.04
51-215                       34.06
51-216                       34.06
52-601.01 through 52-605     132.35
53-103.01 through 53-103.42  111.01;
                             132.20
53-118                       111.37
53-123.04(3)                 132.21
53-123.04(4)                 111.40
53-123.11(1)(c)              132.21
53-123.12                    111.17
53-124                       111.17;
                             111.19
53-124.01                    111.17
53-124.12                    111.19
53-124.15                    111.35
53-124.17                    111.17
53-125                       111.16
53-129                       111.17
53-131                       111.17
53-132                       111.17
53-133                       111.17;
                             111.35
53-134                       111.17
53-134.03                    111.17;
                             111.37
53-135                       111.18
53-135.01                    111.17;
                             111.18
53-148                       111.20
53-168.06                    111.15;
                             111.40
53-177                       111.35
53-177.01                    111.35
53-178                       111.36
53-179                       111.40
53-180                       111.02
53-180.02                    132.20
53-183                       111.38
53-184                       111.39
53-186                       111.03
53-186(2)                    111.03
53-186.01                    111.03
53-401 through 53-409        132.20
53-1,101                     111.21
53-1,102                     111.22
53-1,121                     111.04
54-601                       91.24;
                             91.25
54-602                       91.24;
                             91.25
54-603                       91.22
54-603(3)                    91.22
54-604                       91.41
54-605                       91.26
54-606                       91.20;
                             91.25
54-607                       91.02;
                             91.21
54-617                       91.28
54-618                       91.28
54-619                       91.28
54-620                       91.28
54-621                       91.28
54-622.01                    91.28
54-623                       91.28
55-133                       70.01
Ch. 60                       72.999
Ch. 60, art. 1               72.018
60-3.357                     72.080
60-136                       90.16
60-169                       132.35
Ch. 60, art. 3               72.018
                             71.06;
60-301                       72.080;
                             132.35
60-376                       132.35;
                             132.36
60-3,113.06                  71.26;
                             71.27
Ch. 60, art. 4               72.018
60-4,126                     72.081
60-4,182                     70.38;
                             70.40
Ch. 60, art. 5               72.018
Ch. 60, art. 6               72.045
60-6.358                     72.080
60-606 through 60-676        70.01
60-607                       70.01
60-610                       70.01
60-613                       70.01
60-624                       70.01
60-631                       70.01
60-637                       72.045
60-638                       70.01
60-639                       72.065
60-640                       72.065
60-646                       70.01
60-654                       70.01
60-656                       70.01
60-658.01                    70.01
60-661                       70.01
60-669                       70.01
60-670                       70.01
60-671                       70.01
60-672                       70.01
60-676                       70.01
                             70.03;
60-680                       70.06;
                             71.01
60-683                       70.48;
                             70.49
60-6,118                     70.01
60-6,119                     70.08
60-6,121                     70.07
60-6,130                     70.36
60-6,131                     70.04;
                             70.05
60-6,136                     70.43
60-6,140                     70.45
60-6,148                     70.02
60-6,149                     70.44
60-6,159                     70.03
60-6,164                     70.42
60-6,165                     71.10
60-6,166                     92.05
60-6,167                     71.09
60-6,168                     71.11
60-6,178                     70.46
60-6,179                     70.50
60-6,183                     70.45
60-6,184                     92.07
60-6,185                     70.20
                             70.21;
60-6,186                     70.43;
                             72.049
60-6,187                     70.21
60-6,188                     70.21
60-6,196 through 60-6,203    70.37
60-6,211.08                  111.03;
                             132.21
60-6,212                     70.39
60-6,215                     70.38;
                             70.39
60-6,219                     72.066
60-6,243                     70.51
60-6,278 through 60-6,282    72.050;
                             72.067
60-6,286                     70.46
60-6,304                     70.51
60-6,305                     70.21
60-6,306                     72.068
60-6,308                     70.44
60-6,310                     72.046
60-6,311                     72.047
60-6,312                     72.048
60-6,313                     70.21;
                             72.049
60-6,314                     72.001
60-6,315                     72.001
60-6,316                     72.002
60-6,317                     72.001
60-6,318                     72.001
60-6,335                     72.030;
                             72.031
60-6,337                     72.031
60-6,338                     72.032
60-6,347                     72.015;
                             72.018
60-6,348                     72.016;
                             72.017
60-6,352                     72.015
60-6,355                     72.080
60-6,356                     72.081
60-6,358                     72.080;
                             72.082
60-6,359                     72.083
60-6,360                     72.084
60-6,361                     72.085
60-6,362                     72.999
60-6,371                     70.47
Ch. 60, art. 17              72.018
60-1901                      132.35
60-1902                      132.35
60-1903                      132.35
60-1903.01                   132.35
60-1903.02                   132.35
60-1904                      132.35
60-1905                      132.35
60-1906                      132.35
60-1907                      132.35
60-1908                      132.35
60-1909                      132.35
60-2016                      72.032
60-2209                      70.47
60-2410                      132.35
70-624.04                    31.04
70-1602                      50.05;
                             52.021
70-1603                      50.05;
                             52.021
70-1604                      50.05;
                             52.021
70-1607                      50.05;
                             52.021
70-1608 through 70-1614      50.05;
                             52.021
70-1615                      50.05;
                             52.021
70-2103                      130.01
71-423                       111.04
71-3305                      52.019
71-4401                      91.20
71-4406                      91.40
71-4412                      91.22
71-4603                      132.35
71-5301                      52.020
72-1237 et seq.              34.08
72-1261 et seq.              34.08
73-101 et seq.               34.02
74-1323                      110.02
Ch. 75, art. 3               132.21
77-2201                      31.25
77-2201 through 77-2215      31.25
77-2202                      31.25
77-2209                      31.25
77-2210                      31.25
77-2212                      31.25
77-2341                      34.08
77-2362                      34.07
77-2363                      34.07
77-2364                      34.07
77-2365.01                   34.07
77-2366                      34.07
77-2386 et seq.              34.07
77-2386                      34.07
77-3442                      93.01
77-3444                      33.04
77-27,142 through 77-27,148  34.42
77-27,143                    34.42
Ch. 79                       130.08
81-145 through 81-162        34.02
81-201                       91.05
81-502                       92.20
81-506                       32.37
81-520.01                    92.23
81-2104                      51.19
84-304                       34.01
84-712 through 84-712.09     31.24;
                             31.25
84-712(2)                    31.24
84-1220                      31.24
84-1407 to 84-1414           31.41;
                             31.46
84-1408                      31.40
84-1409                      31.40
84-1410                      31.45
                             31.41;
84-1411                      31.42;
                             31.44
84-1411(7)                   31.41
84-1412                      31.46
84-1413                      31.48 ;
                             31.49
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
1-207              31.23
1-209              31.28
1-401              11.01
1-707              33.05
1-708              33.08
2-101              32.01
2-301              31.05
3-101              52.002
3-102              52.001
3-103              52.003
3-104              52.004
3-106              52.005
3-107              52.022
3-108              52.006
3-111              52.007
3-112              52.008
3-113              52.009
3-114              52.010
3-115              52.011
3-116              52.012
3-117              52.013
3-118              52.014
3-119              52.015
3-120              52.016
3-121              52.017
3-122              52.018
3-123              52.019
3-124              52.020
3-125              53.002
3-126              52.035
3-127              52.036
3-128              52.037
3-129              52.038
3-130              52.039
3-131              52.040
3-132              52.055
3-133              52.056
3-134              52.057
3-135              52.058
3-136              52.059
3-146              52.098
3-201              53.002
3-202              53.001
3-203              53.003
3-204              53.004
3-205              53.007
3-206              53.008
3-207              53.005
3-208              53.060
3-209              53.006
3-210              53.062
3-212              53.061
3-213              53.075
3-214              53.009
3-215              53.095
3-217              53.020
3-218              53.021
3-219              53.022
3-220              53.023
3-221              53.024
3-222              53.025
3-223              53.040
3-224              53.040
3-225              53.060
3-226              53.041
3-227              53.042
3-228              53.043
3-229              53.044
3-230              53.045
3-231              53.046
3-232              53.076
3-233              53.077
3-234              53.078
3-235              53.079
3-236              53.080
3-237              53.081
3-238              53.082
3-239              53.082
3-240              53.083
3-241              53.084
3-242              53.095
3-243              53.095
3-244              53.095
3-245              53.999
3-246              53.097
3-301              54.01
3-302              54.02
3-303              54.03
3-304              54.04
3-305              54.05
3-306              54.06
3-307              50.06
3-308              54.07
3-309              54.08
3-310              54.09
3-311              54.10
3-312              54.11
3-313              54.12
3-314              54.13
3-315              54.14
3-316              54.15
3-317              54.16
3-318              54.17
3-319              54.18
3-320              54.19
3-402              93.03
3-501              51.01
3-502              51.02
3-503              51.03
3-504              51.04
3-606              32.35
3-701              50.01
3-702              50.02
3-703              50.03
3-704              50.04
3-801              32.02
3-802              32.02
3-803              32.02
3-804              32.02
4-201              51.15
4-202              51.15
4-203              51.15
4-204              51.16
4-205              51.17
4-206              51.18
4-207              51.19
4-208              51.20
4-209              50.06
5-102              70.03
5-103              70.03
5-105              70.04
5-106              70.05
5-107              70.06
5-201              70.35
5-205              70.37
5-206              70.38
5-207              70.39
5-208              70.40
5-209              70.41
5-210              70.42
5-211              70.43
5-212              70.43
5-213              70.44
5-214              70.45
5-215              70.45
5-216              70.46
5-217              70.47
5-218              70.48
5-219              70.49
5-220              70.50
5-222              70.51
5-223              70.51
5-225              70.52
5-401              72.001
5-402              72.002
5-501              72.015
5-502              72.016
5-503              72.017
5-504              72.018
5-601              72.030
5-602              72.031
5-603              72.032
5-701              72.045
5-702              72.046
5-703              72.047
5-704              72.048
5-705              72.049
5-706              72.050
5-801              72.065
5-802              72.066
5-803              72.067
5-804              72.068
5-901              72.080
5-903              72.082
5-904              72.083
5-905              72.084
5-906              72.085
5-907              72.999
5-908              72.086
6-101              91.20
6-102              91.20
6-104              91.99
6-105              91.41
6-109              91.24
6-205              91.01
6-206              91.06
6-207              91.06
6-208              91.06
6-302              130.02
6-304              130.05
6-307              130.06
6-310              132.51
6-312              92.68
6-313              131.02
6-321              131.06
6-322              132.05
7-101              92.01
7-102              92.02
7-103              92.03
7-104              92.04
7-105              92.05
7-106              92.06
7-107              92.07
7-108              92.08
7-201              92.20
7-202              92.21
7-203              92.22
7-204              92.23
7-205              92.24
7-301              92.38
7-401              92.35
7-402              92.36
7-403              92.37
8-307              153.51
8-308              153.52
8-309              153.59
9-201              150.03
9-301              150.03
9-401              150.03
9-501              150.03
9-701              150.02
9-801              151.01
9-802              151.02
9-803              151.03
9-804              151.04
9-805              151.05
9-806              151.06
9-807              151.99
10-109             111.40
10-125             111.41
10-201             152.01
10-202             152.02
10-203             152.03
10-204             152.04
10-205             152.05
10-206             152.06
10-207             152.06
10-208             152.07
10-401             110.01
10-701             110.15
10-702             110.15
10-801             110.02
10-802             110.02
10-803             110.02
10-804             110.02
10-805             110.02
10-806             110.02
11-101             155.15
11-102             155.16
11-201             155.30
11-202             155.31
11-203             155.32
11-204             155.33
11-205             155.34
11-206             155.35
11-207             155.36
11-208             155.37
12-101             TSO Table I
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2001-2   2-14-2001   52.022
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     154.01—
                     154.12;
                     154.25—
106      - -         154.29;
                     154.40,
                     154.41;
                     154.99 
208      - -         TSO Table II
100      11-8-1995   10.99;
                     31.23
109      1-14-1998   32.17
110      2-11-1998   31.28
112      4-14-1999   155.02
115      10-13-1999  155.01
121      11-14-2001  TSO Table III
123      12-12-2001  TSO Table III
125      1-9-2002    TSO Table III
126      2-13-2002   TSO Table III
127      3-13-2002   TSO Table III
129      4-10-2002   TSO Table III
130      6-12-2002   TSO Table III
131      6-12-2002   TSO Table III
132      7-10-2002   TSO Table II
                     52.070—
134      1-8-2003    52.079;
                     52.999
139      11-12-2003  94.01—
                     94.08
141      2-11-2004   32.16
142      3-15-2004   TSO Table IV
149      5-10-2006   Ch. 73, Sch. I
152      6-15-2006   150.02;
                     152.05
158      2-15-2007   TSO Table IV
164      7-28-2008   TSO Table II
167      11-12-2008  34.42
171      5-17-2010   TSO Table IV
                     52.090—
175      1-12-2011   52.097;
                     52.999
196      4-5-2018    TSO Table IV
200      12-6-2018   TSO Table IV
                     90.15—
218      12-2-2021   90.18;
                     90.99
220      5-4-2022    TSO Table III
225      8-3-2023    TSO Table II
227      3-11-2024   155.01
231      6-3-2024    34.42
232      10-3-2024   72.080
235      11-26-2024  34.42
236      11-26-2024  32.18
238      1-3-2025    130.08
239      7-10-2025   91.01
                    
 
 
 
