NORTH PLATTE, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-16 Supplement Contains:
Local Legislation current through Ordinance 4199, passed 3-18-25
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.17   Supplementation of code of ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the "North Platte
Code of Ordinances" and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. North Platte, Nebraska.
      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY. The North Platte City Council.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code, as modified
by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Lincoln County, Nebraska.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities,
the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies and associations.
(Neb. RS 49-801(16))
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Mayor
and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or", if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day is a Saturday or Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to
the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including ordinances
specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public
places;
   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;
   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public
use;
   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
   (G)   Appropriating money;
   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or
   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified
by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed
or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in
force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 16-247
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of
the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. RS 18-
132)
   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference" following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.
§ 10.17 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Discretion. When preparing a supplement to this city code, the
codifier (that is, the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate sections and
divisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the ordinance printed in the supplement and make
changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other divisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other division numbers;
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter", "this subchapter", "this section" and the like, as may be
appropriate, or to "§§       through      " (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the code);
      (5)   Insert appropriate section numbers in references to code sections
such as "§      " or "§§       through      " which are not filled in prior to
adoption of an ordinance;
      (6)   Correct the spelling of words, correct obvious typographical
errors, correct erroneous division and hyphenation of words, capitalize or
decapitalize words and make other similar changes in accordance with accepted
usage or for consistency with other provisions of the code;
      (7)   Change terminology for consistency with terminology used in other
provisions of the code; and
      (8)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to incorporate
ordinance material into the code while preserving the original meaning of the
ordinance sections.
   (B)   Prohibition. In no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the code and not repealed by any ordinance.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city code,
unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding
$500. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of
failure to comply with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in Title IX of this code,
the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722
   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. RS 16-246
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
32.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   FINANCES
      
35.   CIVIL SERVICE; LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
36.   EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.001   Emergency succession
Meetings of Public Bodies
   
30.020   Public meetings generally; notice of meetings; agenda; minutes; voting
   
30.021   Time and place of Council meetings; quorum
   
30.022   Order of business of Council meetings
   
30.023   Rules of conduct of Council meetings
   
30.024   “Meetings” defined
   
30.025   “Public body” defined
   
30.026   Closed sessions
   
30.027   Emergency meetings
   
30.028   Public participation
   
30.029   Notice to news media
   
30.030   Special meetings of Council
Disposition of Unclaimed Property
   
30.045   Delivery to Chief of Police; record; custody
   
30.046   Sale at auction
   
30.047   Disposition of abandoned vehicles
Elections Generally
   
30.060   Generally
   
30.061   Number of candidates in primary election
   
30.062   Write-in candidates in primary election
   
30.063   Tie votes
   
30.064   Petition, write-in, and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
30.065   Election to terms; order of names on ballot
   
30.066   Joint and special elections
   
30.067   Nomination of candidates by petition
   
30.068   Recall procedure
   
30.069   Candidate qualifications
   
30.070   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer
Initiative and Referendum
   
30.080   Scope of subchapter
   
30.081   Definitions
   
30.082   Prospective petition; authorization of petition; ballot title and
caption
   
30.083   Petition forms; declaratory judgments; circulation of petitions
   
30.084   Signature sheets
   
30.085   Petition affidavits
   
30.086   Verification of signatures on petitions; time limit for filing
signatures; notification of governing body
   
30.087   Frequency of submission of same measure
   
30.088   Authority of governing body to submit measures to direct vote
   
30.089   Calling of election; notice of election
   
30.090   Preparation and form of ballots
   
30.091   Effect of initiative
   
30.092   Referendum limitations
   
30.093   Effect of referendum
   
30.094   Applicability of state law; exclusions
 
   
30.999   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Mayor and Council, see
Chapter 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.001 EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
   (A)   In accordance with the terms and conditions of the Nebraska General
Emergency Succession Act, the governing body hereby declares that it is
necessary and advisable to invoke the provisions of the Act in the city.
   (B)   The provisions of the Act are binding on the officers of the city
government, whether now in office or hereafter elected or appointed.
(Prior Code, § 2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Nebraska General Emergency Succession Act, see Neb. RS 84-1101-84-1116
MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES
§ 30.020 PUBLIC MEETINGS GENERALLY; NOTICE OF MEETINGS; AGENDA; MINUTES;
VOTING.
   All public meetings, as defined by law, shall be held in a city public
building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings shall be
held in the public building in which the governing body usually holds the
meetings unless the publicized notice required in this section shall designate
some other public building or other specified place. The advance publicized
notice of all public convened meetings shall be simultaneously transmitted to
all members of the governing body and to the public by a method designated by
the governing body or by the Mayor if the governing body has not designated a
method. The notice shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting
and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the
notice, or a statement that such an agenda kept continually current shall be
readily available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. Except
for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered later than 24
hours before the scheduled commencement of the meeting, or 48 hours before the
scheduled commencement of a meeting of the governing body scheduled outside the
corporate limits of the city. The governing body shall have the right to modify
the agenda to include items of an emergency nature at the public meetings. The
minutes of the City Clerk shall include the record of the manner and advance
time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the
availability of an agenda of the then-known subjects was communicated, the time
and specific place of the meetings, and the names of each member of the
governing body present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the
governing body shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon
request at any reasonable time at the office of the City Clerk. Any official
action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by
roll call vote of the governing body in open session. The record of the City
Clerk shall show how each member voted, or that the member was absent and did
not vote.
(Prior Code, § 2-241)
Statutory reference:
   Public meetings, see Neb. RS 84-1408 et seq.
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413
§ 30.021 TIME AND PLACE OF COUNCIL MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Council
Chambers at City Hall, commencing at 5:30 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays
of each month. Special meetings may be held whenever called by the Mayor or any
4 Council members. A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but a lesser number
may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members.
(Prior Code, §2-242) (Am. Ord. 4011, §1, 9-3-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Council meetings, see Neb. RS 16-401
§ 30.022 ORDER OF BUSINESS OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council shall be called to order by the presiding
officer at the time set for the meeting, whereupon the Clerk shall call the
roll of Council members, and, if there is a quorum present, the Council shall
proceed to business in the order prescribed on the agenda.
(Prior Code, § 2-243)
§ 30.023 RULES OF CONDUCT OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The business and proceedings of the meeting of the Council shall be
conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, newly revised.
(Prior Code, § 2-244)
§ 30.024 “MEETINGS” DEFINED.
   The term MEETINGS, as used in this subchapter, shall mean all regular,
special or called meetings, formal or informal, of a public body for the
purposes of briefing, discussion of public business, formation of tentative
policy or the taking of any action.
(Prior Code, § 2-245)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definition, see Neb. RS 84-1409(2)
§ 30.025 “PUBLIC BODY” DEFINED.
   (A)   The term PUBLIC BODY, as used in this subchapter, shall mean:
      (1)   The governing body of the city;
      (2)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, Councils,
subunits, certificate of need appeal panels or any other bodies now or
hereafter created by constitution, statute or otherwise pursuant to law; and
      (3)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed in divisions (A)(1) and
(2) of this section.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of the bodies unless
the subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action
on behalf of their parent body.
(Prior Code, § 2-246)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definition, see Neb. RS 84-1409(1)
§ 30.026 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has
not requested a public meeting. Closed sessions may be held for reasons such
as, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases or litigation;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if the person has not
requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for
the closed session and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded
shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a closed session
shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only
those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the closed session.
The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be
taken.
   (C)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is not clearly necessary for the
protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to the
reputation of an individual. The challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. The challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   (1)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any
meeting be closed to the public.
      (2)   No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its
members to a meeting nor shall a public body designate itself a subcommittee of
the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of this
subchapter, nor shall any closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting,
social gathering or electronic communication be used for the purpose of
circumventing the provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to chance
meetings, or to attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members
of a public body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally
convened and there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over
which the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power.
(Prior Code, § 2-247)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1410
§ 30.027 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in the meeting shall pertain only to the emergency. The
emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of §
30.029 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete
minutes of the emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and
any formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by
no later than the end of the next regular business day.
(Prior Code, § 2-248)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411
§ 30.028 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the public shall have
the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies, and
all or any part of a meeting of a public body except for closed meetings called
pursuant to §
30.026 may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast or recorded by any
person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video equipment or
any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction, or in writing.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to
make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to allow
citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid public participation
at all meetings. [No public body shall require members of the public to
identify themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such
body require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda
prior to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda.] The body
may require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself. No public body shall for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this subchapter hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be
too small to accommodate the anticipated audience. No public body shall be
deemed in violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional
meeting place which is located in this state. An agency which contracts with
municipalities outside the state may hold meetings of any committee outside the
state if the meetings are held only in the contracting municipality. Final
action on any agenda item shall only be taken by the agency at a meeting in the
state, which meeting shall comply with Neb. RS 84-1408—84-1414. The public body
shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public’s right
to hear the discussion and testimony presented at the meeting. Public bodies
shall make available at the meeting, for examination and copying by members of
the public, at least 1 copy of all reproducible written material to be
discussed at an open meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-248)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1412
§ 30.029 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The City Clerk, Secretary or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall
make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and
place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-249)
Statutory reference:
   Notice of meetings, see Neb. RS 84-1411
§ 30.030 SPECIAL MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   (1)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by 4 members of
the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in
writing. The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be
entered upon the journal by the City Clerk. On filing the call for a special
meeting, the City Clerk shall notify the Council members of the special
meeting, stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a special meeting need not
be given to a Council member known to be out of the state, or physically unable
to be present.
      (2)   A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from
day to day and compel the attendance of the absent members. Whether a quorum is
present or not, all absent members shall be sent for and compelled to attend.
   (B)   (1)   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the City Clerk shall
proceed to call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present.
      (2)   If a quorum is present, the Council shall be called to order by the
Mayor, if present, or, if absent, by the president of the Council.
      (3)   In the absence of both the Mayor and the president of the Council,
the City Council members shall elect a president pro tempore.
      (4)   All ordinances passed at any special meeting shall comply with
procedures set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-250)
Statutory reference:
   Special meetings of Council, see Neb. RS 16-401
DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 30.045 DELIVERY TO CHIEF OF POLICE; RECORD; CUSTODY.
   (A)   It is hereby made the duty of every member of the police force to
deliver to the Chief of Police every article of property seized or found by
such officer immediately after the property shall have come into his or her
possession.
   (B)   A complete and accurate record of the property shall be kept by the
Chief of Police and he or she shall be the custodian of the property and
responsible for it.
(Prior Code, § 2-361)
§ 30.046 SALE AT AUCTION.
   (A)   Whenever the Chief of Police deems it necessary, all property which
shall have remained unclaimed in the hands of the Police Department for more
than 30 days shall be sold at public auction at police headquarters or in an
area designated by the Chief of Police, to the highest and best bidder.
   (B)   Notice of the sale shall be published 1 time at least 10 days prior to
the date of sale in some newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-362)
§ 30.047 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle or article which remains in 1 location on the
streets, alleys or public property of the city for a period longer than 72
hours shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed by the Police Department
from the street, alley or public property.
   (B)   Notice by registered mail shall be forthwith given by the Police
Department to the record owner of the motor vehicle or article, to immediately
call for the motor vehicle or article and to pay the charges for removing,
keeping and storing the motor vehicle or article.
   (C)   If the motor vehicle or article is not called for within 5 days from
mailing of the notice, or the address is unknown, the motor vehicle or article
shall be disposed of as provided in §
30.046, either at the time of the sale or forthwith on giving notice as
provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-363)
ELECTIONS GENERALLY
§ 30.060 GENERALLY.
   The city primary and general election shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. The elections shall be held in conjunction
with the state primary and general election. Prior to February 1 of the year in
which the first such joint election takes place, the governing body shall
receive the consent in writing of the county board to so hold the election and
the authorization shall be prescribed according to state law. The Election
Commissioner shall have charge of the election and shall have the authority to
deputize the City Clerk for city election purposes.
(Prior Code, § 18-1)
§ 30.061 NUMBER OF CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY ELECTION.
   If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary
election does not exceed 2 for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates
properly filed shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their
nomination shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 18-2)
§ 30.062 WRITE-IN CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY ELECTION.
   When the name of a candidate who did not file or become a petition candidate
for nomination is written in and voted for as a candidate for a Council member,
the person shall not be entitled to a certificate of nomination at the
statewide primary election nor have his or her name placed on the general
election ballot unless he or she shall have received not less than 20% of the
total votes cast for the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in
the precinct or ward or the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes of
the at-large candidates, whichever the case may be, at the preceding election
in which candidates were elected to serve the ward, or of the at-large
candidates if the election was held at large.
(Prior Code, § 18-3)
§ 30.063 TIE VOTES.
   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or
general election, the County Clerk shall notify the candidates to appear at his
or her office on a given day and hour to determine the election by lot before
the Canvassing Board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be
given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail.
(Prior Code, § 18-4)
§ 30.064 PETITION, WRITE-IN, AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
before March 1 in the calendar year of the general election may have his or her
name placed on the general election ballot for a partisan office by filing
petitions as prescribed in this section and Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by
political party convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the office by
petition as prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, or files as a
write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615, or is nominated by
political party convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-710.
(Neb. RS 32-616)
   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and address
of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the party
affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be filed with
the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed by
registered voters residing in the municipality, if candidates are chosen at
large, or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are
chosen by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner
as provided for candidate filing forms in §
30.070. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for nomination shall be
filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing the payment of the
filing fee required pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608. The petitions shall be filed by
September 1 in the year of the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-617)
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the municipality or in the ward in which the officer is to be
elected, not to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate upon the partisan ballot for the general election shall be
at least 20% of the total vote for Governor or President of the United States
at the immediately preceding general election within the municipality or in the
ward in which the officer is to be elected, as appropriate, not to exceed
2,000.
(Neb. RS 32-618)
(Prior Code, § 18-5)
§ 30.065 ELECTION TO TERMS; ORDER OF NAMES ON BALLOT.
   The candidates shall be placed on the general ballot and the candidates
receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms of the longest
duration and those receiving the next greatest number of votes shall be elected
to the remaining terms. The Election Commissioner shall place the names of the
candidates on the general election ballot in the direct order according to the
number of votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was
held, the names of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election
ballot in the order of their filing. The term of office of all such members
shall commence on the first regular meeting of the Council in December
following their election. Any vacancy on the Council resulting from causes
other than expiration of the term shall be filled by vote of the remaining
members as provided in §
31.01.
(Prior Code, § 18-6)
§ 30.066 JOINT AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   In lieu of submitting a matter or issue at a separate special city election,
the city may submit such matter or issue at a statewide general or primary
election or at a scheduled county election or may request the county to conduct
a special election. The matter or issue must be certified by the City Clerk to
the County Clerk or Election Commissioner at least 50 days prior to the
election. The City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or posting of
any required special notice of the submission of the matter other than that
required to be given of the statewide or county election issues.
(Prior Code, § 18-7)
§ 30.067 NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES BY PETITION.
   Candidates for any city office may be nominated by petition. Petitions shall
contain signatures of registered voters totaling not less than 10% of the total
votes received by the candidate receiving the highest number of votes in the
city or ward at the preceding general election in which officers were last
elected to the office. They shall be accompanied by a Treasurer’s receipt for
the filing fees for the office being sought. All petitions shall provide a
space at least 2-1/2 inches long for written signatures, a space at least 2
inches long for printed names and sufficient space for any additional
information which may be required. Lines on the petitions shall not be less
than 1/4-inch apart. Petitions may be designed in such a manner that lines for
signatures and other information run the length of the page rather than the
width. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-713. Petitions must be filed at least 60 days prior
to the state primary.
(Prior Code, § 18-8)
§ 30.068 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FILING CLERK. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-1301)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council, and any other elected
official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to this
section.
      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of this
section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward.
Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a recall petition or vote
at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member's
ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary
election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions
shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-1302)
   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council, or any other elected official be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election,
except that for City Council office for which more than one candidate is
chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes
for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed
to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32-630.
      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing clerk. Prior
to the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be signed and filed
with the filing clerk by at least 1 registered voter. Such voter or voters
shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators of the recall
petition. The affidavit shall state the name and office of the official sought
to be removed, shall include in typewritten form in concise language of 60
words or less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall
request that the filing clerk issue initial petition papers to the principal
circulator for circulation. The filing clerk shall notify the official sought
to be removed by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if notification
cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods specified in
Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the affidavit at the official's usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official's
last-known address. If the official chooses, he or she may submit a defense
statement in typewritten form in concise language of 60 words or less for
inclusion on the petition. Any such defense statement shall be submitted to the
filing clerk within 20 days after the official receives the copy of the
affidavit. The principal circulator or circulators shall gather the petition
papers within 20 days after the receipt of the official's defense statement.
The filing clerk shall notify the principal circulator or circulators that the
necessary signatures must be gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing
the petitions.
      (4)   The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her
office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers
were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers issued. The filing
clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or
circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions
from the filing clerk may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as
circulators of such petitions.
      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a registered voter
and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the office in
question.
(Neb. RS 32-1303)
   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1304.
   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one
instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing clerk issues
the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators as
provided in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the filing clerk
shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number
of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the initial filing
of the petition papers. No signatures may be removed unless the filing clerk
receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting his or her signature be
removed before the petitions are filed with the filing clerk for signature
verification. If the petition is found to be sufficient, the filing clerk shall
attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. If
the requisite number of signatures has not been gathered, the filing clerk
shall file the petition in his or her office without prejudice to the filing of
a new petition for the same purpose.
(Neb. RS 32-1305)
   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council
that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the official
sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if
notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods
specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the official's usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official's
last-known address.
      (2)   The City Council shall order an election to be held not less than
30 nor more than 75 days after the notification of the official whose removal
is sought under division (F)(1) of this section, except that if any other
election is to be held in the city within 90 days after such notification, the
City Council shall provide for the holding of the recall election on the same
day. All resignations shall be tendered as provided in Neb. RS 32-562. If the
official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall election is held,
the City Council may cancel the recall election if the City Council notifies
the election commissioner or county clerk of the cancellation at least 16 days
prior to the election, otherwise the recall election shall be held as
scheduled.
      (3)   If the City Council fails or refuses to order a recall election
within the time required, the election may be ordered by the district court
having jurisdiction over a county in which the elected official serves. If a
filing clerk is subject to a recall election, the Secretary of State shall
conduct the recall election.
(Neb. RS 32-1306)
   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held pursuant to
division (F) of this section shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1307.
   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against
the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a
tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term
but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in division (I) of
this section.
      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the
removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless
a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall
result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as otherwise provided
in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 to 32-570.
      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a recount of the
votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement
with the filing clerk that he or she does not want a recount.
      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of a majority or more of the
members of the City Council or any other governing body at one time due to the
recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner, or County Clerk.
      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns
after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
(Neb. RS 32-1308)
   (I)   No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within
12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her from office
or within 6 months after the beginning of his or her term of office or within 6
months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the office.
(Neb. RS 32-1309)
(Prior Code, § 18-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-1401—32-1408
§ 30.069 CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS.
   Any person seeking elected office in the city shall be a registered voter
prior to holding the office and, in addition, shall have reached the age of
majority.
(Prior Code, § 18-10)
§ 30.070 CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER.
   (A)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the primary election ballot
by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as
provided in division (B). If a candidate is an incumbent of any elective
office, the filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall be between
December 1 and February 15 prior to the date of the primary election. No
incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to the expiration of his or
her term shall file for any office after February 15 of that election year. All
other candidates shall file for office between December 1 and March 1 prior to
the date of the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-606)
   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-607)
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancy on ballot, see Neb. RS 32-625 and 32-627
   Withdrawal after filing, see Neb. RS 32-622
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§ 30.080 SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the city by state law. This subchapter shall govern the use of
initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal, measures
affecting the governance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 18-31)
Statutory reference:
   Initiative and referendum, see Neb. RS 18-2501 et seq.
§ 30.081 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CIRCULATOR. Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.
   CLERK. The City Clerk or the city official in charge of elections.
   MEASURE. An ordinance, charter provision or resolution which is within the
legislative authority of the governing body to pass, and which is not excluded
from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in §
30.092.
   PETITION. A document authorized for circulation, pursuant to §
30.082, or any copy of the document.
   PLACE OF RESIDENCE. The street and number of the residence. If there is no
street and number for the residence, PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall mean the mailing
address.
   PROSPECTIVE PETITION. A sample document containing the information necessary
for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which has not yet
been authorized for circulation.
   QUALIFIED ELECTORS. All persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative, or altered or repealed by
referendum.
   RESIDENCE. That place at which a person has established his or her home,
where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she departs, he
or she intends to return.
   SIGNATURE SHEET. A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and which is
signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.
(Prior Code, § 18-32)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definitions, see Neb. RS 18-2503—18-2511
§ 30.082 PROSPECTIVE PETITION; AUTHORIZATION OF PETITION; BALLOT TITLE AND
CAPTION.
   (A)   Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the
petitioner shall file with the clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall
date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall
verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a
ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as described in this
section. If the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall
authorize the circulation of the petition and the authorization shall be given
within 3 working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If the
form of the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within 3
working days from the date the prospective petition was filed, inform the
petitioner of necessary changes and request that those changes be made. When
the requested changes have been made and the revised prospective petition has
been submitted to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the
circulation of the petition, and the authorization shall be given within 2
working days from the receipt of the properly revised petition. Verification by
the Clerk that the prospective petition is in proper form does not constitute
an admission by the Clerk, governing body or city that the measure is subject
to referendum or limited referendum or that the measure may be enacted by
initiative.
   (B)   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall
consist of:
      (1)   A briefly worded caption by which the measure is commonly known or
which accurately summarizes the measure;
      (2)   A briefly worded question which plainly states the purpose of the
measure, and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the question
corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and
      (3)   A concise and impartial statement, of not more than 75 words, of
the chief purpose of the measure.
   (C)   (1)   The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum
proposal shall contain the entire ballot title.
      (2)   Proposals for initiative and referendum shall be submitted on
separate ballots and the ballots shall be printed in lower-case 10-point type,
except that the caption shall be in boldface type.
      (3)   All initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in a non-
partisan manner without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that they have
or have not been approved or endorsed by any political party or organization.
(Prior Code, § 18-33)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2512, 18-2513
§ 30.083 PETITION FORMS; DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS; CIRCULATION OF PETITIONS.
   (A)   The Secretary of State shall design the form to be used for initiative
and referendum petitions. The petitions shall conform to Neb. RS 32-628. These
forms shall be made available to the public by the Clerk, and they shall serve
as a guide for individuals preparing prospective petitions. Substantial
compliance with initiative and referendum forms is required before
authorization to circulate the petition shall be granted by the Clerk pursuant
to Neb. RS 18-2512. Chief petitioners or circulators preparing prospective
petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the petition for
circulation, once authorization for circulation has been granted, and each
petition presented for signature must be identical to the petition authorized
for circulation by the Clerk pursuant to §
30.082.
   (B)   The city or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory judgment
regarding any questions arising under this subchapter, as it may be from time
to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether a measure
is subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure may be
enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner seeks a declaratory judgment, the
city shall be served by personal, residence or certified mail service upon the
Chief Executive Officer or Clerk. If the city seeks a declaratory judgment,
only the chief petitioners shall be required to be served. Any action brought
for declaratory judgment for purposes of determining whether a measure is
subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be
enacted by initiative, may be filed in the district court at any time after the
filing of a referendum or initiative petition with the City Clerk for signature
verification until 40 days from the date the governing body receives
notification pursuant to §
30.086. If the city does not bring an action for declaratory judgment to
determine whether the measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum,
or whether the measure may be enacted by initiative, until after it has
received notification pursuant to §
30.086, it shall be required to proceed with the initiative or referendum
election in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. If the city does
file such an action prior to receiving notification pursuant to §
30.086, it shall not be required to proceed to hold the election until a final
decision has been rendered in the action. Any action for a declaratory judgment
shall be governed generally by Neb. RS 25-21,149—25-21,164, except that only
the city and each chief petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The
City Clerk, governing body or any of the city’s officers shall be entitled to
rely on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action
brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given
priority in scheduling, hearings and disposition as determined by the court
when an action is brought to determine whether the measure is subject to
limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by
initiative, and
a decision shall be rendered by the court no later than 5 days prior to the
election. The provisions of this section relating to declaratory judgments
shall not be construed as limiting, but construed as supplemental and
additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law.
   (C)   Every petition shall contain the name and place of residence of not
more than 3 persons as chief petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The chief
petitioners or sponsors shall be qualified electors of the city potentially
affected by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition shall contain
the caption and ballot title required in §
30.082, and only qualified electors shall circulate petitions. When a special
election is being requested, the fact shall be stated on every petition.
(Prior Code, § 18-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2514, 18-2515, 18-2538, 25-510.02
§ 30.084 SIGNATURE SHEETS.
   Every signature sheet shall:
   (A)   Contain the caption required in §
30.082(B)(1);
   (B)   Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to
potential signatories; and
   (C)   Comply with the requirements of Neb. RS 32-628.
(Prior Code, § 18-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2516
§ 30.085 PETITION AFFIDAVITS.
   Signers and circulators shall comply with Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.
(Prior Code, § 18-36)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2517
§ 30.086 VERIFICATION OF SIGNATURES ON PETITIONS; TIME LIMIT FOR FILING
SIGNATURES; NOTIFICATION OF GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature
verification. Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the
governing body, the city and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of the
county in which the city is located may by mutual agreement provide that the
County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether the petition is
signed by the requisite number of voters. The city shall reimburse the county
for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election Commissioner. When the
verifying official has determined that 100% of the necessary signatures
required by this subchapter have been obtained, he or she shall notify the
governing body of that fact, and shall immediately forward to the governing
body a copy of the petition.
   (B)   In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to
the governing body and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file
with the Clerk within 6 months from the date the prospective petition was
authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not obtained by the
date, the petition shall be void.
(Prior Code, § 18-37)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2518
§ 30.087 FREQUENCY OF SUBMISSION OF SAME MEASURE.
   The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every 2 years. No attempt to repeal or alter
an existing measure or portion of the measure by referendum petition may be
made within 2 years from the last attempt to repeal or alter the measure. The
prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter is
designed to accomplish the same or essentially the same purpose as the previous
attempt.
(Prior Code, § 18-38)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2519
§ 30.088 AUTHORITY OF GOVERNING BODY TO SUBMIT MEASURES TO DIRECT VOTE.
   The Chief Executive Officer and governing body of the city may, at any time,
by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the electors of
any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an override of any veto,
if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this subchapter, and may provide
in the resolution that the measure shall be submitted at a special election or
the next regularly scheduled primary or general election. Immediately upon the
passage of any such resolution for submission, the Clerk shall cause the
measure to be submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at the time specified
in the resolution and in the manner provided in this subchapter for submission
of measures upon proposals and petitions filed by voters. The matter shall
become law if approved by a majority of the votes cast.
(Prior Code, § 18-39)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2520
§ 30.089 CALLING OF ELECTION; NOTICE OF ELECTION.
   (A)   Elections under Neb. RS 18-2501 to 18-2538, either at a special
election or regularly scheduled primary or general election, shall be called by
the City Clerk. No special election to be conducted by the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall be held within 30 days prior to the
statewide primary or general election or within 60 days after the statewide
primary or general election.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause notice of every such election to be printed
in 1 or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least once not
less than 30 days prior to the election and also posted in the office of the
Clerk and in at least 3 conspicuous places in the city at least 30 days prior
to the election. The notice shall be substantially as follows:
Notice is hereby given that on                            , the
                  day of                                      ,               
at                                                             (identify
polling place or precinct) of the municipality of
                                                      , Nebraska, an election
will be held at which there will be submitted to the electors of the
Municipality for their approval or rejection, the following measures,
propositions or issues:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
(naming measures, propositions or issues), which election will be open at 8:00
a.m. and will continue open until 8:00 p.m., of the same day.
Dated this                                  day of
                                                            ,
                        .
                                                                                                                                                 
Clerk of the City of North Platte, Nebraska.
 
   (C)   The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in pamphlet
form of measures initiated or referred. The notice provided for in this section
shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be obtained.
(Prior Code, § 18-40)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2521
§ 30.090 PREPARATION AND FORM OF BALLOTS.
   All ballots for use in special elections under this subchapter shall be
prepared by the Clerk and furnished by the governing body, unless the governing
body contracts with the county for the service, and shall be in form the same
as provided by law for election of the Chief Executive Officer and governing
body of the city. When ordinances under this subchapter are submitted to the
electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general election, they shall be
placed upon the official ballots as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-41)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2522
§ 30.091 EFFECT OF INITIATIVE.
   (A)   The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact measures
affecting the governance of the city. An initiative proposal shall not have as
its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of existing law except
if the repeal or modification is ancillary to and necessary for the adoption
and effective operation of the initiative measure.
   (B)   An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect effect
of the passage of the initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an
existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject
only to limited referendum pursuant to §
30.092.
   (C)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed with the
Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body to consider
passage of the measure contained in the petition, including an override of any
veto, if necessary. If the governing body fails to pass the measure without
amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from
the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the city. If the governing body desires to submit
the measure to a vote of the people at a special election prior to the next
regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the city, the
governing body shall, by resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to
be submitted at a special election. The resolution shall not be subject to
referendum or limited referendum.
   (D)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified electors, which petition requests that a special
election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the people,
has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518, it
shall be the duty of the governing body to consider passage of the measure
contained in the petition, including an override of any veto, if necessary. If
the governing body fails to pass the measure, without amendment, including an
override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from the date it received
notification pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518, the Clerk shall cause the measure to
be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for the
purpose. Subject to Neb. RS 18-2521, the date of the election shall not be less
than 30 or more than 60 days from the date the governing body received
notification pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518.
   (E)   If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in
favor of the measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of the city
30 days after certification of the election results, unless the governing body
by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the measure itself provides
for a later effective date, which resolution shall not be subject to referendum
or limited referendum. A measure passed by the method shall not be amended or
repealed except by 2/3 majority of the members of the governing body. No such
attempt to amend or repeal shall be made within 1 year from the passage of the
measure by the electors.
(Prior Code, § 18-42)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2523—18-2526
§ 30.092 REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.
   The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend
existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the city.
   (A)   The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum:
      (1)   Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations, including
but not limited to those relating to the issuance of or provided for in bonds,
notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness, for projects previously
approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to referendum or limited
referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted prior to July 17, 1982;
      (2)   Measures relating to any industrial development projects,
subsequent to measures giving initial approval to the projects;
      (3)   Measures adopting proposed budget statements following compliance
with procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;
      (4)   Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health or safety which have been designated as urgent measures by
unanimous vote of those present and voting of the governing body and approved
by its Chief Executive Officer;
      (5)   Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as
provided for in division (D) of this section for which a sufficient referendum
petition was not filed within the time limit stated in the notice or which
received voter approval after the filing of the petition;
      (6)   Resolutions directing the Clerk to cause measures to be submitted
to a vote of the people at a special election as provided in Neb. RS 18-2524
and 18-2529;
      (7)   Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted
by initiative as provided in Neb. RS 18-2526; and
      (8)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by municipalities and
which are necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in
previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other evidence of indebtedness.
   (B)   The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
      (1)   Measures in furtherance of a policy of the city or relating to
projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to referendum or
which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the voters at an
election, except that the measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum for a period of 1 year after any such policy or project was
approved at a referendum election, enacted by initiative or approved by the
voters at an election;
      (2)   Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement or enlargement, including the financing or refinancing of the
costs, of public ways, public property, utility systems and other capital
projects and measures giving initial approval for industrial development
projects; and
      (3)   Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for
measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in
previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness,
and pay rates and salaries for city employees other than the members of the
governing body and the Chief Executive Officer.
   (C)   Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect 30
days after their passage by the governing body, including an override of any
veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures subject to
limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification pursuant to Neb.
RS 18-2518 within 30 days after the measure’s passage by the governing body,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, or after notice is first
published pursuant to division (D)(3) of this section. If the necessary number
of signatures as provided in Neb. RS 18-2529 or 18-2530 has been obtained
within the time limitation, the effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended
unless approved by the voters.
   (D)   For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement or enlargement of public ways, public property,
utility systems or other capital projects or any measure relating to any
facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste
Management Act, a city may exempt all subsequent measures relating to the same
project from the referendum and limited referendum procedures provided for in
Neb. RS 18-2501 to 18-2537 or by the following procedure:
      (1)   By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place of
the hearing being published at least once not less than 5 days prior to the
date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the governing
body’s jurisdiction;
      (2)   By passage of a measure approving the project, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent to
the date of hearing; and
      (3)   After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, by giving notice as follows:
         (a)   For those projects for which applicable statutes require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity creating a district or otherwise
establishing the project, notice shall be given for the project by including
either as part of the ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized
notice concerning the ordinance or resolution a statement that the project as
described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of the notice and that, after the
30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject to
any further right of referendum; and
         (b)   For projects for which applicable statutes do not require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by publication of a
notice concerning the projects stating in general terms the nature of the
project and the engineer’s estimate of costs of the project and stating that
the project described in the notice is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of the notice and that, after the
30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject to
any further right of referendum. The notice required by this division shall be
published in at least 1 newspaper of general circulation within the city and
shall be published not later than 15 days after passage by the governing body,
including an override of a veto, if necessary, of a measure approving the
project.
         (c)   The right to hold such a hearing prior to the passage of the
measure by the governing body and give the notice after passage of the measure
by the governing body to obtain exemption for any particular project in a
manner described in this division is optional, and the city shall not be
required to hold such a hearing or give the notice for any particular project.
   (E)   All measures, except as provided in divisions (A), (B) and (D) of this
section, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after such
measure has been passed by the governing body, including an override of a veto,
if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.
(Prior Code, § 18-43)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2527, 18-2528
§ 30.093 EFFECT OF REFERENDUM.
   (A)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed with the
Clerk and verified pursuant to §
30.085, it shall be the duty of the governing body to reconsider the measure or
portion of the measure which is the object of the referendum. If the governing
body fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner
proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
within 30 days from the date the governing body receives notification pursuant
to §
30.086, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the
people at the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within
the city. If the governing body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the
people at a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the city, the governing body shall, by resolution,
direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election.
The resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
   (B)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified voters of the city, which requests that a special
election be called to submit the referendum measure to a vote of the people,
has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518, it
shall be the duty of the governing body to reconsider the measure or portion of
the measure which is the object of the referendum. If the governing body fails
to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by
the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk
shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special
election called for such purpose within 30 days from the date the governing
body received notification pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2521. Subject to the
provisions of Neb. RS 18-2521, the date of the special election shall not be
less than 30 and not more than 60 days from the date the governing body
received notification pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518.
   (C)   If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall
vote in favor of the measure, the law subject to the referendum shall be
repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not be
reenacted or returned to its original form except by a 2/3 majority of the
members of the governing body. No such attempt to reenact or return the measure
to its original form shall be made within 1 year of the repeal or amendment of
the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not receive a
majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective or remain in
effect.
(Prior Code, § 18-44)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2529—18-2531
§ 30.094 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   The Election Act, so far as applicable and when not in conflict with
Neb. RS 18-2501 to 18-2531, shall apply to voting on ordinances by the
registered voters pursuant to the sections.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to procedures for initiatives
or referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02, relating to municipal
light and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504 and 70-650.01, relating to public power
districts, and Neb. RS 80-203—80-205, relating to soldiers’ and sailors’
monuments.
(Prior Code, § 18-46)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2536, 18-2537
§ 30.999 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false affidavit or takes
a false oath regarding the qualifications of any person to sign petitions under
Neb. RS 18-2501—18-2531, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit
of $300 on the fine.
      (2)   Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition or any part
thereof, or signs a false name thereto, or signs or files any petition knowing
the petition or any part thereof to be falsely made, or suppresses any petition
or any part thereof, which has been duly filed pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2501—18-
2531, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of $500 on the
fine.
      (3)   Whoever signs any petition under Neb. RS 18-2501—18-2531, knowing
that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where the petition is
made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the acts mentioned in this
section, bribes or gives or pays any money or thing of value to any person
directly or indirectly to induce him to sign the petition, or engages in any
deceptive practice intended to induce any person to sign a petition, shall be
guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of $300 on the fine.
      (4)   Any clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of
Neb. RS 18-2501—18-2531, or who willfully causes unreasonable delay in the
execution of his or her duties under the sections shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor, but imprisonment shall not be included as part of the punishment.
(Prior Code, § 18-45)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2532—18-2535
CHAPTER 31: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Vacancies in elective office
   
31.02   Removal of elected officers
   
31.03   Mayor
   
31.04   President of Council; acting president
   
31.05   Election and term of Council members; duties of Council
   
31.06   Organization of Council; residency requirement for Council members
   
31.07   Relationship with city personnel
Ordinances
   
31.20   Authority of Mayor and Council
   
31.21   Appropriation or payment of money
   
31.22   Reading
   
31.23   Publication or posting; emergencies
   
31.24   Effective date
Standing Committees
   
31.40   Appointment; membership; authority
Statutory reference:
   Ordinances, see Neb. RS 16-403—16-405
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 VACANCIES IN ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   The governing body may provide for filling the vacancies as may occur
in any elective office except the Office of Mayor, by appointment by the Mayor
with the consent of the Council to hold the vacant office for the unexpired
term, including calling a special election. Whenever the City Council shall
fail to consent to any appointment made under this section by the Mayor by the
close of the second regular Council meeting following the announcement of the
appointment, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election in the ward in
which the vacancy exists. If there is a vacancy of a majority of the City
Council, there shall be a special election conducted by the Secretary of State.
   (B)   When there is a vacancy in the Office of the Mayor, the President of
the Council shall serve as Mayor for the unexpired term, except that, if at
least ½ of the previous Mayor’s term remains and a general election is to be
held more than 60 days from the date of vacancy, a successor shall be elected
at the next general election for the balance of the previous Mayor’s unexpired
term.
   (C)   No officer who is removed at a recall election or resigns after the
initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy
resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of the
same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
(Prior Code, § 2-31)
Statutory reference:
   Vacancies in elected city offices, see Neb. RS 16-217
§ 31.02 REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICERS.
   When any officer elected by the qualified voters of the city, as provided in
this code, shall have become habitually intemperate, or in any way incompetent
to discharge the duties of his or her office, or become grossly negligent in
the discharge of his or her duties, or shall willfully and persistently
obstruct the transaction of the business of the Council or the public business,
or shall willfully, persistently, arbitrarily and contrary to law thwart or
impede the action of the Council, or shall have moved from the city, or shall
have been guilty of any act or conduct sufficient to constitute a misdemeanor
in office, or shall have neglected or refused to pay over any money in his or
her hand belonging to the city in the manner or at the time prescribed by law,
or shall fail to present his or her books or accounts to the Council for
adjustment or settlement, or shall have been convicted of any crime or offense
of an infamous character while in office, he or she shall be subject to removal
from office by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-32)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-217
§ 31.03 MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be elected to serve a 4-year term of office. The Mayor shall
be a registered voter of the city. The Mayor’s term of office shall commence on
the first regular meeting of the Council in December following the Mayor’s
election. The Mayor shall preside at all the meetings of the City Council and
shall have the right to vote on any such matter when his or her vote will
provide the additional vote required to create a number of votes equal to a
majority of the number of members elected to the Council. He or she shall have
the superintending control of all the officers and affairs of the city and
shall take care that the state and city law are complied with. He or she may
administer oaths, and shall sign the commissions and appointments of all the
officers appointed in the city. The Mayor shall have the power to approve or
veto any ordinance passed by the City Council, and to approve or veto any
order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the
allowance of any claim; provided that, any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution,
award or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, vetoed
by the Mayor may be passed over his or her veto by a vote of 2/3 of all the
members elected to the City Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign
any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award or vote to enter into any
contract, or the allowance of any claim, and returns it with his or her
objection in writing at the next regular meeting of the Council, it shall
become law without his or her signature. The Mayor may veto any items of any
appropriation bill, and approve the remainder thereof. The items so vetoed may
be passed by the Council over his or her veto as in other cases. The Mayor
shall communicate to the Council such information and recommend such measures,
as, in his or her opinion, may tend to improve the city, and may have such
jurisdiction as may be vested in him or her by ordinance over all places within
2 miles of the corporate limits of the city for the enforcement of health or
quarantine laws and the regulation thereof. The Mayor shall have the power
after the conviction of any person to remit fines and forfeitures, and to grant
reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the laws of the city. If
there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, or if the Mayor is absent or unable
to fulfill the duties and obligations of his or her office, the President of
the Council shall exercise the powers and duties of the office until the
vacancy shall be filled, or until such disability is removed, or, in the case
of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
(Prior Code, § 2-33)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-312—16-316
§ 31.04 PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL; ACTING PRESIDENT.
   The City Council shall elect 1 of its own body each year who shall be styled
the President of the Council, and who shall preside at all meetings of the City
Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor and the
president of the Council, the City Council shall elect 1 of its own body to
occupy his or her place temporarily, who shall be styled acting president of
the Council. Both the president of the Council and the acting president of the
Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the
president of the Council, or acting president of the Council, while so acting,
shall be as binding upon the City Council and upon the city as if done by the
elected Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-317, 16-402
§ 31.05 ELECTION AND TERM OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; DUTIES OF COUNCIL.
   The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a 4-year
term. One Council member from each ward shall be elected at each election, so
that terms are staggered. The City Council shall be the legislative division of
the city government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may
be authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety, assess such taxes and fees as
are necessary and appropriate funds in the exercise of these functions.
(Prior Code, § 2-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-302.01
§ 31.06 ORGANIZATION OF COUNCIL; RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Council members shall take office and commence their duties on the first
regular meeting of the Council in December following their election. The newly
elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law, together with
the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular
meeting at the hour and place prescribed in this subchapter and perfect the
reorganization of the City Council as provided in this chapter, and all
appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled
by appointment. After the meeting has been called to order, the City Clerk
shall report to the City Council the names of all Council members-elect who
have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be spread
upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of the city
shall be represented by 2 Council members. No person shall be eligible who is
not at the time of his or her election an actual resident of the ward for which
he or she is qualified, and, should any Council member move from the ward from
which he or she was elected, his or her office shall thereby become vacant.
(Prior Code, § 2-36)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-302.01
§ 31.07 RELATIONSHIP WITH CITY PERSONNEL.
   The Mayor and City Council reserve the right to make inquiries of any city
personnel relative to city activities. Except for purposes of inquiry, the City
Council and Mayor shall deal with the administrative services of the city
through the City Administrator, and neither the Mayor, the Council, nor members
thereof shall give orders directly to any subordinate of the City
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2-37) (Ord. 2931, § 1, 11-2-1993)
ORDINANCES
§ 31.20 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
   The governing body shall have the responsibility of making all ordinances,
bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of
the state, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining the peace, good
government and welfare of the city and its trade, commerce and security.
(Prior Code, § 2-61)
§ 31.21 APPROPRIATION OR PAYMENT OF MONEY.
   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or payment of
money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a majority
of all members elected to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-62)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-404
§ 31.22 READING.
   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by the title on 3
different days. This requirement may be suspended by a 3/4 vote of the Council,
and in such case the ordinance may be read by title or number and then moved
for final passage. Three-fourths of the Council may require any ordinance to be
read in full before final passage under either process.
(Prior Code, § 2-63)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-404
§ 31.23 PUBLICATION OR POSTING; EMERGENCIES.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall be published 1 time within 15 days
after they are passed in some newspaper published within the city, or in
pamphlet form to be distributed or sold as may be provided by ordinance; and
every ordinance fixing a penalty or forfeiture for its violation shall, before
the ordinance takes effect, be published for at least 1 week in some manner
prescribed in this section; provided that, in case of riots, infectious
diseases or other impending danger, or any other emergency requiring its
immediate operation, the ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of
the Mayor immediately upon its first publication as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-64)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-405
§ 31.24 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   No ordinance, except as provided for in §
31.23, which has been adopted by the city without submission to the voters of
the city shall go into effect until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-65)
STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 31.40 APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   At the organization meeting of the City Council, the Mayor shall
appoint members of standing committees as the City Council may create. The
membership of the standing committees may be changed at any time by the Mayor.
The members of the standing committees shall serve a term of office of 2 years,
unless reappointed. Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of any business. All committee members present shall be
required to cast their vote on all issues moved on by the committee.
   (B)   Committees of the Council shall act as a screening committee only and
it shall be the responsibility of the committee to hear the requests of the
public and staff and to make recommendation to the Council based upon its
findings. The committees shall have no authority to enter into contracts or to
obligate the city in any financial matters or for any services.
   (C)   The committees shall have no authority to act in any administrative
capacity, but may act in a legislative advisory capacity to the Council, to
effect a more efficient operation of city government. The following committees
of the Council have been appointed and shall continue in existence until
abolished by the Mayor and Council:
      (1)   Administration; Finance and Leisure Services Committee;
      (2)   Community and Economic Development Committee;
      (3)   Public Safety Committee; and
      (4)   Public Works Committee.
(Prior Code, § 2-91) (Ord. 3008, § 1, 5-16-1995)
CHAPTER 32: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Amount of bonds
   
32.02   Conditions for bonds
   
32.03   Oath
   
32.04   Appointed officials generally
   
32.05   Emergency appointments
   
32.06   Term of office of appointed officials
   
32.07   Creation of offices
   
32.08   Designation of powers, duties, compensation and classification of
offices
   
32.09   Reports
   
32.10   Merger of offices
   
32.11   Accounting for and delivery of property
   
32.12   Change in office
Specific Offices
   
32.25   City Attorney
   
32.26   City Prosecutor
   
32.27   City Treasurer
   
32.28   City Clerk
   
32.29   City Administrator
   
32.30   City Engineer
   
32.31   Traffic Engineer
   
32.32   City Physician
   
32.33   Public Service Director
   
32.34   Chief of Police
   
32.35   Deputy City Clerk
   
32.36   Development Director
   
32.37   Reserved
   
32.38   Fire Chief
   
32.39   Utilities Manager
   
32.40   Library Director
Compensation
   
32.55   Establishment of salaries; wage and salary schedule
   
32.56   Change in salary of elected officials
   
32.57   Conflict of interest
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 AMOUNT OF BONDS.
   All bonds of city officials shall be in an amount at least equal to the
statutory requirements. If no bond is required by state law, the bonds shall be
in such amount as is set by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-121)
§ 32.02 CONDITIONS FOR BONDS.
   Official bonds of the city shall be in form, joint and several, and shall be
made payable to the city in such penalty as the governing body may set by
resolution, which sums shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk;
provided, the penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal
minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official. All
official bonds of the city officials shall be executed by the principal named
in such bonds and by at least 2 sufficient sureties who shall be freeholders of
the county, or by the official as principal and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity
or bonding company; provided, no city official, while still in his or her
official term of office, shall be accepted as surety on any other official’s
bond, contractor’s bond, license bond or appeal bond under any circumstances.
Only companies that are legally authorized to transact business in the state
shall be eligible for suretyship on the bond of an official of the city. All
such bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge
of all duties required by law of the principal, and shall inure to the benefit
of the city and any persons who may be injured by a breach of the conditions of
the bonds. No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval
of the governing body and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the
instrument by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the
governing body. The premium on any official bond required to be given may be
paid out of the General Fund, or other proper city fund, upon a resolution to
that effect by the governing body at the beginning of any city year. All
official bonds meeting the conditions in this section shall be filed with the
City Clerk for his or her official records, and it shall be the duty of the
City Clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond so filed upon the payment of
a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the governing body. If the sureties
on the official bond of any officer of the city, in the opinion of the
governing body, become insufficient, the governing body may, by resolution, fix
a reasonable time within which the officer may give a new bond or additional
sureties as directed. If the officer should fail, refuse or neglect to give a
new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and approval of the
governing body, then the office shall, by the failure, refusal or neglect,
become vacant, and it shall be the duty of the governing body to appoint a
competent and qualified person to fill the office. Any official who is
reelected to office shall be required to file a new bond after each election.
(Prior Code, § 2-122)
§ 32.03 OATH.
   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided in this code, shall, before entering
upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath, which
shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:
      “I,                                                      , do solemnly
swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Nebraska against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this
obligation freely, and without mental reservation, or for the purpose of
evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the
office of                                               according to law, and
to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor
am I a member of, any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will not
advocate, nor become a member of, any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence. So help me God.”
(Prior Code, § 2-123)
§ 32.04 APPOINTED OFFICIALS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Mayor may, by and with the advice and consent of a majority of the
City Council, appoint an administrator, treasurer, clerk, deputy city clerk,
engineer, attorney, physician, director of development, manager of utilities,
public service director, fire chief, chief of police and library director.
   (B)   All appointed officers may be removed at pleasure by the Mayor, by and
with the consent of a majority of the members of the Council. All confirmations
of appointments to such offices by the Council shall be made viva voce, and the
concurrence of a majority shall be required.
   (C)   The vote by “yeas” and “nays” shall be recorded.
(Prior Code, § 2-124) (Am. Ord. 3797, § 1, 8-17-2010)
§ 32.05 EMERGENCY APPOINTMENTS.
   In the event of an emergency the Mayor may appoint such special police as
may be required, and he or she is hereby authorized to call on any inhabitants
of the city, between the ages of 18 and 50, to aid in enforcing the laws of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2-125)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-308
§ 32.06 TERM OF OFFICE OF APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   All officers appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, except the
Chief of Police and Fire Chief, shall hold the office to which they may be
appointed until the end of the Mayor’s term of office and until their
successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed, or until the
ordinance creating the office shall be repealed.
(Prior Code, § 2-126)
§ 32.07 CREATION OF OFFICES.
   The governing body may create any office that it may deem necessary for the
good government and interest of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-127)
§ 32.08 DESIGNATION OF POWERS, DUTIES, COMPENSATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF
OFFICES.
   The governing body may regulate and prescribe by ordinance the powers,
duties and compensation of the officers of the city not specifically delineated
by state law. The governing body may classify the several offices and positions
of trust or employment in the public service on the basis of merit through such
agency as the governing body shall provide for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2-128)
§ 32.09 REPORTS.
   The governing body may require from any officer of the city at any time a
report in detail of the transactions of his or her office or of any matters
connected therewith.
(Prior Code, § 2-129)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-220
§ 32.10 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The governing body may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and merge
any elective or appointive office or employment, except Mayor and Council
member, with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that 1 or
more of such offices or employments may be held by the same officer or employee
at the same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall
always be construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination or merger
shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or
compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged or combined offices
or employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for
the salary or compensation of the offices or employments so merged and
combined.
(Prior Code, § 2-130)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-305, 16-318.01
§ 32.11 ACCOUNTING FOR AND DELIVERY OF PROPERTY.
   Every officer and employee of the city or of any of its boards or
departments shall promptly and fully account for and deliver to his or her
successor, or as otherwise directed by the Mayor and Council, all money,
equipment and other property of the city which he or she has in his or her
possession or has received from the city during his or her term of office or
employment.
(Prior Code, § 2-131)
§ 32.12 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   The governing body shall meet on the first regular meeting of the Council in
December in each election year following the day of the city election and the
outgoing officers and the outgoing members of the City Council shall present
their reports. The outgoing members of the Council shall surrender their
offices to the incoming members. Each outgoing officer shall thereupon
surrender to his or her successor in office all property, records, papers and
moneys belonging to his or her successor. After the surrender, the outgoing
Council shall adjourn sine die. The newly elected Council shall then convene
and proceed to organize itself for the ensuing year. The Mayor shall call the
meeting to order. The new Council shall then proceed to examine the credentials
of their members and other elective officers of the city to see that each has
been duly and properly elected and to see that the oaths and bonds have been
given as are required. The Council shall then elect 1 of its own body to be the
President of the Council. The Mayor shall nominate his or her candidates for
appointive offices, board members and other city employee positions not later
than the third Tuesday in January following the election of the Mayor. The
officials and employees, when approved by the Council, shall hold office until
their successors are duly appointed and qualified unless otherwise designated
by state law or city ordinance. The Mayor shall then proceed with the regular
order of business. It shall be the duty of all members of the Council and other
elected officials to qualify prior to the first regular meeting of the Council
in December following their election. All appointive officers shall qualify
within 2 weeks following their appointment.
(Prior Code, § 2-132)
SPECIFIC OFFICES
§ 32.25 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall represent the city on corporate and civil matters.
He or she shall give advice to the Mayor and Council and such other city
officials as shall be requested by the Mayor or Council. He or she shall
prepare ordinances, examine legal instruments, and handle civil lawsuits, and
shall be responsible for such other work as may be requested by the Mayor or
Council. He or she shall attend meetings of the Council and give the Council
his or her opinion upon any matter submitted to him or her, either orally or in
writing as may be required.
(Prior Code, § 2-131)
Statutory reference:
   City attorney, see Neb. RS 16-319
§ 32.26 CITY PROSECUTOR.
   The City Prosecutor shall be responsible for criminal prosecution of city
ordinances, for the preparation of complaints as requested by the city police
or other authorized officials, and attend and prosecute violations of the
ordinances of the city when directed to do so by the Mayor. Without direction,
the City Prosecutor shall appear and prosecute all cases for violation of the
ordinances of the city that have been appealed and are pending in the District
Court. He or she shall be available to advise the city police in all matters
regarding the prosecution of violations of the city ordinances, and shall
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-134)
§ 32.27 CITY TREASURER.
   The Treasurer of the city shall be custodian of and receive all money
belonging to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation, and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall, at
the end of every month, and as often as may be requested, render an account to
the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of
the account, the amount of money remaining in each fund and the amount paid
therefrom, and the balance of money in the treasury. He or she shall accompany
such account with a statement of all receipts and disbursements, together with
all warrants retained and paid by him or her, which warrants, with all vouchers
held by him or her, shall be filed with his or her account in the Clerk’s
office. He or she shall keep all records and do all activities required by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-135)
Statutory reference:
   City treasurer, see Neb. RS 16-318
§ 32.28 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Council, appoint the City
Clerk. Except when some other person is specifically appointed, the Clerk shall
be and assume the duties of the City Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the
City Clerk to attend every meeting of the Council and keep a record of the
proceedings thereof. Whenever required by the Mayor or requested by 4 members
of the Council, he or she shall deliver a notice to the members of the Council
of any special meeting thereof, and shall notify any and all committees of the
Council of the business entrusted to them.
   (B)   The Clerk shall, in addition to the general duties imposed by law,
perform such duties as may be imposed by ordinance or directed by the governing
body.
(Prior Code, § 2-136)
Statutory reference:
   City Clerk, see Neb. RS 16-317
§ 32.29 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council. He or she may be removed at the pleasure of the Mayor with the
consent of the Council. The Administrator shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Mayor at all times. He or she shall be an ex officio member of
all boards and committees for liaison purposes. He or she shall make and keep
current an inventory of all real property and all major items of equipment
owned by the city. The supervision shall not extend to unilateral action on
construction or purchase of equipment. He or she shall serve as public
relations officer of the city and shall endeavor to adjust all complaints filed
against any employee, department, division or service and shall cooperate with
community organizations whose aim and purpose is to advance the best interests
of the city. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall have
the duty of reporting any matter concerning city affairs under his or her
supervision. He or she shall analyze the functions, duties and activities of
the various departments, divisions and services of the city and of all
employees thereof and to make his or her recommendations to the Mayor. He or
she shall thereafter carry out the Mayor’s recommendations in coordinating the
administrative functions and operations of the various departments. He or she
shall procure facts and submit suggested long range improvements to the
governing body. He or she shall maintain the records and prepare the reports as
may be required to perform the duties of his or her office. Information and
reports deemed necessary by the Administrator shall be prepared by the
department heads under his or her supervision. The Administrator shall act as
the agent of the Mayor in the discharge of his or her duties of the
superintending and control of all of the officers and affairs of the city. He
or she shall have no independent power to exercise any policy-making or
legislative functions whatsoever, or to commit or bind the governing body to
any plan, action or program requiring official action by the governing body.
The salary of the Administrator shall be fixed by ordinance of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-137)
Statutory reference:
   City administrator, see Neb. RS 16-308
§ 32.30 CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Engineer shall make all surveys, estimates and calculations
necessary to be made for the establishment of any public utilities, and the
cost of labor and materials therefor. He or she shall accurately make all
plats, sections and maps as may be necessary under the direction of the
governing body. Upon request, he or she shall make estimates of the cost of
labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract with the city,
and make all surveys, estimates and calculations necessary to be made for the
establishment of grades, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system,
waterworks, power plant, public heating system, bridges, curbing and gutters
and the improvement of streets and erection and repair of buildings, and shall
perform such other duties as the governing body may require.
(Prior Code, § 2-138)
Statutory reference:
   City engineer authorized, see Neb. RS 16-308
§ 32.31 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   (A)   The Office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The city’s
Traffic Engineer shall be a qualified engineer and shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council. He or she shall exercise the powers and
duties as provided in this code and as directed by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   It shall be the general duty of the city’s Traffic Engineer to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control
devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise
remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions,
to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city and to
cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties
as is necessary to comply with the provisions of this code. The city’s Traffic
Engineer may be, but is not required to be, the same person as the City
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 2-139)
§ 32.32 CITY PHYSICIAN.
   The City Physician shall be a physician who resides permanently in the city.
He or she shall be a member of the Board of Health of the city and shall be its
medical adviser. When requested by the Mayor or City Attorney, he or she shall
investigate all cases of injury to persons in which liability against the city
may be asserted and make a written report thereof, including the circumstances
causing the injury and the nature and extent of the injury. He or she shall
perform such other duties of a medical and healthful nature as shall be
assigned to him or her from time to time by the Mayor and Council. He or she
shall receive no compensation as a member of the Board of Health nor any salary
as City Physician, but shall be allowed compensation for services so assigned
to him or her and rendered the city at the usual rates prevailing in the city
for the services.
(Prior Code, § 2-140)
Statutory reference:
   City physician, see Neb. RS 16-238
§ 32.33 PUBLIC SERVICE DIRECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Service Director to have general charge,
direction and control over the street, sanitation, shop, traffic, park and
cemetery departments. The Director shall establish appropriate rules and
regulations for the management, use and operation of the departments, subject
to the review and approval of the governing body. The Director shall be
responsible for making the reports and performing such other duties as the
governing body may from time to time designate. The city’s Street
Superintendent shall be the same person as the Public Service Director.
(Prior Code, § 2-141)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-324
§ 32.34 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall have the immediate superintendence of the police.
He or she and the police officers shall have the power, and it shall be their
duty, to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by
day or by night, in the same manner as a sheriff or constable, and keep them
until a trial or examination may be had before the proper officer; and they
shall have the same power as a sheriff and constable in relation to all
criminal matters arising out of a violation of a city law and all process
issued by the county court in connection with a violation of a city law. They
shall arrest and detain any person found violating any law of the state or any
law of the city, until a legal warrant can be obtained. Each member of the
city’s Police Department shall have the duties of becoming well informed as to
the laws of the state and laws of the city, of enforcing the laws, of wearing
at all times the badge, uniform and insignia furnished by the city for the
police and of properly caring for such badge, uniform and insignia, and such
further duties as shall be assigned to the members of the Police Department by
the Mayor and Council and as are otherwise provided by law. The Chief of Police
shall have custody of all city property used by the city police, shall execute
the orders of the Mayor, shall be a member of the Board of Health and the
Secretary and Quarantine Officer thereof, shall have charge of traffic control
on the city streets, shall make and file or cause to be made and filed
complaints for violations of the ordinances of the city, and shall perform such
other duties as are assigned to or required of him or her by the Mayor and
Council or otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-142)
§ 32.35 DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of the City Council, appoint a
Deputy City Clerk. The Deputy City Clerk shall perform the duties of the City
Clerk at all times when the City Clerk is absent from the city for any reason,
or is otherwise disqualified or incapacitated. The Deputy City Clerk may be
removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-143) (Ord. 2971, § 1, 8-2-1994)
§ 32.36 DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   The Development Director shall be responsible for the acceptance,
processing, analysis and presentation of all applications for zone changes,
conditional use permits and subdivision maps for the city’s Planning
Commission. He or she shall be an ex officio member of the city’s Planning
Commission for liaison purposes and shall serve as chief staff advisor to the
Commission on all planning matters. He or she shall also be responsible for the
preparation and presentation of plans and maps for the physical development of
the whole or any portion of the city, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the judgment of the Commission, bear relation to the
planning of the city. In addition, he or she shall be responsible for the
coordination of all opinions and recommendations regarding the planning matters
described in this section from all concerned government agencies. He or she
shall plan, program, direct and perform all aspects of the city planning,
engineering and community development processes. He or she shall perform such
other duties as are assigned to or required of him or her by the Mayor and
Council or otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-144)
§ 32.37 RESERVED.
§ 32.38 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall appoint a chief of the
Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall, on or before the last Tuesday in April
of each year, furnish or cause the Secretary to furnish the City Clerk a copy
of the roster of the members of the Fire Department in good standing, and from
month to month thereafter he or she shall report any proposed additions or
changes in the roster for proper action by the Council so that all members of
the Fire Department shall be, at all times, covered by insurance or by such
other lawful protections and benefits as may be provided under state or city
law. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have under his or her control the
property, implements and apparatus used by the Fire Department, subject to the
general and specific directives of the governing body. He or she shall use all
proper means for the extinguishing of fires, the protection of property, the
preservation of order and the enforcement of all laws relating to fires and
fire protection which govern the city. During the time of fire or great public
danger, he or she shall have and exercise the powers and duties of the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 2-146)
§ 32.39 UTILITIES MANAGER.
   The Mayor, by and with the consent of a majority of the Council, shall
appoint a Utilities Manager. The duties of the Utilities Manager shall be to
perform administrative and supervisory work in directing city utilities of
electric distribution, water and wastewater and formulation of long range plans
and daily operational decisions.
(Prior Code, § 2-147)
§ 32.40 LIBRARY DIRECTOR.
   The Mayor, by and with the consent of a majority of the Council, shall
appoint a Library Director. The duties of the Library Director shall be to
direct, plan, organize and control the activities and business of the city’s
public library, according to the accepted principles of library management and
subject to administrative direction. The Library Director shall perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-148)
COMPENSATION
§ 32.55 ESTABLISHMENT OF SALARIES; WAGE AND SALARY SCHEDULE.
   Salaries of officers and employees of the city shall be in such amount as
the governing body shall fix by ordinance; provided that, after the governing
body has adopted a wage and salary schedule with appropriate employee
classifications and wage ranges for each classification, by ordinance, the
ordinance shall be sufficient for all changes in salary for city employees
included thereunder without further ordinances being passed, approved and
published. All salaries shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and
available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 2-171)
§ 32.56 CHANGE IN SALARY OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The emoluments of any elected official shall not be increased or diminished
during the term of office for which he or she was elected, except that, in the
case elected officials who are elected to the Council or other body having more
than 1 member where terms of 1 or more members commence and end at different
times, the compensation of all members of that body may be increased or
diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person
who shall have resigned or vacated any elective office shall be again eligible
to hold the office during the term he was elected to if after resignation the
emoluments have been increased.
(Prior Code, § 2-172)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-326
§ 32.57 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the term OFFICER shall mean:
         (a)   Any member of any board or commission of the city;
         (b)   Any appointed official if the city official:
            1.   Serves on a board or commission which spends and administers
its own funds; and
            2.   Is dealing with a contract made by such board or commission.
         (c)   Any elected city official.
      (2)   Unless specified otherwise, volunteer firefighters and ambulance
drivers shall not be considered officers for purposes of this section, with
respect to their duties as firefighters and ambulance drivers.
   (B)   No officer of the city shall be permitted to benefit from any contract
to which the city is a party. The existence of such an interest in any contract
renders the contract voidable by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as
to any person who entered into the contract or took assignment thereof with
actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An action to have a contract
declared void under this section may be brought by the city or by any resident
thereof and must be brought within 1 year after the contract is signed or
assigned. Any such decree may provide for the reimbursement of any person for
the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor or services furnished
under the contract, to the extent that the city has benefited thereby. The
prohibition in this section shall apply only when the officer or his parent,
spouse or child:
      (1)   Has a business with which the individual is associated or has a
business association, which shall mean a business:
         (a)   In which the individual is a partner, director or officer; or
         (b)   In which the individual or a member of the individual’s
immediate family is a stockholder of a closed corporation stock worth $1,000.00
or more at fair market value or which represents more than 5% equity interest,
or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair
market value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
      (2)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of
the contract; provided, however, if the officer is an employee of the business
involved in the contract and has no ownership interest or will not receive a
pecuniary fee, the officer shall not be deemed to have an interest within the
meaning of this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply if the interested
officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governmental body
responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his
or her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that,
if the number of members of the board declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the board, with all members present, from securing a quorum on
the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and
      (3)   Does not act for the city as to inspection or performance under the
contract in which he or she has an interest.
   (D)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any city by a financial institution shall
not be considered a contract under the provisions of this section. The
ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall not
constitute an interest within the meaning of this section. Notwithstanding the
provisions of divisions (C)(1) through (3) of this section, if an officer’s
parent, spouse or child is an employee of the city, the officer may vote on all
issues of the contract which are generally applicable to all employees or all
employees within a classification and do not single out his or her parent,
spouse or child for special action. If an officer has the power to employ
personnel and he or she hires his or her parent, spouse or child, the officer
shall disclose the hiring pursuant to divisions (E)(1)(a) through (e) of this
section, except that, if the parent, spouse or child is already employed in the
position at the time the officer takes office and the position does not change,
no disclosure need be made. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, any contract entered into with an interested officer shall be subject
to applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable
to the city.
   (E)   (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain, separately from other records, a
ledger containing the information listed in divisions (E)(1)(a) through (e) of
this section about every contract entered into by the city in which an officer
has an interest as specified in this section for which disclosure is made as
provided in divisions (C)(1) through (3) of this section. Such information
shall be kept in the ledger for 5 years from the date of the officer’s last day
in office, and shall include:
         (a)   The names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   The nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   The date that the contract was approved by the city;
         (d)   The amount of the contract; and
         (e)   The basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
to the Clerk not later than 10 days after the contract has been signed by both
parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for public inspection
during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
   (F)   An open account established for the benefit of the city or any entity
thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be deemed a
contract subject to the provisions of this section. The statement required to
be filed pursuant to this section shall be filed within 10 days after such
account is opened. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running account of
all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from petty cash or a
petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (G)   Any officer who knowingly violates the provisions of Neb. RS 49-
14,103.01—49-14,103.03, shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Any officer
who negligently violates Neb. RS 49-14,103.01—49-14,103.03, shall be guilty of
a Class V misdemeanor.
   (H)   The city may enact ordinances exempting from the provisions of this
section contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of the city may
have an interest.
   (I)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary. The governing body shall not pay or appropriate any
money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the
performance of any act, service or duty which shall come within the proper
scope of the duties of any officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-173)
CHAPTER 33: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
33.01   Maximum term of service
   
33.02   Planning Commission
   
33.03   Board of Adjustment
   
33.04   Board of Health
   
33.05   Housing Agency
   
33.06   Cable Television Board
   
33.07   Historic Preservation Commission
   
33.08   Economic development; Citizens Advisory Review Committee
   
33.09   Library Advisory Board
§ 33.01 MAXIMUM TERM OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Generally. No member of any city commission or board may serve more
than 2 full terms if the appointment is for a period of 5 years or more, nor
shall any member serve more than 3 full terms if the appointment is for less
than 5 years.
   (B)   Specific boards and commissions.
      (1)   No person appointed by the Mayor and Council to the Planning
Commission shall serve on a board or commission for more than 3 consecutive
full terms of the board or commission.
      (2)   No person appointed by the Mayor and Council to the Civil Service
Commission shall serve on a board, commission or authority for more than 2
consecutive full terms on the board, commission or authority.
      (3)   When a member of a board, commission or authority is originally
appointed by the Mayor and Council to fill a vacancy that occurs during the
term of an appointment, the appointment shall not be considered as being for a
full term.
      (4)   Present members of the Library Board, Planning Commission, Civil
Service Commission and Urban Renewal Authority shall not be eligible for
reappointment when their present terms expire if they shall have served on the
board or commission the maximum period of time as specified in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)
§ 33.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership; bond; term of office. The governing body shall appoint the
Planning Commission, which shall consist of 9 members who shall represent
insofar as is possible different professions or occupations in the city and who
shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the approval of a 3/4 vote of the
Council. Two of the members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When
1,000 or more residents live within the area over which the city exercises
extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, 1 member of the Commission
shall be a resident from the area. All members of the Commission shall serve as
such without compensation, and may be required, in the discretion of the
governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing
body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. The
members of the Commission shall hold no other city office except when appointed
to serve on the Board of Adjustment. The term of each member shall be 3 years
unless reappointed, and members shall serve no more than 3 terms. All members
shall hold office until their successors are appointed. All members may, after
a public hearing before the Council, be removed by the Mayor by and with the
consent of a 3/4 vote of the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause.
   (B)   Organization; meetings; funding. At the time of the Planning
Commission’s first meeting in January of each year, the Commission shall
organize by selecting from its membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson/
secretary, who are eligible for reelection. It shall be the duty of the Vice-
Chairperson/Secretary to preside over the Planning Commission meetings when the
Chairperson is absent and to see that correct minutes and records of all
meetings are filed with the City Clerk, where they shall be available for
public inspection at any reasonable time. The Planning Commission shall be
funded by the governing body from time to time out of the General Fund. A
majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing
business and a majority vote of all members present shall be required to
conduct business, pass any measure or elect to any office of the Commission.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson, or any 3 members
of the Commission.
   (C)   Powers and duties relating to development regulations. It shall be the
function and duty of the Planning Commission to make and adopt plans for the
physical development of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries
which, in the Commission’s judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city,
and including a comprehensive development plan; to prepare and adopt the
implemental means as a capital improvement program, subdivision regulations,
building codes and a zoning ordinance in cooperation with other interested city
departments; to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public
utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions and citizens with
relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive
development plan and its implemental programs; to have the power to delegate
authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys for the
commission; to make preliminary reports on its findings; and to hold public
hearings before submitting its final reports. The governing body shall not hold
its public meetings or take action on matters relating to the comprehensive
development plan, capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development
or zoning until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall send its recommendations to the governing body
within 30 days from the first hearing date.
   (D)   Additional powers. The Commission may, with the consent of the
governing body, in its own name, make and enter into contracts with public or
private bodies; receive contributions, bequests, gifts or grant funds from
public or private sources; expend the funds appropriated to it by the city;
employ agents and employees; and acquire, hold and dispose of property The
Commission may on its own authority make arrangements consistent with its
program; conduct or sponsor special studies or planning work for any public
body or appropriate agency; receive grants, remuneration or reimbursement for
the studies or work; and, at its public hearings, summon witnesses, administer
oaths and compel the giving of testimony.
(Prior Code, § 2-212) (Ord. 3103, § 1, 2-4-1997)
§ 33.03 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Membership; bond; term of office. The governing body shall appoint the
Board of Adjustment, which shall consist of 5 regular members, 1 of whom shall
be a member of the Planning Commission, plus 1 additional member designated as
an alternate who shall attend and serve only when 1 of the regular members is
unable to attend for any reason. Each member of the Board shall serve a term of
3 years, unless reappointed, and shall be removable only for good and
sufficient cause by the governing body upon written charges and after a public
hearing. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, and may be
required, in the discretion of the governing body, to give a bond in a sum set
by resolution of the governing body, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties. One member of the Board of Adjustment shall be at
the same time a member of the Planning Commission at all times. Upon the loss
of membership on the Planning Commission, the member shall also lose his or her
membership on the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   Organization; meetings; funding. The Board of Adjustment shall
organize at its first meeting in June of each year and elect from its
membership a chairperson and secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary
to keep complete and accurate minutes of all Board meetings and to file the
minutes at the office of the City Clerk for examination at any reasonable time
by the public. The Board of Adjustment shall be funded from time to time out of
the General Fund by the governing body. Meetings of the Board shall be held at
such times as the governing body may designate, or at such other times as the
Chairperson may, in his or her discretion, call a meeting. Special meetings may
be also held upon the call of any 3 members of the Board. A majority of the
Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business.
   (C)   Powers.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures;
         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
         (c)   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulation, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon
the owner of the property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the
property, a variance from the strict application so as to relieve the
difficulties or hardships, if the relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of any ordinance or resolution. No such variation shall be authorized
by the Board unless it finds:
            1.   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
            2.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in
the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
            3.   The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance;
            4.   The granting of the variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice; and
            5.   The Board finds that the condition or situation of the
property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or
recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a
general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulation.
      (2)   The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is
required to pass.
   (D)   Governing body acting as Board of Adjustment. If the governing body
fails or neglects to appoint the appropriate number of Board members, the
governing body shall constitute the Board of Adjustment and shall have the same
duties, powers and authority as provided in this section.
   (E)   Duties. The Board shall be responsible for making the reports and
performing such other duties as the governing body or state law may require.
   (F)   Restrictions on membership and officers. No member of the governing
body shall serve as a member of the Board of Adjustment except as provided in
this section. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity
of both Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-213)
§ 33.04 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   Membership; organization. The governing body shall appoint a board of
health, which shall consist of 5 members. The members of the Board shall
include the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairperson; the Police Chief, who shall
serve as Secretary and Quarantine Officer; a physician, who shall serve as the
medical advisor; the President of the City Council; and 1 other member. The
members shall serve without compensation, for a 1-year term of office, unless
reappointed, and shall organize at the first meeting in June of each year.
   (B)   Meetings; funding. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the minutes
with the City Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The Board of Health shall be funded by the governing body from
time to time out of the General Fund. A majority of the Board shall constitute
a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times
as the governing body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call
of the Chairperson, or any 2 members of the Board.
   (C)   Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Board to enact rules
and regulations, which shall have the full force and effect of law, to
safeguard the health of the residents of the city. Included in the duties of
the Board shall be to enforce the rules and regulations, and to provide fines
and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress and
prevent the occurrence of nuisances and shall actively enforce all laws of the
state and ordinances of the city relating to matters of sanitation which affect
the health and safety of the people. The Board shall regularly inspect the
premises and businesses as the governing body may direct. All members of the
Board shall be responsible for making the reports and performing such other
duties as the governing body may from time to time designate.
   (D)   Holding more than 1 position on Board. No member of the Board of
Health shall hold more than 1 Board of Health position.
(Prior Code, § 2-214)
§ 33.05 HOUSING AGENCY.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Membership; organization; meetings; employees. The governing body
shall appoint 5 persons who shall constitute the Housing Agency, and the
persons shall be called the Commissioners. One Commissioner shall be appointed
each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a 5-year term of office or until his
or her successor is duly appointed; provided that, all vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms. The governing body may appoint 1 of its members
to serve as 1 of the 5 members of the Housing Agency for a 2-year term of
office or until his or her successor is duly appointed, not to exceed 3
consecutive terms of office. No person shall serve as a Commissioner unless he
or she resides within the area of operation of that Housing Agency. A
certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner shall be
filed with the City Clerk and the certificate shall be conclusive evidence of
the proper appointment of the Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no
compensation for his or her services, but he or she shall be entitled to the
necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his or
her duties. A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the
authority for the purpose of conducting its business, for exercising its
powers, and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon
the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present unless in any case the
bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger number. The Commissioners shall
elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the Commissioners and shall
have the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex officio
secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also employ legal counsel or it
may call upon the City Attorney, for such services as it may require. It may
employ technical experts and such other officers, agents and employees as it
may require and shall determine their qualifications, duties, compensations and
terms of office. The Authority may delegate such other powers and duties to its
agents or employees as it may deem proper.
      (2)   Conflict of interest. During his or her tenure, and for 1 year
thereafter, no Commissioner, officer or employee of the city’s Housing Agency
shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or
in any property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any
contract or proposed contract relating to any housing project. If any such
Commissioner, officer or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or
voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or
employment as Commissioner, officer or employee, he or she shall immediately
disclose his or her interest in writing to the Authority, and the disclosure
shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority, and he or she shall not
participate in any action by the Authority relating to the property or contract
in which he or she has any such interest; provided that, nothing in this
division shall apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of
the Authority issued in connection with any housing project, or to the
execution of agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of
funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee under any trust
indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled
by a governmental agency.
      (3)   Removal of members. The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect
of duty or misconduct in office in the manner prescribed in this division. The
Mayor shall send a notice of removal to the Commissioner, which notice shall
contain a statement containing the charges against him or her. Unless, within
10 days from the receipt of the notice, the Commissioner files with the Clerk a
request for a hearing before the governing body, the Commissioner shall be
deemed removed from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk,
the governing body shall hold a hearing at which the Commissioner shall have
the right to appear in person or by counsel and the governing body shall
determine whether the removal shall be disapproved or upheld. If the removal is
disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his or her position.
      (4)   Accounts. The Housing Agency shall keep an accurate account of all
its activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a
report to the governing body on all such information.
   (B)   Definitions. Except as otherwise specifically provided, the
definitions and terms set out in the state statutes relating to housing
authorities under the Nebraska Housing Authority Law are hereby adopted by
reference as they now exist or may hereafter be amended.
   (C)   Operation and management of rentals. The Housing Agency shall, at all
times, observe the following duties with respect to rentals and tenant
selection.
      (1)   It may rent or lease dwelling accommodations therein only to
persons of low income, elderly persons, or handicapped persons of low income,
and displaced persons in need.
      (2)   There shall be no discrimination in the eligibility or occupancy of
tenants on the basis of sex, disability, race, religion, color, creed, national
origin or ancestry.
      (3)   The Authority shall not accept any person as a tenant in any
dwelling in the housing project if the applicant has an annual income which
equals or exceeds the amount which the Authority has conclusively determined to
be sufficient to enable one to secure safe, sanitary and uncongested dwelling
accommodations within the area served by the Authority and to provide an
adequate standard of living.
      (4)   The Authority may rent or lease to a tenant a dwelling consisting
of a number of rooms which is deemed necessary to provide safe and sanitary
accommodations to the occupants without overcrowding.
      (5)   The Authority shall fix income limits for occupancy and rents after
taking into consideration:
         (a)   The family size, composition, age, physical handicaps and other
factors which might affect the rent-paying ability of the person; and/or
         (b)   The economic factors which affect the financial stability and
solvency of the project.
      (6)   The Authority may accept as a tenant any displaced person in need,
regardless of income, but in no event shall the person remain as a tenant of
the Authority for more than a period of 6 months unless the person also
qualifies as a person of low income, elderly person or handicapped person of
low income.
      (7)   All persons of low income, elderly persons or handicapped persons
of low income, or displaced persons in need, shall be entitled to the benefits
of this section, and the Authority may establish rules and regulations
consistent with the purposes of this section concerning eligibility and
occupancy of the housing project or other such shelter.
      (8)   Nothing in this division shall prohibit the right of the Authority
to inquire into the financial condition, family composition and medical,
personal and employment history of any tenant or prospective tenant.
      (9)   The Authority shall prohibit subletting by tenants.
   (D)   Establishment of regulations relating to eligibility for occupancy.
The Housing Agency may establish from time to time rules and regulations
consistent with the purposes of this section concerning the priority of
eligible applicants for occupancy. The Authority may give preferential
treatment to applicants who are servicepersons or veterans, or relatives of
servicepersons or veterans, to disabled servicepersons or veterans, to the
elderly or disabled, or to those in urgent need of adequate housing or who have
no adequate source of income; provided that, in any such system of priority,
displaced persons in need shall have a priority ahead of all other persons; and
provided further that, no tenant in good standing then in occupancy and
qualified for continued occupancy shall have his or her tenancy terminated in
order to provide dwelling units for classes or categories of applicants as the
authority may establish.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)
§ 33.06 CABLE TELEVISION BOARD.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Membership; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint, by and with
the assent of the Council, a cable television board, which shall consist of 5
regular members, 1 of whom shall be a member of the Council. After the initial
formation of the Board, 1 of the 4 non-Council members shall be appointed each
year to serve a 4-year term of office or until a successor is duly appointed;
provided that, all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Any of
the 4 non-Council members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and City Council and may be removed with or without cause at any time. The
Council member shall serve for a 2-year term of office or until a successor is
duly appointed, not to exceed 3 consecutive terms of office. No person shall
serve on the cable television board unless he or she resides inside the city
limits and is a subscriber to cable television.
      (2)   Organization; meetings. At the time of the Board’s first meeting in
January of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its membership
a chairperson and a vice-chairperson/secretary, who are eligible for
reelection. It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chairperson/Secretary to preside
over the Board’s meeting when the Chairperson is absent and to see that correct
minutes and records of all meetings are filed with the City Clerk. A Board
member shall receive no compensation for his or her services, other than
reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of duties, with
prior approval of the Council. A majority of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of doing business and a majority vote of all members
appointed shall be required to elect a person to any office of the Board. The
Board shall meet monthly unless otherwise canceled due to lack of business or
emergency. Special meetings shall be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any 2 members of the Board.
      (3)   Powers and duties. It shall be the function and duty of the Board
to develop recommendations for consideration by the Mayor and City Council for
the use of the cable television public service channel. The Board shall also
serve to hear complaints regarding the performance of the local cable company,
to investigate those complaints and to make recommendations to the Mayor and
City Council concerning those complaints not resolved to the satisfaction of
the subscriber or potential subscriber. The Board shall serve in an advisory
position only, and all pertinent decisions, rules and guidelines adopted
concerning local cable television and the city shall be made by the Mayor and
City Council.
   (B)   Complaint procedure.
      (1)   Upon commencing service and annually thereafter, the cable company
shall notify all subscribers of the manner in which to register complaints, and
of the availability of a review of complaints not satisfactorily resolved
through the Cable Television Board. The notice shall state the address,
telephone number and hours of the cable television office.
      (2)   The cable company shall keep a written record of all complaints
showing the date, the subscriber’s name and address, the nature of the
complaint and the corrective action taken. The reports shall be available for
inspection by the Board or a designated representative.
      (3)   Any person who has a complaint or problem with cable television
service shall notify the cable company first. If the problem is not adequately
resolved within 24 hours, the complainant may file a written complaint with the
cable company, which sets forth the complainant’s name and address, and the
date, a summary of the complaint, and corrective action, if any, taken by the
cable company. If the problem is not resolved within 10 days after filing the
written complaint, the complainant may file a written request for review with
the Cable Board. No later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board, the Board will meet and consider all pending written complaints in order
to resolve any disputes. Notice of the meeting is to be mailed to the address
of the complainant and the cable company. At the meeting, the complainant has
the opportunity to present the nature of his or her complaint and the type of
relief sought. After the complainant, a representative of the cable company may
present its version of the dispute and what, if anything, has been or will be
done to resolve the complaint. The Board shall notify the parties within 5
working days of its recommendations. If those recommendations are satisfactory
to the parties involved, no further action will be required. If the
recommendations are not satisfactory to either of the parties, the matter shall
be brought to the Mayor and Council for consideration and action at the next
regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)
§ 33.07 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally. It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the
protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements of special
character or special historical interest or value is a public necessity and is
required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the
people. This section shall be known as the “Historic Preservation Commission
Act of the City of North Platte”. The purpose of this act is to:
      (1)   Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation
of such improvements, which represent or reflect elements of the city’s
cultural, social, economic, political, engineering and architectural history;
      (2)   Safeguard the city’s historic and cultural heritage, as embodied
and reflected in such historic properties and sites;
      (3)   Stabilize and improve property values;
      (4)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
      (5)   Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to residents, tourists
and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;
      (6)   Strengthen the economy of the city; and
      (7)   Promote the use of historic properties and sites for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the people of the city.
   (B)   Definitions. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise the
following shall be the controlling definitions.
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR DEMOLITION. The certificate issued by
the Commission approving the demolition of an historic structure, historic site
or demolition of any structure or improvement in an historic district. Denial
by the Commission of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition results in
a certificate for demolition delay by the Commission.
      COMMISSION. The Historic Preservation Commission created under this
section.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area that contains a significant portion of
buildings, sites, structures or other improvements which, considered as a
whole, possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling and association, and embodies the distinctive
characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or is associated
with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of
our local, state or national history.
      HISTORIC PROPERTY. Any building, site, structure, object or improvement
which has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of
the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or
nation and which has been designated as a historic property pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
      IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, or place constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment that has historic
significance, exclusive of interior renovation or remodeling.
      IMPROVEMENT PARCEL. The unit of property that includes a physical
betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof,
and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes.
Provided, however, that the term IMPROVEMENT PARCEL shall also include an
unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for tax purposes.
   (C)   Historic Preservation Commission composition. 
      (1)   The Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created, consisting
of 7 members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. Of the membership, 1
shall be an historian, 1 shall be an attorney, 1 shall be a Council member, 1
shall be an architect trained in historical architecture and 3 interested
members of the community. The Mayor shall appoint the Commission subject to the
confirmation by the Council. The Commission may recommend to the Mayor members
to be appointed to the Commission. Membership in the Commission shall be for a
term of 3 years with the exception of the Council member of the Commission, who
shall be a member of the Commission so long as he or she serves as a Council
member and except that 2 members of the first Commission shall serve for terms
of 1 year, 2 for terms of 2 years and 2 for terms of 3 years. No salary or
compensation shall be paid to any member of the Commission for his or her
services.
      (2)   In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the
Commission for any reason, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in
the same manner as the original appointments for the unexpired term.
      (3)   The Commission shall meet quarterly at a designated time and place.
Additional meetings may be convened at the request of the Chairperson of the
Commission. The City Clerk shall provide 7 days public notice of the meeting
prior to such meeting. Official minutes shall be kept for each meeting. A
simple majority of the total number of appointed commission members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If a member has 3
consecutive unexcused absences, the position will become vacant and the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council, shall fill the vacancy.
      (4)   The Commission shall elect 4 officers, each to serve for the full
duration of his or her term of appointment to the Commission; a Chair, a Vice-
Chair, a Secretary and a Treasurer. The duties of the Chair shall be to preside
at meetings, to assign projects to members, to call special meetings, to issue
public statements for the Commission, and in general to assume the duties of
directing the activities of the Commission. The duties of the Vice-Chair shall
be to act in the place of the Chair in the event of the latter's absence or
inability to act. The duties of the Secretary shall be to keep complete and
accurate minutes of each meeting. The Secretary shall arrange for a suitable
place for each meeting upon instruction from the Vice-Chair. The duties of the
Treasurer shall be to work in conjunction with the City Clerk/Treasurer to keep
complete and accurate records and accounting for all funds, income and
expenditures of every nature of the Commission. All funds of the Commission
shall be placed with the City of North Platte in a specially designated city
account. The Treasurer shall also prepare a written statement of recommended
expenditures and reasons therefore, to be submitted to the City Council for
approval, such statements to be subject to the approval of the Commission's
Chair and the Commission membership.
      (5)   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a majority of affirmative
votes from members in attendance shall be required for final action on any
matter acted upon by the Commission.
      (7)   The Commission shall adopt design guidelines based on the Secretary
of the Interior's Guidelines for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and other appropriate sources. In doing so,
the ordinances recommended by the Commission shall provide for the
consideration of economic factors and provide for the recognition of weighing
potential economic detriments against preservationist objectives and shall
strive to effect a fair balance in all instances.
      (8)   All plans, projects, proposals, evaluations, specifications, and
sketches and other information necessary for the review of the Commission, or
colors, building materials, signs or other features subject to public view,
shall be made available to the Commission by the applicant or appropriate
department of the City of North Platte, along with a copy of the application
for the building or demolition permit.
      (9)   The city Development Department Director or his/her designee shall
be the Director of the Commission, without the right to vote, he/she or members
of staff shall be the custodian of records, conduct official correspondence and
generally to supervise the clerical and technical work of the Commission as
required to administer this section. In addition, the Director, for and on
behalf of the Commission and with approval and direction of the Commission,
shall:
         (a)   Carry out, assist and collaborate in studies and programs
designed to identify and evaluate structures, sites and areas worthy of
preservation;
         (b)   Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historical preservation;
         (c)   Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which are
believed worthy of preservation;
         (d)   Disseminate information to the public concerning those
structures, sites and areas deemed worthy of preservation and encourage and
advise property owners in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of
property of historical interest; and
         (e)   Make recommendations and do such other acts pursuant to this
section as the Commission shall direct.
   (D)   Annual report. The Commission shall make an annual report to the City
Council with respect to its activities for the preceding year. The annual
report shall be filed with the City Council on or before October 1 of each
year.
   (E)   Historic properties and sites designation criteria. For purposes of
this section, a historic property or historic site designation may be placed on
any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure
located thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural or cultural
significance such as historic properties or sites which:
      (1)   Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community; or
      (2)   Are identified with historic personages or with important events in
national, state or local history; or
      (3)   Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type
or specimen, inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of
construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
      (4)   Is representative of the noble work of a master builder, designer
or architect whose individual genius influenced an age; or
      (5)   Is part of or related to a city center, park or other distinctive
area, which should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on a
historic, cultural or architectural motif; or owing to its unique location or
singular physical characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual
feature of a neighborhood, community or the City of North Platte; or
      (6)   Its archeological importance has yielded or is likely to yield
information important regarding the history of the area prior to the
establishment of the City of North Platte.
   (F)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   Designation. The Commission shall have the power, subject hereto,
to designate historic properties and historic sites and to recommend
designation of historic districts within city limits. The designation shall be
made based on criteria herein. Historic districts shall be approved by the City
Council. Once designated, the historic properties, sites, improvements and
districts shall be subject to all provisions of the code.
      (2)   Certificate of appropriateness for demolition.
         (a)   No permit to demolish all or part of the exterior of a historic
property or object or a contributing property in a historic district shall be
granted to demolish the property without first receiving a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition from the Commission.
         (b)   At the time that the person applies for a permit to demolish,
the application shall be filed with the Commission. The Commission may decide
to grant the certificate of appropriateness for demolition or to issue a
certificate for demolition delay. If the Commission fails to act on the
application for certificate of appropriateness for demolition within 45 days of
the application date, it will be deemed as issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition. During the period, the applicant and the
Commission shall cooperate in attempting to avoid demolition of the property.
If the Commission issues a certificate of demolition delay, the applicant must
wait a period of 60 days before proceeding with demolition of the property,
during which period the applicant will work with the Commission and other
interested parties to achieve viable alternatives to demolition. If at the end
of 60 days a viable alternative to demolition has not been determined, the
demolition permit will be granted to the applicant.
         (c)   In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness
for demolition, the Commission shall consider and may give weight to any or all
of the following:
            1.   Whether the property or site is of such architectural or
historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public
interest and contrary to the general welfare of the city and the state;
            2.   Whether the property or site, although not itself a designated
historic structure, contributes to the distinctive architectural or historic
character of the district as a whole and therefore should be preserved for the
benefit of the city and state;
            3.   Whether the property or site is of an old and unusual or
uncommon design, texture, and/or material that it could not be reproduced or be
reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense;
            4.   Whether the property or site is in such a deteriorated
condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or
restore it, provided, however, any hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner
which is self-created or which is the result of inexcusable neglect to maintain
the property in good repair shall not qualify as a basis for the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness;
            5.   Whether the delay of the permit would result in the loss of
all reasonable and beneficial use of or return from the property.
      (3)   Other duties. In addition to those duties already specified in this
section, the Commission shall:
         (a)   Work for the continued education of the citizens about the
historical heritage of North Platte and the historic property designations
under the provision of this section;
         (b)   Cooperate with the State of Nebraska Historical Preservation
Office and the Nebraska Historic Preservation Review Board in attempting to
include such properties hereunder designated as historic structures or historic
sites, or historic districts in the National Register of Historic Places;
         (c)   As it deems advisable, receive and solicit funds for the purpose
of historic preservation in the city. The funds shall be placed in a special
city account for such purposes.
   (G)   Procedures.
      (1)   Designation of historic properties and sites. The Commission may,
after notice and public hearing, establish historic properties, improvements
and sites or rescind the designations or recommendation, after application of
the criteria herein. At least 30 days prior to the hearing, the Commission
shall notify, in writing, the owners of record, as listed in the County
Register of Deeds office. The notice shall be by personal delivery of certified
mail. These owners shall have the right to confer with the Commission prior to
final action by the Commission on the designation. Notice of the hearing shall
also be published in the local newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
The Commission shall also notify the Mayor, City Council and City
Administrator. Each such department may respond to the Commission within 10
days of notification with its comments on the proposed designation or
rescission. The Commission shall then conduct the public hearing and, in
addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and shall have the
power to subpoena the witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The
Commission may conduct an investigation into the proposed designation or
rescission. After the close of the public hearing, the Commission may designate
the property as either a historic building, structure, site or object, or may
rescind the designation. After the designation or rescission has been made,
notification shall also be given to the City Clerk.
      (2)   Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector for alteration, construction, demolition or removal of any property
or structure which has been nominated for historic sites status from the date
of the meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission at which time a
nomination form is first presented until the final disposition of the
nomination by the Historic Preservation Commission or the City Council unless
the alteration, removal or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the
City Council as necessary for public health, welfare or safety. In no event
shall the delay be for more than 60 days.
      (3)   Voluntary restrictive covenants. The owner of any historic property
or site may, at any time following the designation of his or her property,
enter into a restrictive covenant on the subject property after negotiation
with the Commission. The Commission may assist the owner in preparing the
covenant in the interest of preserving the historic property. The owner shall
record the covenant in the County Register of Deeds office.
      (4)   Appeal. An appeal from any decision of the Commission of any kind
including designation of historical properties or sites may be taken to the
City Council. The appeal may be initiated by filing a petition to appeal
specifying the grounds therefor, with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date
of the decision of the Commission that is being appealed. The City Council
shall hold a public hearing on the appeal and may by majority vote of its
members reverse or modify any decision of the Commission.
   (H)   Historic Zoning Overlay District.
      (1)   Designation of historic districts.
         (a)   This Historic Preservation Commission may, after notice and
public hearing, recommend historic districts. At least 10 days prior to such
hearing, the Commission shall notify the owners of records, as listed in the
County Register of Deeds office, who are owners of property in the proposed
district, the owners of the property immediately adjacent extending 100 feet
therefrom, and the owners of property directly opposite thereto extending 100
feet from the street frontage of the opposite property. These owners shall have
the right to confer with the Commission prior to final action by the Commission
on the designation. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least 20 days
prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall also notify the following:
Mayor, City Administrator and City Council members. Each may respond to the
Commission with its comments on the proposed designation or recission at or
prior to the hearing.
         (b)   The Commission shall then conduct the public hearing and, in
addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and receive records
and documentation as it deems necessary. Within 60 days after the close of the
public hearing, the Commission may recommend creation or amendment of a
historic district. The Commission shall cause the recommendation or recision to
be submitted to the City Council for referral to the city’s Planning Commission
and approval by the City Council.
         (c)   All historic districts shall be subject to prior review and
recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, Planning Commission and
subject to final approval by the City Council in accordance with applicable
state and city zoning procedure.
         (d)   Historic districts may also be initiated by a petition of
property owners wishing to be included in a historic district. At least 4
property owners within the area to be considered for designation of a historic
district shall file such a request with the Historic Preservation Commission.
The Commission shall follow the notice and public hearing procedure as outlined
herein.
      (2)   Zoning of historic properties. The historic zoning overlay district
designation shall constitute a change in zoning for historic preservation
purposes and shall be included as such on the official land use or zoning map.
The historic zoning shall be in addition to the existing underlying land use
zoning.
      (3)   Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Department for alteration, construction, demolition or removal of any property
or structure within a nominated historic district from the date of the meeting
of the Historic Preservation Commission at which time a nomination form is
first presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the Historic
Preservation Commission and the City Council, unless such alteration, removal
or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the City Council as
necessary for public health, welfare or safety. In no event shall the delay be
for more than 60 days.
   (I)   Conditions dangerous to life, health or property. Nothing contained in
this section shall prohibit the demolition of any historic property, or any
improvement on a historic site pursuant to order of any governmental agency or
pursuant to any court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency
conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health, or property as
determined by the Health Department. In such cases, no approval from the
Commission shall be required. The Health Department shall promptly notify the
Commission of the action being taken. When the emergency conditions do not
require demolition, the Health Department shall make every effort to carry out
the intent of this section and to use the design guidelines of the Commission
when remedying the emergency.
(Ord. 3679, § 1, passed 2-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3685, § 1, 4-3-2007; Am. Ord. 3757,
§ 1, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 33.08 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; CITIZENS ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a citizens advisory review committee. The
Mayor shall appoint 5 registered voters of the city to the Committee, subject
to approval by the City Council. At least 1 member of the Committee shall have
expertise or experience in the field of business finance or accounting. An ex-
officio member of the Committee with responsibility for assisting the Committee
and providing it with necessary information and advice on the economic
development plan shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Development Corporation
of North Platte (DEVCO) shall have the responsibility for the administration of
the economic development program.
   (B)   The Citizens Advisory Review Committee shall review the function and
progress of the economic development program and advise the City Council in
relation to the program. No member of the citizens Advisory Review Committee
shall be an elected or appointed city official, an employee of the city, a
participant in a decision making position regarding the expenditures of program
funds, or an official or employee of any qualifying business receiving
financial assistance under the economic development program or of any financial
institution participating directly in the economic development program. All
citizen members shall hold office until their successors are appointed, or
until removed by the Mayor, by and with the approval and majority vote of the
City Council.
   (C)   Members of the Citizens Advisory Review Committee shall include:
      (1)   A representative from the North Platte Area Chamber of Commerce
Board of Directors;
      (2)   A representative from the Development Corporation of North Platte
Board of Directors;
      (3)   A representative from the banking/financial services industry; and
      (4)   Two citizens at large with an interest in the continued growth and
success of the North Platte/Lincoln County region.
   (D)   The members of the Citizens Advisory Review Committee shall serve
without compensation. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep complete
and accurate minutes of all Board meetings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failed to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be public
record. The Committee shall organize at its first meeting and elect from its
membership a chairperson and secretary. A majority of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum for purposes of doing business and the Committee shall
adopt rules in accordance with the direction of the governing body.
   (E)   The Citizens Advisory Review Committee shall conduct regular meetings
to review the functioning and progress of the economic development program and
to advise the City Council with regard to the program. At least once in every
6-month period after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section derives, the Committee shall report to the governing body on its
findings and suggestions at a public hearing called for that purpose.
   (F)   (1)   The members of the Citizens Advisory Review Committee, in their
capacity as members and consistent with their responsibilities as members, may
be permitted access to business information received by the city in the course
of its administration of the economic development program, which information
would otherwise be confidential:
         (a)   Under Neb. RS 84-712.05, as amended;
         (b)   By agreement with a qualifying business participating in the
economic development program; or
         (c)   Under any ordinance of the city providing access to the records
to members of the committee and guaranteeing the confidentiality of the
business information received by reason of its administration of the economic
development program.
      (2)   Any unauthorized disclosure of any business information which is
confidential under Neb. RS 84-712.05 as amended, shall be punishable as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 17-1) (Ord. 3350, § 1, 3-20-2001)
§ 33.09 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Mission statement. The North Platte Public Library Advisory Board
shall advise and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council regarding
the orderly growth and improvement of the North Platte Public Library.
      (1)   The Board shall establish priorities and make recommendations to
the Mayor and City Council for accomplishing the various projects, plans and
functions of the North Platte Public Library.
      (2)   The Board shall make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
regarding overall objectives for management of the library.
      (3)   The Board shall make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
regarding the long term use, and general rehabilitation of the library
including buildings, grounds, parking areas, etc.
      (4)   The Board shall make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
regarding library fines, fees, rules and procedures.
   (B)   General organization. The North Platte Public Library Board shall be a
citizen advisory board organized and governed by the City of North Platte,
Nebraska.
      (1)   The Board shall consist of 12 individuals appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the City Council. The Board members shall serve without pay
for 3-year term. Each member of the Board must be a resident of Lincoln County,
Nebraska.
      (2)   The Board shall be self-organized, electing from its members a
president, vice-president, and secretary to serve for terms as shall be
determined by the Board. The business of the Board shall be conducted in
accordance with rules and policies adopted by a majority vote of the Board.
   (C)   Procedures. The following procedures shall serve as rules governing
election of officers, terms of office, responsibility of officers and conduct
of business coming before the Board.
      (1)   Election of officers and terms of office. The Board shall at its
first regular meeting conduct an election of officers to serve for a term of 1
year from the date of election. In the event an office becomes vacant, it shall
be filled at the next regular meeting of the Board by electing an officer to
fill the remainder of the term.
      (2)   Responsibilities of officers and Board members.
         (a)   President. The president shall be responsible for presiding at
the meetings of the Board. The business of the Board will be conducted in an
orderly manner keeping in mind at all times, that each member of the Board is
an equal. This position shall be in the nature of a moderator and as a
spokesperson to the public for Board statements, policy or procedures for the
conduct of Board business.
         (b)   Vice-president. The vice-president shall serve as president in
the absence of the president and at those times he/she must comply with the
responsibilities and duties of the president.
         (c)   Secretary. The secretary of the Board shall be responsible for
the preparation and preservation of Board minutes and other responsibilities as
may be delegated to the secretary by the Board.
         (d)   Board members. Each Board member is equal and shall be
responsible for the conduct of business in a dignified manner in order to
demonstrate and reflect the high character and moral integrity of each of the
Board members.
            1.   Conduct. Except of the purpose of inquiry, the Board and its
members shall not give orders to any employee of the North Platte Public
Library either publicly or privately.
            2.   Removal. Any Board member shall be removed by the Mayor, with
the consent of the City Council, for failure to attend 3 consecutive regular
meetings in a 1-year period. Any Board member failing to meet this attendance
requirement may review the circumstances with the Board and the Mayor if they
so desire. Under certain circumstances such as job related, illness or death in
the family, the Mayor with the consent of the City Council may reinstate such
member.
   (D)   Conduct of business.
      (1)   Meeting times.  Starting with the first meeting, the Board must
conduct a regular meeting every other month, plus any other special meetings
called for by the Mayor or City Council, along with any specified by the
Board's decisions of need for extra meetings of committees, meetings, etc.
      (2)   Quorum. The presence of 7 members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. A quorum shall be present to conduct business.
      (3)   Motions. All items of business coming before the Board shall be
determined by motion, second and voted of the Board unless the Board fails to
receive a motion or second to a motion.
      (4)   Vote. The approval of business coming before the Board shall
require an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of those members
present.
(Res. passed 12-19-1995)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Intergovernmental risk management
Fiscal Management
   
34.20   Publication of financial statements
   
34.21   Preparation of proposed budget statement
   
34.22   Budget hearing; adoption of budget statement
   
34.23   Certification and filing of adopted budget
   
34.24   Annual audit
   
34.25   Property tax
   
34.26   Annual appropriation ordinance
   
34.27   Expenditures
   
34.28   Judgments
   
34.29   Unlawful transfer of funds
   
34.30   Lawful transfer of funds
   
34.31   Insufficient funds
   
34.32   Sinking funds
   
34.33   Depositories generally
   
34.34   Depository bond
   
34.35   Depository securities
   
34.36   Maximum deposits
   
34.37   Investment of surplus funds
   
34.38   Filing of claims; notification of disallowance
   
34.39   Audits of claims
   
34.40   Warrants
   
34.41   Appropriation required before making contract or expenditure
   
34.42   Vote on contracts
   
34.43   Advertising of contracts
   
34.44   Political Subdivision Construction Alternatives Act
Statutory reference:
   Finances, see Neb. RS 13-601 et seq.
   Occupation taxes, levies authorized, see §
110.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT.
   The governing body and any 1 or more public agencies, as defined in Neb. RS
44-4303, may make and execute an agreement providing for joint and cooperative
action in accordance with Neb. RS 44-4301—44-4339, to form, become members of
and operate a risk management pool for the purpose of providing to members risk
management services and insurance coverages in the form of group self-insurance
and standard insurance, to protect members against losses arising from any of
the following:
   (A)   General liability;
   (B)   Damage, destruction or loss of real or personal property, including
but not limited to loss of use or occupancy, and loss of income or extra
expense resulting from loss of use or occupancy;
   (C)   Errors and omissions liability; and
   (D)   Workers’ compensation liability.
(Prior Code, § 2-281)
Statutory reference:
   Intergovernmental risk management, see Neb. RS 44-4301 et seq.
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
§ 34.20 PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   The Mayor and Council shall cause to be published semi-annually a statement
of the receipts of the city and the sources thereof and an itemized account of
the expenditures and the financial condition of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-606
§ 34.21 PREPARATION OF PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT.
   (A)   The governing body shall, not later than October 1 of each year, on
forms prescribed and furnished by the State Auditor, prepare in writing and
file with the City Clerk a proposed budget statement containing the following:
      (1)   For the immediate 2 prior fiscal years, the budgeted revenue and
expenditures from all sources, separately stated as to each such source, and
for each fund the budgeted unencumbered cash balance of the fund at the
beginning of each fiscal year;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year, the budgeted revenue and expenditures
from all sources, separately stated as to each such source, and for each fund
the budgeted unencumbered cash balance of the fund at the beginning of the
year. The statement shall contain the cash reserve for each such fund for each
fiscal year. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total
budget adopted for the fund, exclusive of capital outlay items; and
      (3)   For the immediate ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of the non-tax
revenue from each source and which fund it is to be allocated to, the actual or
estimated unencumbered cash balance for each fund which will be available at
the beginning of the next fiscal year, amounts proposed to be expended during
the year, and the amount of cash reserve, which shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted, exclusive of capital outlay items.
   (B)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances at the
beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources other than
taxation shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and the amount shall
be shown on the proposed budget statement filed pursuant to this section. The
amount to be raised from taxation, as determined pursuant to this section, plus
the estimated revenue from sources other than taxation, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve
for the ensuing year.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)
§ 34.22 BUDGET HEARING; ADOPTION OF BUDGET STATEMENT.
   Subsequent to the filing of the proposed budget statement, the governing
body shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed budget statement. Notice of
the place and time of the hearing, as well as a copy of a summary of the
proposed budget, shall be published at least 5 days prior to the date set for
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the
hearing, the statement shall be adopted, or amended, and adopted as amended,
and a written record shall be made of the hearing. If the adopted budget
statement reflects a change from that shown in the published proposed budget
statement, a summary of the changes shall be published within 20 days after its
adoption.
(Prior Code, § 2-303)
§ 34.23 CERTIFICATION AND FILING OF ADOPTED BUDGET.
   The governing body shall file with and certify to the Levying Board and File
with the State Auditor, a copy of the adopted budget statement, together with
the amount of the tax to be levied and proof of publication. The governing body
shall not certify any tax that exceeds the maximum levy prescribed by state
law; provided, in certifying the amount to be so levied, allowance may be made
for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount to be levied, plus the
actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year.
(Prior Code, § 2-304)
§ 34.24 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The governing body shall cause an audit of the city accounts to be made by a
qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of the
fiscal year. The audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the
discretion of the governing body. The audit shall be completed and the annual
audit report made not later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year.
The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than 3 copies of the
audit report to the governing body. All public utilities or other enterprises
which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited separately, and
the results of the audits shall appear separately in the annual audit report,
and the audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and
materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit
report shall set forth a financial position and results of financial operations
for each fund or group of accounts of the city, as well as an opinion by the
accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two copies of the annual
audit report shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall become a part of the
public records of the City Clerk’s office, and will, at all times thereafter,
be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed with the Auditor of
Public Accounts. The governing body and every other entity that is required in
this section to submit to an audit of its accounts shall provide and file with
the City Clerk, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements
showing its actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal
year.
(Prior Code, § 2-305)
§ 34.25 PROPERTY TAX.
   (A)   The governing body shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for
all city purposes on all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits which is taxable according to the laws of the state. All city taxes,
both real and personal, except special assessments otherwise provided for,
shall become due on December 1 of each year.
   (B)   The Council shall cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount
of tax to be levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement, including
all special assessments and other taxes.
   (C)   The County Clerk shall then place the amount of tax on the proper tax
list to be collected in the manner provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-306)
§ 34.26 ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.
   The city shall, within the last quarter of each fiscal year, pass an
ordinance to be termed “The Annual Appropriation Bill”, in which the governing
body shall appropriate such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray
all necessary expenses and liabilities of the city, not exceeding in the
aggregate the amount of tax authorized to be levied and revenue available
during the then-ensuing year. In such ordinance, there shall be specified the
object and purpose for which the appropriations are made and the amount
appropriated for each object or purpose. (This financial information probably
will be the same as the final approved budget.) No further appropriations shall
be made at any other time within the fiscal year, unless the proposition to
make the appropriations has been approved by a majority voter of the City
Council, after a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be published at least 5 days prior to the date set for hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city. All appropriations shall end
with the fiscal year for which they are made; provided, the fund arising from
road taxes and bridge taxes shall be deemed especially appropriated for street
repair purposes, and the income arising from the operation of the utility
systems shall be deemed especially appropriated to the payment of the current
expenses of and to the cost of improvements and extensions and additions to the
systems respectively, and shall not be included in the annual appropriation
ordinance. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
Council from appropriating other money in the annual appropriation bill for the
use of streets, grades and bridges, and for water, lighting, power, heating and
sewer systems; provided the sums so appropriated in the aggregate do not exceed
the maximum of tax allowed to be levied and collected as fixed by the laws of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-307)
§ 34.27 EXPENDITURES.
   The governing body shall not have the power to appropriate, issue or draw
any order or warrant on the City Treasurer for money, unless it has been
appropriated or ordered by ordinance or the claim has been allowed and a fund
has been provided in the adopted budget statement out of which the claim is
payable.
(Prior Code, § 2-308)
§ 34.28 JUDGMENTS.
   Should any judgment be obtained against the city, the Mayor and the
Committee on Finances, with the sanction of the City Council, may borrow a
sufficient amount to pay the judgment for a period of time not to extend beyond
the close of the next fiscal year. The governing body shall then add to the
amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy the sum and interest
accrued of the judgment.
(Prior Code, § 2-309)
§ 34.29 UNLAWFUL TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   Any transfer or diversion of the money or credits from any of the funds to
another fund or to a purpose other than that for which proposed, except as
specifically provided in this subchapter, shall render any Council member
voting therefor or any city official participating therein guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 2-310)
§ 34.30 LAWFUL TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   When the City Council, by a 3/4 vote of the members, shall declare the
expenditure of any fund for the purpose for which it was created to be unwise
and impracticable or where the purpose has been fully accomplished and the
whole fund or an unexpired balance thereof remains, and no indebtedness has
been incurred on account of the fund which has not been fully paid, the fund
may be transferred to any other fund of the city by the affirmative vote of 3/
4 of all the members of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-311)
§ 34.31 INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   The governing body may, whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent due to unforeseen emergencies that there is temporarily insufficient
money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted budget of
expenditures for that fund, by a majority vote transfer money from other funds
to the fund. No expenditure during the fiscal year shall be made in excess of
the amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized in
this subchapter. If, as the result of unforeseen circumstances, the revenue of
the current fiscal year shall be insufficient, the governing body may propose
to supplement the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a
public hearing at which time any taxpayer may appear, or file a written
statement protesting the application for additional money. A written record
shall be kept of all such hearings. Notice of a place and time for the hearing
shall be published at least 5 days prior to the date set for the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. The published notice shall set
forth the time and place of the proposed hearing, the amount of additional
money required, the purpose of the required money, a statement setting forth
the reasons why the adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced to meet
the need for original money and a copy of the summary of the originally adopted
budget previously published. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing on the
proposed supplemental budget and the approval of the governing body, the
governing body shall file with the County Clerk and the State Auditor a copy of
the supplemental budget and shall certify the amount of additional tax to be
levied. The governing body may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures
authorized by the adopted supplemental budget. The warrants shall be referred
to as registered warrants, and shall be repaid during the next fiscal year from
funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
(Prior Code, § 2-312)
§ 34.32 SINKING FUNDS.
   The governing body, subject to the limitations set forth in this subchapter,
shall have the power to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by state law
upon the assessed value of all taxable property within the city for a term not
to exceed that prescribed by state law, in addition to the amount of tax which
may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement of the
city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the construction,
purchase, improvement, extension or repair of the approved uses as authorized
by state law. To initiate the sinking fund, the governing body shall declare
its purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the city the
proposition to provide the improvement at the next general city election. The
resolution shall set forth the improvement, the estimated cost, the amount of
the annual levy, the number of years required to provide the required revenue,
the name of the sinking fund proposed, and the proposition as it will appear on
the ballot. Notice of the proposition shall be published in its entirety 3
times on successive weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper
of general circulation in the city. The sinking fund may be established after
the election if a majority or more of the legal votes were in favor of the
establishment of the fund. The governing body may then proceed to establish the
fund in conformity with the provisions of the proposition and applicable state
law. The funds received by the City Treasurer shall, as they accumulate, be
immediately invested with the written approval of the governing body in the
manner provided by state law. No sinking fund so established shall be used for
any purpose contrary to the purpose as it appeared on the ballot unless the
governing body is authorized to do so by 60% of the qualified electors of the
city voting at a general election favoring such a change in the use of the
sinking fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1301—19-1304
§ 34.33 DEPOSITORIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit,
for safekeeping, in state or national banks of approved and responsible
standing, all money collected, received or held by him or her as City
Treasurer. The deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or
adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof.
   (B)   The fact that a stockholder, director or other officer of the banking
institution shall also be serving as Mayor, as member of the City Council, or
as any other officer of the city shall not disqualify the bank from acting as a
depository for the city funds.
(Prior Code, § 2-314)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-712
§ 34.34 DEPOSITORY BOND.
   For the security of the funds deposited pursuant to §
34.33, the City Treasurer shall require each depository bank to give bond for
the safekeeping and payment of the deposits and the accretions thereof, which
bond shall run to the city and be approved by the Mayor. The bond shall be
conditioned that such a depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render
to the Treasurer a statement in duplicate, showing the several daily balances,
the amount of money of the city held by it during the quarter, the amount of
the accretion thereto, and how credited. The bond shall also be conditioned
that the depository shall generally do and perform whatever may be required by
the provisions in this subchapter and faithfully discharge the trust reposed in
the depository. The bond shall be as nearly as practicable in the form provided
by the laws of the state; provided that, no person in any way connected with
any depository bank, as officer or stockholder, shall be accepted as a surety
on any bond given by the bank of which he is an officer or stockholder. The
bond shall be deposited with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-315)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-714
§ 34.35 DEPOSITORY SECURITIES.
   In lieu of the bond required in this subchapter, any bank making application
to become a depository may deposit with the City Clerk United States government
bonds, bonds of the state or of any state whose bonds are purchased by the
Board of Educational Lands and Funds of this state for investment of the
permanent school fund, warrants of the state, county bonds, city bonds or
school district bonds of any county, city, village or school district in the
state issued under the direction of and with the approval of the Auditor of
Public Accounts, bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by
any of the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit banks, or the 13
banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration,
or warrants of the county or any city, village or school district in the
county; provided that, the penal sum of the bond or the sum of the pledge of
assets shall be of the value equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit
in excess of that portion of the deposit insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. The depository bank furnishing securities described in
this section shall have the right to substitute other approved securities
provided for in this section in lieu of securities already pledged if it so
desires at any time.
(Prior Code, § 2-316)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-715
§ 34.36 MAXIMUM DEPOSITS.
   The Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank at any time more than
the maximum amount of the bond given by the bank if the bank gives a surety
bond, or, in any bank giving a personal bond, more than ½ of the amount of the
bond of the bank; and the amount so on deposit at any time with any bank shall
not in either case exceed the paid-up capital stock and surplus of the bank, or
more than 90% of the par value of the securities furnished by the bank in cases
where the bank deposits approved securities in lieu of a bond. The City
Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss sustained by reason of the failure
of any such bonded depository whose bond shall have been duly approved by the
Mayor as provided in this subchapter, or which has, in lieu of a surety bond,
deposited approved securities as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-317)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-716
§ 34.37 INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS FUNDS.
   Whenever the city shall have accumulated a surplus in its General Fund in
excess of its current needs, or shall have accumulated a sinking fund for the
payment of its bonds and the money in the sinking fund shall exceed the amount
necessary to pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due
during the current year, the funds may be invested in accordance with state
law.
(Prior Code, § 2-318)
§ 34.38 FILING OF CLAIMS; NOTIFICATION OF DISALLOWANCE.
   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable against the city
shall be presented in writing; state the name and address of the claimant and
the amount of the claim; and fully and accurately identify the items or
services for which payment is claimed or the time, place, nature and
circumstances giving rise to the claim. As a condition precedent to maintaining
an action for a claim, other than a tort claim as defined by state statute, the
claimant shall file the claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the
office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or
her agent or attorney by letter, mailed to the claimant’s address within 5 days
if the claim is disallowed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-319)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-726
§ 34.39 AUDITS OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   The Council shall, prior to the allowance of any claim against the
city, examine and audit the claim to determine whether it is in proper form, is
correctly computed and is justly and legally due and payable, and shall
determine the proper fund from which the claim is payable.
   (B)   The administrative staff shall prepare, prior to each Council meeting,
a line item listing of the claims being submitted to the Mayor and Council for
approval.
(Prior Code, § 2-320)
§ 34.40 WARRANTS.
   Upon allowance of a claim by the Council, the order for the payment thereof
shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which it is payable
as specified in the annual appropriation bill, and no order or warrant shall be
drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose of which it is drawn
unless there shall be sufficient money in the treasury to the credit of the
proper fund for its payment, and no claim shall be audited or allowed unless an
order or warrant for the payment thereof may legally be drawn. All warrants
drawn upon the treasury must be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Clerk and shall state the particular fund or appropriation to which the warrant
is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular object. No
money shall be otherwise paid that has not been drawn upon the warrant. The
warrants may be delivered immediately when so drawn.
(Prior Code, § 2-321)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-718
§ 34.41 APPROPRIATION REQUIRED BEFORE MAKING CONTRACT OR EXPENDITURE.
   No contract shall be made by the City Council or any committee or member
thereof and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments
of the city, whether the object of the expenditure is ordered by the City
Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously made
concerning the expense, except as otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-322)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-501
§ 34.42 VOTE ON CONTRACTS.
   (A)   On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into
a contract, or accepting of work done under contract, by the Mayor or Council,
the “yeas” and “nays” shall be called and entered upon the record. To pass or
adopt any bylaw or ordinance or any such resolution or order a concurrence of a
majority of the whole number of the members elected to the Council shall be
required.
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor may vote on any such matter when his or her vote will
provide the additional vote required to create a number of votes equal to a
majority of the number of members elected to the Council.
      (2)   The Mayor shall, for the purpose of the vote, be deemed to be a
member of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-323)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-503
§ 34.43 ADVERTISING OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Before the Council shall make any contract in excess of $30,000 for
general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating systems,
bridges or work on streets, any motor or other mechanical equipment, including
parking meters and street machinery, or any other work or improvement where the
cost of the improvement shall be assessed to the property, an estimate of the
cost thereof shall be made by the City Engineer and submitted to the Council,
and no contract shall be entered into for any such work or improvement, or for
the purchase of the equipment, for any price exceeding $30,000, without
advertising for bids, unless the contract shall be entered into for the benefit
of the city’s Electric Utility. A city electric utility may enter into a
contract for any such work or improvement or for the purchase of such equipment
without advertising for bids if the price is $30,000 or less, the price is
$60,000 or less and the city’s Electric Utility has gross annual revenue from
retail sales in excess of $1,000,000, the price is $90,000 or less and the
city’s Electric Utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of
$5,000,000, or the price is $120,000 or less and the city’s Electric Utility
has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000. In
advertising for bids for any such work, or for the purchase of the equipment,
the Council shall cause the amount of the estimate to be published therewith.
The advertisement shall be published at least 10 days in some newspaper of
general circulation published in the city. In case of a public emergency
resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive windstorms,
floods, snow, war or an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need
calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of or serious
injury or damage to life, health or property, estimates of costs and
advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance when adopted by a
3/4 vote of the Council and entered on the record. If, after advertising for
bids as provided in this section, the governing body receives fewer than 2 bids
on a contract for any work or improvement, or if the bids received by the
governing body contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost of the project,
the governing body shall have the authority to negotiate a contract in an
attempt to complete the proposed project at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.
   (B)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the governing body, no cost can be
estimated until the materials have been manufactured or assembled to the
specific qualifications of the city, the governing body may authorize the
manufacture and assemblage of the materials and may thereafter approve the
estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer. The city
bidding procedure shall be waived when materials or equipment are purchased at
the same price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have
formerly been obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure.
(Prior Code, § 2-324)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-321
§ 34.44 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION ALTERNATIVES ACT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the below recommended guidelines and
procedures is to authorize the city, through the Political Subdivision
Construction Alternatives Act (Neb. RS §§ 13-2901 through 13-2914), to enter
into a design-build contract which is subject to qualification-based selection
or a construction management at risk contract for public contracts.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this policy the following are the
definitions outlined in the Political Subdivisions Construction Alternatives
Act.
      CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT AT RISK CONTRACT. A contract by which a
construction manager:
         (a)    Assumes the legal responsibility to deliver a construction
project within a contracted price;
         (b)   Acts as a construction consultant during the design development
phase of the project; and
         (c)   Is the builder during the construction phase of the project. The
construction manager is the legal entity which proposes to enter into a
construction management at risk contract.
      DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACT. A contract subject to qualification-based
selection of the design-builder to furnish:
         (a)   Architectural, engineering, and related design services for a
project; and
         (b)   Labor, materials, supplies, equipment and construction services.
      DESIGN BUILDER. The legal entity which proposes to enter into a design-
build contract by qualification-based selection.
      LETTER OF INTEREST. A statement indicating interest to enter into a
design-build or construction management at risk contract for a project.
      PERFORMANCE-CRITERIA DEVELOPER. Any person licensed or any organization
issued a certificate of authorization to practice architecture or engineering
who is selected to assist in the development of project performance criteria,
requests for proposals, evaluations of proposals, evaluation of construction
under a design-build contract to determine adherence to performance criteria,
and any additional requested services to represent the city's interest in
relation to a project. The performance criteria developer is ineligible to be
included as a provider of any services in a proposal for any project on which
he/she/it has acted as performance-criteria developer and is not employed by or
does not have a financial or other interest in a design-builder or construction
manager who will submit a proposal.
      PROJECT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA. The performance requirements of the project
suitable to allow the design-builder to make a proposal. Performance
requirements include the following:
         (a)   Capacity;
         (b)   Durability;
         (c)   Standards;
         (d)   Ingress and egress requirements;
         (e)   Description of the site;
         (f)   Surveys;
         (g)   Soil and environmental information concerning the site;
         (h)   Interior space requirements;
         (i)   Material quality standards;
         (j)   Design and construction schedules;
         (k)   Site development requirements;
         (l)   Provisions for utilities and storm water retention and disposal;
         (m)   Parking requirements;
         (n)   Applicable governmental code requirements; and
         (o)   Other criteria for the intended use of the project.
      PROPOSAL. An offer in response to a request for proposals a) by a design-
builder to enter into a design-build contract or b) by a construction manager
to enter into a construction management at risk contract.
      QUALIFICATION-BASED SELECTION PROCESS. The process of selecting a design-
builder based first on qualifications of the design-builder and then on the
design-builder's proposed approach to the design and construction of the
project.
      REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. The documentation by which the city solicits
proposals.
      REQUEST OF LETTERS OF INTEREST. The documentation or publication by which
the city solicits letters of interest.
   (C)   Policies. The City Council shall adopt a resolution selecting the
design-build contract or construction management at risk contract delivery
system prior to proceeding with any of the steps involved with solicitation or
execution of any construction contract by the city. The resolution requires the
affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the City Council. For a project authorized
under Neb. RS § 13-2914(3), the resolution shall include a statement that the
political subdivision has made a determination that the design-build contract
or construction management at risk contract delivery system is in the public
interest based, at a minimum, on one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Savings in cost or time; or
      (2)   Requirement of specialized or complex construction methods suitable
for the design-build contract or construction management at risk contract
delivery system.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Design-build contract.
         (a)   Letters of interest.
            1.   The city shall prepare a request for letters of interest for
design-build proposals. Requests shall describe the project in sufficient
detail to permit the design-builder to submit a letter of interest. The details
should include the items listed under the project performance criteria under
the definition section of this policy. Requests for letters of interest shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city's area at
least 30 days prior to the receipt of letters of interest deadline. Requests
for letters of interest should also be sent via first class mail to any design-
builder upon request.
            2.   Letters of interest shall be reviewed by the city in
consultation with the performance-criteria developer. The city shall select
prospective design-builders in accordance with the procedures and standards
adopted by the city pursuant to Neb. RS § 13-2905.
            3.   At least 3 prospective design-builders shall be selected,
except that if only 2 design-builders have submitted letters of interest, the
city shall select at least 2. Selected design-builders shall then be considered
pre-qualified and eligible to receive a request for proposal.
         (b)   Request for proposal. The city shall prepare a request for
proposal for each design-build contract. Notice of the request for proposal
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city's
service area at least 30 days prior to the deadline for receipt and opening of
proposals. The request for proposal shall contain, at a minimum, the following
elements.
            1.   That the City Council will execute the design-build contract.
            2.   The policies adopted by the City Council to be used when
executing a design-build contract.
            3.   The proposed terms and conditions of the design-build
contract, including any terms and conditions which are subject to further
negotiation. The general terms and conditions shall be consistent with
nationally recognized model general terms and conditions which are standard in
the design and construction industry in Nebraska. The terms and conditions may
set forth an initial determination of the manner by which the design-builder
selects any subcontractor and may require that any work subcontracted be
awarded by competitive bidding.
            4.   A project statement which contains information about the scope
and nature of the project.
            5.   The project performance criteria.
            6.   The budget parameters for the project.
            7.   Any bonds and insurance required by law or as may be
additionally required by the city.
            8.   The criteria for evaluation of proposals and the relative
weight of each criterion.
            9.   A requirement that the design-builder provide a written
statement of the design-builder's proposed approach to the design and
construction of the project, which may include graphic materials illustrating
the proposed approach to design and construction but shall not include price
proposals.
            10.   A requirement that the design-builder agree to the following
conditions:
               a.   An architect or engineer licensed to practice in Nebraska
will participate substantially in those aspects of the offering which involve
architectural or engineering services;
               b.   At the time of the design-build offering, the design
builder will furnish to the City Council a written statement identifying the
architect or engineer who will perform the architectural or engineering work
for the design-build project;
               c.   The architect or engineer engaged by the design-builder to
perform the architectural or engineering work with respect to the design-build
project will have direct supervision of such work and may not be removed by the
design-builder prior to the completion of the project without the written
consent of the City Council;
               d.   A design-builder offering design-build services with its
own employees who are design professionals licensed to practice in Nebraska
will comply with the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act by procuring a
certificate of authorization to practice architecture or engineering and will
submit proof of sufficient professional liability insurance; and
               e.   The rendering of architectural or engineering services by a
licensed architect or engineer employed by the design-builder will conform to
the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act and rules and regulations adopted
under the act.
            11.   Other information which the city chooses to require.
         (c)   Proposal evaluation.
            1.   The request for proposals shall be sent only to the pre-
qualified design-builders selected. Design-builders shall submit proposals as
required by the request for proposals.
            2.   The city may only proceed to negotiate and enter into a
design-build contract if there are at least 2 proposals from pre-qualified
design-builders.
            3.   Proposals shall be sealed and shall not be opened until
expiration of the time established for making proposals as set forth in the
request for proposals.
            4.   Proposals may be withdrawn at any time prior to acceptance.
The city shall have the right to reject any and all proposals except for the
purpose of evading the provisions and policies of the Political Subdivisions
Construction Alternatives Act. The city may thereafter solicit new proposals
using the same or a different project performance criteria.
            5.   a.   The city shall refer the proposals for recommendation to
the selection committee. The selection committee shall be at least 5 persons
designated by the city. Members of the selection committee shall include:
                  i.   Members of the City Council;
                  ii.   Members of the administration or staff of the city;
                  iii.   The performance-criteria developer;
                  iv.   Any person having special expertise relevant to
selection of a design-builder under the Political Subdivisions Construction
Alternatives Act; and
                  v.   A resident of the city's service region other than any
individual listed above.
               b.   Any selection committee member designated under divisions
d. or item e. above, shall not be employed by or have a financial or other
interest in a design-builder who has a proposal being evaluated and shall not
be employed by the city or the performance-criteria developer.
            6.   The city shall rank in order of preference the design-builders
pursuant to the criteria in the request for proposals and taking into
considerations the recommendation of the selection committee.
            7.   The city and the selection committee shall evaluate proposals
taking into consideration the criteria listed below with the maximum percentage
of total points for evaluation which may be assigned to each criterion as
indicated immediately following the criterion.
               a.   The financial resources of the design-builder to complete
the project, 10%;
               b.   The ability of the proposed personnel of the design-builder
to perform, 30%;
               c.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience,
and efficiency of the design-builder, 30%;
               d.   The quality of performance on previous projects, 30%;
               e.   The ability of the design-builder to perform within the
time specified, 30%;
               f.   The previous and existing compliance of the design-builder
with laws relating to the contract, 10%; and
               g.   Other information as may be secured having a bearing on the
selection, 20%.
            8.   The records of the selection committee in evaluating proposals
and making recommendations shall be considered public records.
            9.   The city may attempt to negotiate a design-build contract with
the highest ranked design-builder selected by the city and may enter into a
design-build contract after negotiations. The negotiations shall include a
final determination of the manner by which the design-builder selects a
subcontractor.
            10.   If the city is unable to negotiate a satisfactory design-
build contract with the highest ranked design-builder, the city may terminate
negotiations with that design-builder. The city may then undertake negotiations
with the second highest ranked design-builder and may enter into a design-build
contract after negotiations. If the city is unable to negotiate a satisfactory
contract with the second highest ranked design-builder, the city may undertake
negotiations with the third highest ranked design-builder, if any, and may
enter into a design-build contract after negotiations.
            11.   If the city is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract
with any of the ranked design-builders, the city may either revise the request
for proposals and solicit new proposals or cancel the design-build process.
            12.   A design-build contract may be conditioned upon later
refinements in scope and price and may permit the city in agreement with the
design-builder to make changes in the project without invalidating the
contract. Later refinements shall not exceed the scope of the project statement
contained in the request for proposals.
            13.   The city shall not use a design-build contract for a project,
in whole or in part, for road, street, or highway construction.
      (2)   Construction management at risk contract.
         (a)   Request for proposal. The city shall prepare a request for
proposal for each construction management at risk contract. Notice of the
request for proposal shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city's service area at least 30 days prior to the deadline for
receipt and opening of proposals. The request for proposal shall contain, at a
minimum, the following elements:
            1.   That the City Council will execute the contract.
            2.   The policies adopted by the City Council to be used when
executing a construction management at risk contract.
            3.   The proposed terms and conditions of the contract, including
any terms and conditions which are subject to further negotiation. The general
terms and conditions shall be consistent with nationally recognized model
general terms and conditions which are standard in the design and construction
industry in Nebraska. The terms and conditions may set forth an initial
determination of the manner by which the construction manager selects any
subcontractor and may require that any work subcontracted be awarded by
competitive bidding.
            4.   Any bonds and insurance required by law or as may be
additionally required by the city.
            5.   General information about the project which will assist the
city in its selection of the construction manager, including a project
statement which contains information about the scope and nature of the project,
the project site, the schedule and the estimated budget.
            6.   The criteria for evaluation of proposals and the relative
weight of each criterion.
            7.   A description of any other information which the city chooses
to require.
         (b)   Proposal evaluation.
            1.   Proposals shall be sealed and shall not be opened until
expiration of the time established for making proposals as set forth in the
request for proposals.
            2.   The city shall refer the proposals for recommendation to the
selection committee. The selection committee shall be at least 5 persons
designated by the city. Members of the selection committee shall include:
               a.   Members of the City Council;
               b.   Members of the administration or staff of the city;
               c.   The city's architect or engineer;
               d.   Any person having special expertise relevant to selection
of a construction manager under the Political Subdivisions Construction
Alternatives Act; and
               e.   A resident of the city's service region other than any
individual listed above.
            3.   Any selection committee member designated under item d. or
item e. above, shall not be employed by or have a financial or other interest
in a construction manager who has a proposal being evaluated and shall not be
employed by the city or the performance-criteria developer.
            4.   The city shall evaluate and rank each proposal on the basis of
best meeting the criteria in the request for proposals and taking into
considerations the recommendation of the selection committee.
            5.   The city and the selection committee shall evaluate proposals
taking into consideration the criteria listed below with the maximum percentage
of total points for evaluation which may be assigned to each criterion as
indicated immediately following the criterion.
               a.   The financial resources of the construction manager to
complete the project, 10%;
               b.   The ability of the proposed personnel of the construction
manager to perform, 30%;
               c.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience,
and efficiency of the construction manager, 30%;
               d.   The quality of performance on previous projects, 30%;
               e.   The ability of the construction manager to perform within
the time specified, 30%;
               f.   The previous and existing compliance of the construction
manager with laws relating to the contract, 10%; and
               g.   Other information as may be secured having a bearing on the
selection, 20%.
            6.   The records of the selection committee in evaluating proposals
and making recommendations shall be considered public records.
            7.   The city may attempt to negotiate a construction management at
risk contract with the highest ranked construction manager and may enter into a
construction management at risk contract after negotiations. The negotiations
shall include a final determination of the manner by which the construction
manager selects a subcontractor.
            8.   If the city is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract
with the highest ranked construction manager, the city may terminate
negotiations with that construction manager. The city may then undertake
negotiations with the second highest ranked construction manager and may enter
into a construction management at risk contract after negotiations. If the city
is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the second highest ranked
construction manager, the city may undertake negotiations with the third
highest ranked construction manager, if any, and may enter into a construction
management at risk contract after negotiations.
            9.   If the city is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract
with any of the ranked construction managers, the city may either revise the
request for proposals and solicit new proposals or cancel the construction
management at risk process.
            10.   A construction management at risk contract may be conditioned
upon later refinements in scope and price and may permit the city in agreement
with the construction manager to make changes in the project without
invalidating the contract. Later refinements shall not exceed the scope of the
project statement contained in the request for proposals.
            11.   The city shall not use a construction management at risk
contract for a project, in whole or in part, for road, street, or highway
construction.
            12.   Nothing in the Political Subdivisions Construction
Alternatives Act shall limit or reduce statutory or regulatory requirements
regarding bonding or insurance.
(Ord. 4114, § 1, 1-17-24)
CHAPTER 35: CIVIL SERVICE; LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Civil Service Generally
   
35.001   Positions covered
   
35.002   Position creation and elimination
   
35.003   Establishment of salaries and compensation
   
35.004   Restrictions on payment of compensation
   
35.005   Duties of city regarding Civil Service Commission
   
35.006   Political contributions and political service by employees
   
35.007   Obstructing examinations
Civil Service Commission
   
35.020   Established
   
35.021   Appointment of members
   
35.022   Term of office
   
35.023   Removal of members from office
   
35.024   Compensation of members
   
35.025   Meetings
   
35.026   Chairperson
   
35.027   Secretary and chief examiner
   
35.028   Quorum
   
35.029   Powers and duties
Civil Service Provisions
   
35.040   Appointments and promotions
   
35.041   Qualifications of applicants for civil service positions
   
35.042   Filling of vacant positions
   
35.043   Probationary period
   
35.044   Disciplinary actions
   
35.045   Reduction in force policy
   
35.046   Leave of absence
Police Department
   
35.060   Composition; duties; Chief
Police Officers’ Retirement
   
35.075   Applicability of subchapter
   
35.076   Definitions
   
35.077   Credit for prior service
   
35.078   Police officers retirement system fund; administration; transfer of
contributions; system funding; separate investment accounts
   
35.079   Contributions by police officer; amount; city; pick up officers’
contributions; voluntary contributions
   
35.080   Contributions by city; amount; how credited; interest; when
   
35.081   Retiring officer; annuity options; how determined; lump-sum payment
option
   
35.082   Retirement options; retirement date
   
35.083   Death other than in the line of duty; pension benefit payable
   
35.084   Death in the line of duty; beneficiaries; retirement benefits
   
35.085   Disability in the line of duty; benefit; requirements
   
35.086   Temporary disability
   
35.087   Termination of employment; benefits; how treated; vesting schedule
   
35.088   Retirement Committee; established; governing body; responsibilities
   
35.089   Membership of Retirement Committee
   
35.090   Retirement system funds; contracts for investments
   
35.091   Duties of Retirement Committee
   
35.092   Termination of employment; transfer of benefits; when
   
35.093   Exemption from legal process; administration; requirements; Retirement
Committee; power and duties; review of adjustment, tax levy authorized
Statutory reference:
   Civil service, see Neb. RS 19-1825 et seq.
CIVIL SERVICE GENERALLY
§ 35.001 POSITIONS COVERED.
   This subchapter shall apply only to all present full-time firefighters or
full-time police officers of the city, including any paid full-time police
chief or fire chief of the department, and future appointees to the full-time
positions. For purposes of this section, FULL-TIME POLICE OFFICERS shall mean
police officers in positions which require certification by the state law
enforcement training center, who have the power of arrest, who are paid
regularly by the city, and for whom law enforcement is a full-time career, but
shall not include clerical, custodial or maintenance personnel. FULL-TIME
FIREFIGHTERS shall mean duly appointed firefighters who are paid regularly by
the city and for whom firefighting is a full-time career, but shall not include
clerical, custodial or maintenance personnel who are not engaged in fire
suppression.
(Prior Code, § 40-31)
§ 35.002 POSITION CREATION AND ELIMINATION.
   All positions subject to the Civil Service Act shall be created or
eliminated by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 40-32)
§ 35.003 ESTABLISHMENT OF SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to infringe upon the power and
authority of the Mayor and Council to establish salaries and compensation of
all employees within the compensation schedule or ranges established by the
Mayor and Council for the positions.
(Prior Code, § 40-33)
§ 35.004 RESTRICTIONS ON PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION.
   No treasurer, auditor, comptroller or other officer or employee of the city
subject to the Civil Service Act shall approve the payment of or be in any
manner concerned in paying, auditing or approving any salary, wage or other
compensation for services to any person subject to the jurisdiction and scope
of the Civil Service Act, unless the person to receive the salary, wage or
other compensation has been appointed or employed in compliance with the Civil
Service Act.
(Prior Code, § 40-34)
§ 35.005 DUTIES OF CITY REGARDING CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The Mayor and Council shall provide the Civil Service Commission with
suitable and convenient rooms and accommodations and cause the accommodations
to be furnished, heated, lighted and supplied with all office supplies and
equipment necessary to carry on the business of the Commission and with the
clerical assistance as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of the city to
appropriate each fiscal year, from the General Funds of the city, a sum of
money sufficient to pay the necessary expenses involved in carrying out the
purposes of the Civil Service Act, including but not limited to reasonable
attorney’s fees for any special counsel appointed by the Commission when the
City Attorney is not authorized by the City Administrator to represent the
Commission. The City Administrator may establish the hourly or monthly rate of
pay of the special counsel. The city shall afford the Commission and its
members and employees all reasonable facilities and assistance to inspect all
books, papers, documents and accounts applying or in any way appertaining to
any and all positions and employments subject to civil service and shall
produce the books, papers, documents and accounts. All city officers and
employees shall attend and testify whenever required to do so by the
Commission, the accused or the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 40-35)
§ 35.006 POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND POLITICAL SERVICE BY EMPLOYEES.
   No person holding any position subject to civil service shall be under any
obligation to contribute to any political fund or to render any political
service to any person or party whatsoever. No person shall be removed, reduced
in position or salary or otherwise prejudiced for refusing so to do. No public
officer, whether elected or appointed, shall discharge, promote, demote or in
any manner change the official rank, employment or compensation of any person
under civil service, or promise or threaten to do so, for giving, withholding
or neglecting to make any contribution of money, services or any valuable thing
for any political purposes.
(Prior Code, § 40-36)
§ 35.007 OBSTRUCTING EXAMINATIONS.
   No member of the Civil Service Commission or any other person shall by
himself or herself or in cooperation with 1 or more persons:
   (A)   Defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in respect to the right of
examination according to the rules and regulations made pursuant to the Civil
Service Act;
   (B)   Falsely mark, grade, estimate or falsely report upon the examination
and standing of any person examined or certified in accordance with the Civil
Service Act or aid in so doing;
   (C)   Make any false representation concerning the examination or standing
or concerning the person examined;
   (D)   Furnish any person any special or secret information for the purpose
of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person so examined or
certified to be examined or certified; or
   (E)   Persuade any other person to permit or aid in any manner any other
person to impersonate him or her in connection with any examination,
application or request to be so examined.
(Prior Code, § 40-37)
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 35.020 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created in the city a civil service commission, which shall
have 3 members who shall each be a citizen of the United States, a resident of
the city for at least 3 years immediately preceding the appointment and an
elector of the county.
(Prior Code, § 40-61)
§ 35.021 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor
by and with the consent of a majority of the Council. At the time of any
appointment, not more than 2 members of the Civil Service Commission, including
the ones to be appointed, shall be registered electors of the same political
party. Confirmation of the appointments by any other legislative body shall not
be required.
(Prior Code, § 40-62)
§ 35.022 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The first persons appointed to the Civil Service Commission shall be
appointed for terms of 2 years, 4 years and 6 years respectively. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be for 6 years.
(Prior Code, § 40-63)
§ 35.023 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FROM OFFICE.
   Any member of the Civil Service Commission may be removed from office for
incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office or other good cause by
the Mayor, except that no member of the Civil Service Commission shall be
removed until written charges have been preferred, due notice given the member
and a full hearing had before the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 40-64)
§ 35.024 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 40-65)
§ 35.025 MEETINGS.
   The Civil Service Commission shall hold meetings as may be required for the
proper discharge of its duties.
(Prior Code, § 40-66)
§ 35.026 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Civil Service Commission shall annually elect 1 of its members as
Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 40-671)
§ 35.027 SECRETARY AND CHIEF EXAMINER.
   The Civil Service Commission shall appoint a secretary and a chief examiner
who shall keep the records of the Commission, preserve all reports made to it,
superintend and keep a record of all examinations held under its direction and
perform such other duties as the Commission may prescribe. The Commission may
merge the positions of Secretary and Chief Examiner and appoint 1 person to
perform the duties of both positions. The Commission shall appoint the city’s
Personnel Officer and Secretary and Chief Examiner, if requested to do so by
the City Administrator. The Secretary and Chief Examiner shall be subject to
suspension or discharge from his or her duties as Secretary and Chief Examiner
upon the vote of a majority of the appointed members of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 40-68)
§ 35.028 QUORUM.
   Two members of the Civil Service Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 40-69)
§ 35.029 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Civil Service Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural
rules and regulations which shall provide in detail the manner in which
examinations may be held, and shall provide for any other matters assigned to
it by the City Administrator. At least 1 copy of the rules and regulations, and
any amendments, shall be made available for examination and reproduction by
members of the public. One copy of the rules and regulations and any amendments
shall be given to each full-time police officer.
   (B)   The Commission shall provide that all tests shall be practical and
consist only of subjects which will fairly determine the capacity of persons
who are to be examined to perform the duties of the position to which an
appointment is to be made. Tests may include, but shall not be limited to,
tests of physical fitness and of manual skill and psychological testing.
   (C)   The Commission shall provide, by the rules and regulations, for a
credit of 10% in favor of all applicants for an appointment to an entry level
position, as defined by the City Administrator under civil service, who, in
time of war or in an expedition of the armed forces of the United States, have
served in and been honorably discharged from the armed forces of the United
States and who have equaled or exceeded the minimum qualifying standards
established by the City Administrator.
   (D)   The Commission may conduct an investigation concerning and report upon
all matters regarding the enforcement and effect of the Civil Service Act and
the rules and regulations prescribed.
   (E)   The Commission may inspect all institutions, departments, positions
and employments affected by the Civil Service Act to determined whether the Act
and all such rules and regulations are being obeyed. The investigations may be
conducted by the Commission or by any Commissioner designated by the Commission
for that purpose. The Commission shall also make a like investigation on the
written petition of a citizen, duly verified, stating that irregularities or
abuses exist or setting forth, in concise language, the necessity for such an
investigation. The Commission may be represented in such investigations by the
City Attorney, if authorized by the City Administrator. If the City Attorney
does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be represented by special
counsel appointed by the Commission in any such investigation. In the course of
such an investigation, the Commission, designated Commissioner or the Chief
Examiner shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas to require
the attendance of witnesses and the production by them of books, papers,
documents and accounts appertaining to the investigation, and to cause the
deposition of witnesses, residing within or without the state, to be taken in
the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in the
courts of this state. The oaths administered and subpoenas issued shall have
the same force and effect as the oaths administered by a district judge in a
judicial capacity and subpoenas issued by the district courts of the state. The
failure of any person so subpoenaed to comply shall be deemed a violation of
the Civil Service Act and be punishable as such. No investigation shall be made
pursuant to this section if there is a written accusation concerning the same
subject matter against a person in the civil service. The accusation shall be
handled pursuant to §
35.044.
   (F)   The Commission shall provide that all hearings and investigations
before the Commission, designated Commissioner or Chief Examiner shall be
governed by the Civil Service Act and the rules of practice and procedure to be
adopted by the Commission. In the conduct thereof, the Commission shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceedings or
hearing or in the manner of taking testimony shall invalidate any order,
decision, rule or regulation made, approved or confirmed by the Commission,
except that no order, decision, rule or regulation made by any designated
Commissioner conducting any hearing or investigation alone shall be of any
force or effect unless it is concurred in by a majority of the appointed
members of the Commission, including the vote of any Commissioner making the
investigation.
   (G)   The Commission shall establish and maintain a roster of officers and
employees.
   (H)   The Commission shall provide for, establish and hold competitive
examinations to determine the relative qualifications of persons who seek
employment in any position and, as a result thereof, establish eligible lists
for the various positions.
   (I)   The Commission shall make recommendations concerning a reduction in
force policy to the Mayor and Council.
   (J)   The Commission shall keep records as may be necessary for the proper
administration of the Civil Service Act.
   (K)   The Commission, upon request of the City Administrator, shall
establish and maintain a list of names and addresses, for a period of time
established by the City Administrator, of those eligible for appointment to or
promotion within the Department.
   (L)   The Commission, upon request of the City Administrator, shall certify
the name of the persons who are the 3 highest on the eligible list, following
the most recent examination and whose qualifications have been validated by the
Commission for a vacant position.
   (M)   The Commission shall begin and conduct all civil suits which may be
necessary for the proper enforcement of the Civil Service Act and the rules of
the Commission. The Commission may be represented in such suits and all
investigations pursuant to the Act by the City Attorney, if authorized by the
City Administrator. If the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the
Commission may be represented by special counsel appointed by it in any
particular case.
(Prior Code, § 40-70)
CIVIL SERVICE PROVISIONS
§ 35.040 APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS.
   Appointments and promotions of civil service positions shall be made by the
City Administrator pursuant to the procedure set forth in this subchapter,
except that the Fire Chief and Police Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor by
and with consent of a majority of the Council as provided in §
32.04, pursuant to the procedure set forth in this subchapter. All appointments
to and promotions in the Police or Fire Department shall be made solely on
merit, efficiency and fitness, which shall be ascertained by open competitive
examination and impartial investigation by the Commission. For purposes of this
section, APPOINTMENTS shall mean all means of selecting, appointing or
employing any person to hold any position or employment subject to civil
service. Promotion or demotion shall mean changing  from 1 position to another,
accompanied by a corresponding change in current rate of pay. Position shall
mean an individual job which is designated by an official title indicative of
the nature of the work.
(Prior Code, § 40-91)
§ 35.041 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS FOR CIVIL SERVICE POSITIONS.
   An applicant for a position of any kind, including, but not limited to,
promotions, transfers and new hirings, under civil service shall be able to
read and write the English language, meet the minimum job qualifications of the
position as established by the City Administrator and be of good moral
character. An applicant shall be required to disclose his or her past
employment history and his or her criminal record, if any. Prior to certifying
to the City Administrator the name of the persons eligible for a position, the
Commission shall validate the qualifications of the persons.
(Prior Code, § 40-92)
§ 35.042 FILLING OF VACANT POSITIONS.
   (A)   Considerations. If the City Administrator fills a vacancy in a
position subject to the Civil Service Act, he or she shall consider factors
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed by
the applicant which are necessary for the position;
      (2)   The knowledge, skills and abilities of the applicant which are
necessary for the position;
      (3)   The performance appraisals of any applicant who is already employed
in the Department, including any recent or pending disciplinary actions
involving the employee;
      (4)   The employment policies and staffing needs of the Department,
together with contracts, ordinances and statutes related thereto;
      (5)   Required federal, state or local certifications or licenses
necessary for the position; and
      (6)   The qualifications of the applicants who are already employed in
the Department and have successfully completed all parts of the examination for
the position. No person shall be reinstated in or transferred, suspended or
discharged from any such position or employment contrary to the Civil Service
Act.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a position subject to this subchapter becomes
vacant, the City Administrator shall make requisition upon the Commission for
the names and addresses of the persons eligible for appointment, and may
decline to fill the vacancy for an indefinite period. If the Commission
certifies fewer than 3 names for each vacancy to the City Administrator, the
City Administrator may appoint 1 of such persons to fill the vacancy, may
decline to fill the vacancy, or may order that another examination be held by
the Civil Service Commission.
   (C)   Temporary appointments. If a vacancy occurs and there is no eligible
list for the position or if the Commission has not certified persons from the
eligible list, a temporary appointment may be made by the City Administrator.
The temporary appointment shall not continue for a period longer than 4 months.
No person shall receive more than 1 temporary appointment or serve more than 4
months as a temporary appointee in any 1 fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 40-93)
§ 35.043 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   To enable the City Administrator to exercise a choice in the filling of
positions, no appointment, employment or promotion in any position in the
service shall be deemed complete until after the expiration of a period of not
less than 6 months of probationary service for firefighters and 6 months after
certification by the state law enforcement training center for police officers,
during which time the City Administrator may terminate the employment of the
person appointed by him or her if, during the performance test thus afforded
and upon an observation or consideration of the performance of duty, the City
Administrator deems the person unfit or unsatisfactory for service in the
Department. The City Administrator may appoint 1 of the other persons certified
by the Commission, and the person shall likewise enter upon the duties until
some person is found who is fit for appointment, employment or promotion for
the probationary period provided, and then the appointment, employment or
promotion shall be complete.
(Prior Code, § 40-94)
§ 35.044 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
   (A)   Tenure of employment. The tenure of a person holding a position of
employment under the Civil Service Act shall be only during good behavior.
   (B)   Causes for disciplinary action. Any such person may be removed or
discharged, suspended with or without pay, demoted, reduced in rank or deprived
of vacation, benefits, compensation or other privileges, except pension
benefits, for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Incompetency, inefficiency or inattention to or dereliction of
duty;
      (2)   Dishonesty, prejudicial conduct, immoral conduct, insubordination,
discourteous treatment of the public or a fellow employee, any act of omission
or Commission tending to injure the public service, any willful failure on the
part of the employee to properly conduct himself or herself, or any willful
violation of the Civil Service Act or the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to the Act;
      (3)   Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the employee
holds;
      (4)   Drunkenness or the use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or any
other habit-forming drug, liquid or preparation to such an extent that the use
interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical fitness of the employee or
precludes the employee from properly performing the functions and duties of his
or her position;
      (5)   Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor tending to injure the
employee’s ability to effectively perform the duties of his or her position; or
      (6)   Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment of the Civil
Service Commission, is sufficient to justify the offender to be an unsuitable
and unfit person to be employed in the public service.
   (C)   Procedure. The disciplinary action procedure set out in this division
shall apply to all civil service employees, except that, in the case of the
Fire Chief and Police Chief, the Mayor, by and with the consent of a majority
of the Council, shall make the decision concerning removal, suspension,
demotion or discharge; provided that, the same procedure shall be followed,
including notices and time limitations.
      (1)   No employee in the civil service who shall have been permanently
appointed or inducted into civil service shall be removed, suspended, demoted
or discharged except for cause, and then only upon the written accusation of
the Police Chief or Fire Chief, the City Administrator or any citizen or
taxpayer.
      (2)   The written accusation shall set forth the alleged misconduct,
charges or grounds for investigation against the employee. The written
accusation shall be filed by the complainant with the Secretary of the
Commission, who shall cause a copy of the written accusation to be delivered
within 3 working days after the filing to the Police Chief or Fire Chief, to
the City Administrator, and to the employee personally or by certified mail
addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the
personnel records. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing
such delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the secretary’s office.
      (3)   The Police Chief or Fire Chief shall have the authority to
immediately suspend, with pay, an employee against whom such written accusation
has been filed, pending the confirmation of the suspension or a decision of the
City Administrator to reinstate the employee or remove, demote, discharge or
suspend the employee, with or without pay. In the case of the Police Chief or
Fire Chief, the City Administrator shall have the authority to immediately
suspend, with pay, the Police Chief or Fire Chief against whom a written
accusation has been filed, pending the confirmation of the suspension or a
decision of the Mayor and Council to reinstate the Chief or remove, demote,
discharge or suspend the Chief, with or without pay.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to the decision of the City Administrator to reinstate
the employee or remove, demote, discharge or suspend the employee, with or
without pay, the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall, within a reasonable period
of time, investigate the alleged misconduct, charges or grounds against the
employee and explain the basis of the employer’s evidence to the employee and
provide the employee an opportunity to present his or her version of the
circumstances which resulted in the filing of the written accusation. If the
Chiefs’ investigation reveals other misconduct, charges or grounds, the Chief
shall amend the written accusation to include the other misconduct, charges or
grounds by filing an amendment to the written accusation with the Secretary of
the Commission, who shall cause a copy of the amended accusation to be
delivered within 3 working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
after the filing to the Police Chief or Fire Chief, to the City Administrator,
and to the employee personally or by certified mail addressed to the employee
at the residence address of the employee shown in the personnel records. The
Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing the delivery or
mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary’s office. If the Police Chief
or Fire Chief is being disciplined, the City Administrator shall follow the
same procedures as are followed by the Police Chief or Fire Chief in
disciplining employees under this section. Upon completion of this procedure
within a reasonable period of time, the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall
recommend in writing to the City Administrator that the alleged misconduct,
charges or grounds set forth in the written accusation be deemed:
            1.   To be without merit;
            2.   To not warrant disciplinary action;
            3.   To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal,
demotion, discharge or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or
written reprimand; or
            4.   To warrant removal, demotion, discharge or suspension, with or
without pay.
         (b)   In the case of an accusation made against the Police Chief or
Fire Chief, it shall be the duty of the City Administrator to investigate the
allegations and perform those tasks and duties otherwise assigned to the Chief
in the case of other civil service employees, and it shall be the duty of the
City Administrator to perform the tasks and duties otherwise placed with the
Chiefs as provided in division (C) of this section in the case of disciplinary
actions against the Chiefs. Concerning all duties and tasks assigned the City
Administrator in division (C) of this section, the duties and tasks shall be
the duty and responsibility of the Mayor and Council in disciplinary actions
against the Police Chief and Fire Chief.
      (5)   (a)   Within ten calendar days after receiving the written
recommendation of the Police Chief or Fire Chief, the City Administrator shall
decide to accept the recommendation of the Police Chief or Fire Chief, or shall
decide that the alleged misconduct, charges or grounds for investigation
against the employee set forth in the written accusation be deemed:
            1.   To be without merit;
            2.   To not warrant disciplinary action;
            3.   To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal,
demotion, discharge or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or
written reprimand; or
            4.   To warrant removal, demotion, discharge or suspension, with or
without pay.
         (b)   The City Administrator shall file a copy of his or her decision
within 10 calendar days after receiving the written recommendation of the
Police Chief or Fire Chief, with the Secretary of the Civil Service Commission,
who shall cause a copy of the decision to be delivered within 3 working days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the filing to the Police Chief
or Fire Chief, and to the employee, personally or by certified mail, addressed
to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the personnel
records. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing the
delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary’s office.
      (6)   Any employee so removed, suspended, demoted or discharged may,
within 10 calendar days after receiving written notice of the City
Administrator’s decision, or in the case of the Police Chief or Fire Chief,
notice from the Mayor and Council, file a written demand for an investigation
and public hearing by the Civil Service Commission. The employee shall file the
request for the hearing with the Secretary of the Commission and simultaneously
send a copy of the request to the City Administrator. The failure to file the a
request with the Secretary of the Commission within 10 calendar days of receipt
of notice of the action by the City Administrator shall constitute a waiver of
the employee’s right to review by the Civil Service Commission and the City
Administrator’s decision shall become final.
      (7)   Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the employee’s notice of
appeal, the City Administrator shall cause to be mailed or delivered following
notice to the employee and the Secretary of the Civil Service Commission a
notice containing:
         (a)   A statement of the charges;
         (b)   The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf of the
city and a general statement of the nature of their testimony; and
         (c)   Copies of the documents to be introduced.
      (8)   Within 10 calendar days after the filing of the written demand for
an investigation and public hearing by the Commission, the employee shall mail
or deliver copies of the following to both the City Administrator and the
Commission:
         (a)   A response to the statement of the charges;
         (b)   The names of witnesses who will be called on behalf of the
employee and a general statement of the nature of their testimony; and
         (c)   Copies of the documents to be introduced.
      (9)   Upon receipt of a written demand, the Commission shall conduct an
investigation. The Commission may be represented in such investigation and
public hearing by the City Attorney if authorized by the City Administrator. If
the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be
represented by special counsel appointed by the Commission for the
investigation and hearing. The investigation shall consist solely of a review
of the written submissions of the City Administrator and employee to determine
whether any individuals or documents should be subpoenaed by the Commission for
the subsequent public hearing before the Commission ultimately to determine
whether the City Administrator acted in good faith for cause. For purposes of
this division, GOOD FAITH for cause shall mean that the action was not
arbitrary or capricious and was not made for political or religious reasons.
      (10)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing not less than 10
and not more than 20 calendar days from the date of filing of the employee’s
written demand for an investigation. The Commission shall notify the City
Administrator and employee in writing, at least 10 calendar days prior to the
date of the hearing, of the date, time and place of hearing.
      (11)   The City Administrator shall be permitted to appear in person and
by counsel and to present his or her case. The City Administrator may present
evidence by testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross examine the
employee’s witnesses. At the hearing, the employee shall be permitted to appear
in person and by counsel and to present his or her defense. The employee may
present evidence by testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross
examine the witnesses called by the City Administrator.
      (12)   The Commission may affirm the action taken by the City
Administrator, if the action is supported by a preponderance of the evidence.
If the Commission finds that the removal, suspension, demotion or discharge was
made for political or religious reasons or was not made in good faith for
cause, it shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of the
employee in the position or employment from which the employee was removed,
suspended, demoted or discharged, which reinstatement shall, if the Commission,
in its discretion, so provides, be retroactive and entitle the person to
compensation and restoration of benefits and privileges from the time of the
removal, suspension, demotion or discharge.
      (13)   After the hearing, in lieu of affirming the removal, suspension,
demotion or discharge, the Commission may modify the order of removal,
suspension, demotion or discharge by directing a suspension, with or without
pay, for a given period, and subsequent restoration to duty or demotion in
position or pay. No later than 10 calendar days after the hearing, the
Commission shall certify its findings in writing to the employee, and to the
City Administrator, who shall enforce them.
(Prior Code, § 40-95)
§ 35.045 REDUCTION IN FORCE POLICY.
   (A)   Establishment. The Mayor and Council, in establishing a reduction in
force policy, shall consider recommendations from the Civil Service Commission,
but shall not be bound by them. Prior to the adoption of a reduction in force
policy, the Mayor and Council shall, after giving reasonable notice to each
police officer and firefighter by first class mail, conduct a public hearing.
   (B)   Factors. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a reduction in force policy
which shall consider factors including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed by
the employee;
      (2)   The knowledge, skills and abilities of the employee;
      (3)   The performance appraisal of the employee, including any recent or
pending disciplinary actions involving the employee;
      (4)   The employment policies and staffing needs of the Department,
together with contracts, ordinances and statutes related thereto;
      (5)   Required federal, state or local certifications or licenses; and
      (6)   Seniority.
(Prior Code, § 40-96)
§ 35.046 LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   A leave of absence with or without pay may be granted by the City
Administrator to any person under civil service. The City Administrator shall
give notice of the leave to the Commission. All appointments for temporary
employment resulting from the leaves of absence shall be made from the eligible
list, if any, of the civil service.
(Prior Code, § 40-97)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.060 COMPOSITION; DUTIES; CHIEF.
   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further
number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by resolution of the
Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the City
Administrator, have control and management of all matters relating to the
Police Department and its officers and members and shall have the custody and
control of all property and books belonging to the Department. He or she shall
devote his or her whole time to the city affairs and interests of the city, and
to the preservation of peace, order and safety. The Department shall execute
and enforce all laws and also the orders of the City Administrator. It shall be
the duty of the Department to protect the rights of persons and property. The
Department shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments, obstructions and
defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business places and residences of the
city. The Department shall execute, or cause to be executed, the processes
issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the proper
court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of Police and all regular
and special police officers shall become thoroughly conversant with the laws of
the city, and shall see that the laws of the city are strictly enforced, and
shall make sworn complaints against any person for violation of the laws of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 30-31)
POLICE OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT
§ 35.075 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Sections
34.20 to
34.38 shall apply to all police officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 30-61)
Statutory reference:
   Police officers’ retirement, see Neb. RS 16-1001 et seq.
§ 35.076 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT. Equality in value of the aggregate amount of benefit
expected to be received under different forms of benefit or at different times
determined as of a given date as adopted by the city or the Retirement
Committee for use by the retirement system. Actuarial equivalencies shall be
specified in the funding medium established for the retirement system, except
that if benefits under the retirement system are obtained through the purchase
of an annuity contract, the actuarial equivalent of any such form of benefit
shall be the amount of pension benefit which can be purchased or otherwise
provided by the police officer’s retirement value. All actuarial and mortality
assumptions adopted by the city or Retirement Committee shall be on a sex-
neutral basis.
   ANNUITY CONTRACT. The contract or contracts issued by 1 or more life
insurance companies and purchased by the retirement system in order to provide
any of the benefits described in this subchapter. Annuity conversion rates
contained in any such contract shall be specified on a sex-neutral basis.
   BENEFICIARY. The person or persons designated by a police officer, pursuant
to a written instrument filed with the Retirement Committee before the police
officer’s death, to receive death benefits which may be payable under the
retirement system.
   FUNDING AGENT. Any bank, trust company, life insurance company, thrift
institution, credit union or investment management firm selected by the city or
Retirement Committee to hold or invest the funds of the retirement system.
   REGULAR INTEREST. The rate of interest earned each calendar year commencing
January 1, 1984, equal to the rate of net earnings realized for the calendar
year from investments of the retirement fund. Net earnings shall mean the
amount by which income or gain realized from investments of the Retirement Fund
exceeds the amount of any realized losses from the investments during the
calendar year.
   REGULAR PAY. The average salary of a police officer for the 5 years
preceding the date such police officer elects to retire, the 5 years preceding
his or her death or the 5 years preceding the date of disability, whichever is
earliest, except that for any police officer who retires, dies or becomes
disabled after July 15, 1992, regular pay shall mean the average salary of the
police officer for the period of 5 consecutive years preceding the retirement,
death or disability which produces the highest average.
   RETIREMENT COMMITTEE. The Retirement Committee created pursuant to §
35.088.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM. A retirement system established pursuant to this
subchapter.
   RETIREMENT VALUE. The accumulated value of the police officer’s employee
account and employer account. The retirement value shall consist of the sum of
the contributions made or transferred to such accounts by the police officer
and by the city on the police officer’s behalf and the regular interest
credited to the accounts as of the date of computation, reduced by any realized
losses which were not taken into account. In determining regular interest in
any year, and further adjusted each year to reflect the pro rata share for the
accounts of the appreciation or depreciation of the fair market value of the
assets of the retirement system as determined by the Retirement Committee. The
RETIREMENT VALUE shall be reduced by the amount of all distributions made to or
on the behalf of the police officer from the retirement system. The valuation
shall be computed annually as of December 31. If separate investment accounts
are established pursuant to §
35.078(C), a police officer’s retirement value with respect to the accounts
shall be equal to the value of his or her separate investment accounts as
determined hereunder.
   SALARY. All amounts paid to a participating police officer by the employing
city for personal services as reported on the participant’s federal income tax
withholding statement, including the police officer’s contributions picked up
by the city as provided in §
35.079(B) and any salary reduction contributions which are excludable from
income for federal income tax purposes pursuant to §§ 125 or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
   STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY. An ordinary annuity payable for the life of the
primary annuitant only and terminating at his or her death without refund or
death benefit of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 30-62)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1002
§ 35.077 CREDIT FOR PRIOR SERVICE.
   A police officer shall be credited with all years of his or her service
after the year 1965 for the purpose of determining vested retirement benefits
under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 30-63)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1003
§ 35.078 POLICE OFFICERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUND; ADMINISTRATION; TRANSFER OF
CONTRIBUTIONS; SYSTEM FUNDING; SEPARATE INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Commencing on January 1, 1984, each city of the first class shall keep
and maintain a police officers retirement system fund for the purpose of
investing payroll deductions and city contributions to the retirement system.
The Fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all city money and funds.
The Fund shall be administered under the direction of the city and the
Retirement Committee exclusively for the purposes of the retirement system and
for the benefit of participating police officers and their beneficiaries. The
Fund shall be established as a trust under the laws of the state for all
purposes of § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. Upon the passage of this
subchapter, all of the contributions made by a police officer prior to January
1, 1984, will be transferred to the police officer’s employee account without
interest unless the city, at the time of the transfer, credited interest on the
contributions. Regular interest shall begin to accrue on the contributions
transferred into the Fund from January 1, 1984. Such funds shall be invested in
the manner prescribed in §
35.090.
   (B)   The city shall establish a medium for funding of the retirement
system, which may be a pension trust fund, custodial account, group annuity
contract or combination thereof, for the purpose of investing money for the
retirement system in the manner prescribed by §
35.090 and to provide the retirement, death, and disability benefits for police
officers pursuant to this subchapter. The trustee or custodian of any trust
fund may be a designated funding agent which is qualified to act as a fiduciary
or custodian in this state, the City Treasurer, a city officer authorized to
administer funds of the city, or a combination thereof.
   (C)   Upon direction of the city, there may be established separate
investment accounts for each participating police officer for the purpose of
allowing each police officer to direct the investment of all or a portion of
his or her employee account or employer account subject to the requirements of
§
35.090 and any other rules or limitations that may be established by the city
or the Retirement Committee. If separate investment accounts are established,
each account shall be separately invested and reinvested, separately credited
with all earnings and gains with respect to the investment of the assets of the
investment account, and separately debited with the losses of the account. Each
investment account shall be adjusted each year to reflect the appreciation or
depreciation of the fair market value of the assets held in such account as
determined by the Retirement Committee. The expenses incurred by the retirement
system when a police officer directs the investment of all or a portion of his
or her individual investment account shall be charged against the police
officer’s investment account and shall reduce the police officer’s retirement
value.
(Prior Code, § 30-64)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1004
§ 35.079 CONTRIBUTION BY POLICE OFFICER; AMOUNT; CITY; PICK UP OFFICERS’
CONTRIBUTIONS; VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Each police officer participating in the retirement system shall
contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to 6% of his or her salary. The
payment shall be made by regular payroll deductions from his or her periodic
salary and shall be credited to his or her employee account on a monthly basis.
Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest.
   (B)   Each city of the first class with police officers participating in a
retirement system established pursuant to this subchapter shall pick up the
police officers’ contributions required by division (A) of this section for all
compensation paid on or after January 1, 1984, and the contributions so picked
up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining federal tax
treatment under the Internal Revenue Code, except that the city shall continue
to withhold federal income taxes based upon these contributions until the
Internal Revenue Service or the federal courts rule that, pursuant to § 414(h)
of the Internal Revenue Code, these contributions shall not be included as
gross income of the employee until such time as they are distributed from the
retirement system. The city shall pay these employee contributions from the
same source of funds which is used in paying earnings to the employee. The city
shall pick up these contributions by a salary deduction either through a
reduction in the cash salary of the employee or a combination of a reduction in
salary and offset against a future salary increase. A police officer shall not
be given an option to choose to receive the amount of the required contribution
in lieu of having the contribution paid directly to the retirement system.
   (C)   Each police officer participating in the retirement system shall be
entitled to make voluntary cash contributions to the retirement system in an
amount not to exceed the contribution limitations established by the Internal
Revenue Code. Voluntary contributions shall be credited to the police officer’s
employee account and shall thereafter be credited with regular interest. A
police officer’s voluntary contribution shall become a part of the police
officers Retirement System Fund and shall be held, administered, invested and
distributed in the same manner as any other employee contribution to the
retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 30-65)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1005
§ 35.080 CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY; AMOUNT; HOW CREDITED; INTEREST; WHEN.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 1984, each city of the first class with police
officers participating in a retirement system shall contribute to the
retirement system a sum equal to 6% of each such participating police officer’s
periodic salary.
   (B)   The payment shall be contributed as provided in §
35.079(A) for employee contributions and shall be credited to his or her
employer account on a monthly basis.
   (C)   Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest.
   (D)   The city shall also contribute to the employer account of any police
officer employed by the city on January 1, 1984, an amount equal to the
employee contribution of the police officer that were made to the city prior to
January 1, 1984, without interest, with the contribution to be made at the time
the police officer retires or terminates employment with the city.
   (E)   The city may contribute the amount before the police officer’s
retirement or termination of employment or credit interest on the contribution.
(Prior Code, § 30-66)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1006
§ 35.081 RETIRING OFFICER; ANNUITY OPTIONS; HOW DETERMINED; LUMP-SUM PAYMENT
OPTION.
   (A)   At any time before the retirement date, the retiring police officer
may elect to receive at his retirement date a pension benefit either in the
form of a straight life annuity or any optional form of annuity benefit
established by the Retirement Committee and provided under a purchased annuity
contract. The optional annuity benefit shall be specified in the funding medium
for the retirement system and shall include a straight life annuity with a
guarantee of at least 60 monthly payments or an annuity payable for the life of
the retiring police officer and, after the death of the retiree, monthly
payments, as elected by the retiring police officer, of either 100%, 75% or 50%
of the amount of annuity payable to the retiring police officer during his or
her life, to the beneficiary selected by the retiring police officer at the
time of the original application for an annuity. For any police officer whose
retirement date is on or after January 1, 1997, the optional benefit forms for
the retirement system shall include a single lump-sum payment of the police
officer’s retirement value. The retiring police officer may further elect to
defer the date of the first annuity payment or lump-sum payment to the first
day of any specified month prior to age 70. If the retiring police officer
elects to receive his or her pension benefit in the form of an annuity, the
amount of annuity benefit shall be the amount paid by the annuity contract
purchased or otherwise provided by his or her retirement value as of the date
of the first payment. Any such annuity contract purchased by the retirement
system may be distributed to the police officer and, upon the distribution, all
obligations of the retirement system to pay retirement, death or disability
benefits to the police officer and his beneficiaries shall terminate, without
exception.
   (B)   (1)   For all officers employed on January 1, 1984, and continuously
employed by the city from the date through the date of their retirement, the
amount of the pension benefit, when determined on the straight life annuity
basis, shall not be less than the following amounts:
         (a)   If retirement occurs following age 60 and with 25 years of
service with the city, or 21 years of service if hired prior to November 18,
1965, 50% of regular pay; or
         (b)   If retirement occurs following age 55 but before age 60 and with
25 years of service with the city, 40% of regular pay.
      (2)   A police officer entitled to a minimum pension benefit under this
division may elect to receive such pension benefit in any form permitted by
division (A) of this section, including a single lump-sum payment, if the
officer retires on or after January 1, 1997, or if the city has adopted a lump-
sum distribution option for officers retiring before January 1, 1997, in the
funding medium for the retirement system. If the minimum pension benefit is
paid in a form other than a straight life annuity, the benefit shall be the
actuarial equivalent of the straight life annuity that would otherwise be paid
to the officer pursuant to this division.
      (3)   If the police officer chooses the single lump-sum payment option,
the officer can request that the actuarial equivalent be equal to the average
of the cost of 3 annuity contracts purchased on the open market. Of the 3
annuity contracts used for comparison, 1 shall be chosen by the police officer,
1 shall be chosen by the Retirement Committee and 1 shall be chosen by the
city.
   (C)   If the retirement value of an officer entitled to a minimum pension
benefit under division (B) of this section is not sufficient at the time of the
first payment to purchase or provide the required pension benefit, the city
shall transfer the funds as may be necessary to the employer account of the
police officer so that the retirement value of the officer is sufficient to
purchase or provide for the required pension benefit.
   (D)   Any retiring police officer whose pension benefit is less than $25 per
month on the straight life annuity option shall be paid a lump-sum settlement
equal to the retirement value and shall not be entitled to elect to receive
annuity benefits.
(Prior Code, § 30-67)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1007
§ 35.082 RETIREMENT OPTIONS; RETIREMENT DATE.
   (A)   A police officer of a city of the first class may:
      (1)   Elect to retire and receive the applicable pension benefit provided
in §
35.081 based on his or her full retirement value upon the attainment of age 60;
      (2)   Elect to take early retirement and receive the applicable pension
benefit provided in §
35.081 if he or she has attained the age of 55 and has completed 25 years of
service with the city; or
      (3)   Retire as a result of disability while in the line of duty, as
determined under §
35.085, at any age, and receive the applicable pension benefit provided in §
35.085.
   (B)   A police officer who is eligible to retire pursuant to division (A) of
this section, but does not, shall continue to contribute to his or her employee
account and the city shall continue to contribute to his or her employee
account and to his or her employer account.
   (C)   The first of the month immediately following the last day of work
shall be the retirement date.
(Prior Code, § 30-68)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1008
§ 35.083 DEATH OTHER THAN IN THE LINE OF DUTY; PENSION BENEFIT PAYABLE.
   (A)   When prior to retirement any police officer participating in the
retirement system dies other than in the line of duty and except as provided in
division (B) of this section, the entire retirement value shall be payable to
the beneficiary or beneficiaries specified by the deceased police officer prior
to his or her death or to the deceased police officer’s estate if no
beneficiary was specified. The retirement value or portion thereof to be
received by the beneficiary may be paid in the form of a single lump-sum
payment, straight life annuity or other optional form of benefit specified in
the retirement systems Funding medium. If benefits are paid in the form of an
annuity, the annuity shall be the amount paid by the annuity contract purchased
or otherwise provided by the amount of the beneficiary’s share of the
retirement value as of the date of the first payment. Upon the purchase and
distribution of such annuity contract to the beneficiary, all obligations of
the retirement system to the beneficiary shall terminate, without exception.
   (B)   If any police officer employed by such city as a member of its paid
Police Department on January 1, 1984, except those who shall have been formerly
employed in the Department who are now in military service, dies while employed
by the city as a police officer, other than in the line of duty, after becoming
55 years of age and before electing to retire, and after serving in the paid
Police Department of the city for at least 21 years, then a pension of at least
25% of his or her regular pay in the form of a straight life annuity shall be
paid to the surviving spouse of the deceased police officer. If the deceased
police officer is not survived by a spouse or if the surviving spouse dies
before the children of the police officer attain the age of majority, the
pension benefit shall be paid to the police officer’s minor children until they
attain the age of majority. Each such child shall share equally in the total
pension benefit to the age of his or her majority, except that as soon as a
child attains the age of majority, the pension as to the child shall cease. To
the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount
required to purchase the specified pension, the excess shall be paid in the
manner provided in division (A) of this section. If the actuarial equivalent of
the pension benefit payable under this division exceeds the retirement value at
the time of the first payment, the city shall contribute such additional
amounts as may be necessary to purchase or provide for the required pension
benefit. If a deceased police officer described in this division is not
survived by a spouse or minor children, his or her death benefits shall be
provided under division (A) of this section as if the officer was not employed
by the city on January 1, 1984.
   (C)   Any payments for the benefit of a minor child shall be made on behalf
of the child to the surviving parent or, if there is no surviving parent, to
the legal guardian of the child.
(Prior Code, § 30-69)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1009
§ 35.084 DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY; BENEFICIARIES; RETIREMENT BENEFITS.
   When prior to retirement any police officer participating in the retirement
system dies in the line of duty or in case death is caused by or is the result
of injuries received while in the line of duty and if the police officer is not
survived by a spouse or by minor children, the entire retirement value shall be
payable to the beneficiary specified by the deceased police officer prior to
his or her death or to the deceased police officer’s estate if no beneficiary
was specified. The retirement value or portion thereof to be received by the
beneficiary may be paid in the form of a single lump-sum payment, straight life
annuity, or other optional form of benefit specified in the retirement system’s
funding medium. For a police officer who is survived by a spouse or minor
children, a retirement pension of 50% of regular pay shall be paid to the
surviving spouse or, upon his or her remarriage or death, to the minor children
during each child’s minority subject to deduction of the amounts paid as
workers’ compensation benefits on account of death as provided in §
35.086. Each such child shall share equally in the total pension benefit to the
age of his or her majority, except that as soon as a child attains the age of
majority, the pension as to the child shall cease. Any payments for the benefit
of a minor child shall be made on behalf of the child to the surviving parent
or, if there is no surviving parent, to the legal guardian of the child. To the
extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount
required to purchase or provide the specified retirement pension, as reduced by
any amounts paid as workers’ compensation benefits, the excess shall be paid in
the manner provided in §
35.083(A). If the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefit payable to a
surviving spouse or minor children under this section exceeds the retirement
value at the time of the first payment, the city shall contribute such
additional amount as may be necessary to purchase or provide for the required
pension benefit.
(Prior Code, § 30-70)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1010
§ 35.085 DISABILITY IN THE LINE OF DUTY; BENEFIT; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   If any police officer becomes disabled, the police officer shall be
placed upon the roll of pensioned police officers at the regular retirement
pension of 50% of regular pay for the period of the disability. For purposes of
this section, DISABILITY shall mean the complete inability of the police
officer, for reasons of accident or other cause while in the line of duty, to
perform the duties of a police officer.
   (B)   No disability benefit payment shall be made except upon adequate proof
furnished to the city, the proof to consist of a medical examination conducted
by a competent, disinterested physician who is duly licensed to practice
medicine and surgery in this state and who certifies to the city that the
police officer is unable to perform the duties of a police officer. The city,
during the first 3 years of the payment of the benefits, shall have the right,
at reasonable times, to require the disabled police officer to undergo a
medical examination at the city’s expense to determine the continuance of the
disability claimed. After the 3-year period, the city may request the District
Court to order the police officer to submit proof of the continuance of the
disability claimed if the city has reasonable grounds to believe the police
officer is fraudulently receiving disability payments. The city shall have the
right to demand a physical examination of the police officer by a competent,
disinterested physician who is duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery
in this state, and who is chosen by the city. The expense of the examination
shall be borne by the city.
   (C)   In case of temporary disability of a police officer received while in
the line of duty, he or she shall receive his or her salary during the
continuance of the disability for a period not to exceed 12 months, except that
if it is ascertained by the City Council or other proper municipal authorities
within 12 months that the temporary disability has become a disability as
defined in this section, then the salary shall cease and he or she shall be
entitled to the benefits for pensions in case of disability as provided in this
section.
   (D)   All payments of pension or salary provided by this section shall be
subject to deduction of amounts paid under the state’s Workers’ Compensation
Act. The payments shall not commence until all credit for unused annual or sick
leave and other similar credits have been fully utilized by the disabled police
officer if there will be no impairment to his or her salary during the period
of disability. Total payments to a disabled police officer, in excess of
amounts paid as workers’ compensation benefits, shall not be less than the
retirement value at the date of disability. If the actuarial equivalent of the
disability pension payable under this section exceeds the police officer’s
retirement value at the time of the first payment, the city shall contribute
such additional amounts as may be necessary, from time to time, to provide for
the required disability pension.
   (E)   If a police officer who was pensioned under this section is later
determined to be no longer disabled, the pension provided for under this
section shall terminate and the police officer’s vested retirement value, as
reduced by any disability payments made from the retirement system, shall
thereafter be held and administered in the same manner as for any nondisabled
police officer or former police officer.
   (F)   (1)   If a police officer who has pensioned under this section is
later determined to be no longer disabled during the first 3 years when
disability benefit payments are being paid the police officer may return to
duty with the police force under the following conditions:
         (a)   If a vacancy exists on the police force for which the police
officer is qualified and the police officer wishes to return to the police
force, the city shall hire the police officer to fill the vacancy at a pay
grade of not less than his or her previous pay grade; or
         (b)   If no vacancy exists on the police force and the police officer
wishes to return to the police force, the city may create a vacancy under the
city’s reduction in force policy adopted under the Civil Service Act and rehire
the officer at a pay grade of not less than his or her previous pay grade.
      (2)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to a police officer
whose disability benefit payments are terminated because of fraud on the part
of the police officer.
(Prior Code, § 30-71)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1011
§ 35.086 TEMPORARY DISABILITY.
   No police officer shall be entitled during any period of temporary
disability to receive in full both his or her salary and his or her benefits
under Neb. RS 48-101 et seq. All state workers’ compensation benefits shall be
payable in full to such police officer as provided in Neb. RS 48-101 et seq.,
but all amounts paid by the city or its insurer under §§
35.075 to
35.093 to any disabled police officer entitled to receive a salary during the
disability shall be considered as payments on account of the salary and shall
be credited thereon. The remaining balance of the salary, if any, shall be
payable as otherwise provided in §§
35.075 to
35.093.
(Prior Code, § 30-72)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1012
§ 35.087 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; BENEFITS; HOW TREATED; VESTING SCHEDULE.
   (A)   If a police officer quits or is discharged before his or her normal or
early retirement date, the officer may request and receive as a lump-sum
payment an amount equal to the retirement value of his or her employee account
as determined at the valuation date preceding his or her termination of
employment. Such police officer, if vested, shall also receive a deferred
pension benefit in an amount purchased or provided by the retirement value at
the date of retirement. The retirement value at the retirement date shall
consist of the accumulated value of the police officer’s employee account, as
reduced by any lump-sum distributions received prior to retirement, together
with a vested percentage of the accumulated value of the police officer’s
employer account at the date of retirement.
   (B)   The vesting schedule shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the terminated police officer has been a member of the system
for less than 4 years, the vesting shall be nil;
      (2)   If the terminating officer has been a member of the paid Department
of the city of the first class for at least 4 years, the vesting percentage
shall be 40%. The vesting percentage shall be 50% after 5 years, 60% after 6
years, 70% after 7 years, 80% after 8 years, 90% after 9 years and 100% after
10 years; and
      (3)   All police officers shall be 100% vested upon attainment of age 60
while employed by the city as a police officer.
   (C)   The deferred pension benefit shall be payable on the first of the
month immediately following the police officer’s sixtieth birthday. At the
option of the terminating police officer, the pension benefit may be paid as of
the first of the month after the police officer attains the age of 55. The
election may be made by the police officer any time prior to the payment of the
pension benefits. The deferred pension benefit shall be paid in the form of the
benefit options specified in §
35.081(A) as elected by the police officer. If the police officer’s vested
retirement value at the date of his or her termination of employment is less
than $3,500, the city may elect to pay the police officer his or her vested
retirement value in the form of a single lump-sum payment.
   (D)   Effective January 1, 1997, a police officer may elect upon his or her
termination of employment to receive his or her vested retirement value in the
form of a single lump-sum payment. For a police officer whose termination of
employment is prior to January 1, 1997, this election shall be available only
if the city has adopted a lump-sum distribution option for terminating police
officers in the funding medium established for the retirement system.
   (E)   Upon any lump-sum payment of a terminating police officer’s retirement
value under this section, the police officer will not be entitled to any
deferred pension benefit and the city and the retirement system shall have no
further obligation to pay the police officer or his or her beneficiaries any
benefits under this subchapter.
   (F)   If the terminating police officer is not credited with 100% of his or
her employer account, the non-vested portion of the account shall be forfeited
and first used to meet the expense charges incurred by the city in connection
with administering the police officers retirement system and the remainder
shall then be used to reduce the city contribution which would otherwise be
required to fund pension benefits.
(Prior Code, § 30-73)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1013
§ 35.088 RETIREMENT COMMITTEE; ESTABLISHED; GOVERNING BODY; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   A Retirement Committee shall be established to supervise the general
operation of the retirement system established pursuant to this subchapter. The
governing body of the city shall continue to be responsible for the general
administration of the retirement system unless specific functions or all
functions with regard to the administration of the retirement system are
delegated, by ordinance, to the Retirement Committee. Whenever duties or powers
are vested in the city or the Retirement Committee under the sections or
whenever the sections fail to specifically allocate the duties or powers of
administration of the retirement system, the powers or duties shall be vested
in the city unless the powers or duties have been delegated by ordinance to the
Retirement Committee. The city and the Retirement Committee shall have all
powers which are necessary for or appropriate to establishing, maintaining,
managing and administering the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 30-74)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1014
§ 35.089 MEMBERSHIP OF RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   The Retirement Committee established pursuant to §
35.088 shall consist of members from both the police force and designees of the
City Council. The Committee shall consist of 6 members. Four members shall be
selected by the officers from the police force of the city. Election of police
officers shall be by secret ballot. Two members shall be designated by the City
Council. The members who are not participants in the retirement system shall
have a general knowledge of retirement plans. The Committee members shall be
appointed to 4-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
term by a person with the same representation as his or her predecessor.
Members of the Retirement Committee shall receive no salary and shall not be
compensated for expenses.
(Prior Code, § 30-75)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1015
§ 35.090 RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUNDS; CONTRACTS FOR INVESTMENTS.
   The funds of the retirement system shall be invested under the general
direction of the Retirement Committee. The city or the Retirement Committee if
delegated the function by the city shall select and contract with a funding
agent to hold or invest the assets of the retirement system and to provide for
the benefits provided by this subchapter. The city or Committee may select and
contract with investment managers registered under the Investment Advisers Act
of 1940 to invest, reinvest and otherwise manage the portion of the assets of
the retirement system as may be assigned by the city or Committee. All funds of
the retirement system shall be invested pursuant to the policies established by
the state’s Investment Council.
(Prior Code, § 30-76)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1016
§ 35.091 DUTIES OF RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to:
   (A)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements and
benefit provisions;
   (B)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a participant, a
statement describing the amount of benefits the participant is eligible to
receive;
   (C)   Make available for review an annual report of the system’s operations
describing both:
      (1)   The amount of contributions to the system from both employee and
employer sources; and
      (2)   An identification of the total assets of the retirement system.
   (D)   Have an analysis made of the investment return that has been achieved
on the assets of the retirement system administered by the Committee. The
analysis shall be prepared as of January 1, 1988, and each 5 years thereafter.
The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private organization which has
demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and which is unrelated
to any organization offering investment advice or which provides investment
management services to the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 30-77)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1017
§ 35.092 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; TRANSFER OF BENEFITS; WHEN.
   If a police officer terminates his or her employment for the purpose of
becoming a police officer employed by another city of the first class in the
state and the new employment commences within 120 days of the termination, the
police officer shall be entitled to transfer to the Police Officers Retirement
System Fund of the city by which he or she is newly employed, the full amount
of his or her employee account and the vested portion of the value of his or
her employer account at the time of termination. The transferred funds shall be
directly transferred to the police officer’s employee account in the retirement
system of the city to which transferred and administered by the Retirement
Committee of the city to which transferred. Upon the transfer, the city and the
retirement system shall have no further obligation to the police officer or his
or her beneficiary. Following the commencement of new employment, the
transferring police officer shall be deemed a new employee for all purposes of
the retirement system of the city to which he or she transferred.
(Prior Code, § 30-78)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1018
§ 35.093 EXEMPTION FROM LEGAL PROCESS; ADMINISTRATION; REQUIREMENTS; RETIREMENT
COMMITTEE; POWER AND DUTIES; REVIEW OF ADJUSTMENT, TAX LEVY AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The right to any benefits under the retirement system and the assets
of any fund of the retirement system shall not be assignable or subject to
execution, garnishment, attachment or the operation of any bankruptcy or
insolvency laws, except that the retirement system may comply with the
directions set forth in a qualified domestic relations order meeting the
requirements of § 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. The city or Retirement
Committee may require appropriate releases from any person as a condition to
complying with any such order. The retirement system shall not recognize any
domestic relations order which alters or changes benefits, provides for a form
of benefit not otherwise provided for by the retirement system, increases
benefits not otherwise provided by the retirement system, or accelerates or
defers the time of payment of benefits. No participant or beneficiary shall
have any right to any specific portion of the assets of the retirement system.
   (B)   (1)   The retirement system shall be administered in a manner
necessary to comply with the tax-qualification requirements applicable to
government retirement plans under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,
including § 401(a)(9) relating to the time and manner in which benefits are to
be distributed, § 401(a)(16) relating to compliance with the maximum limitation
on the plan benefits or contributions under §§ 415, 401(a)(17) which limits the
amount of compensation which can be taken into account under a retirement plan
and § 401(a)(25) relating to the specification of actuarial assumptions.
      (2)   Any requirements for compliance with § 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code may be set forth in any trust or funding medium for the retirement
system. This division shall be in full force and effect only so long as
conformity with § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code is required for public
retirement systems in order to secure the favorable income tax treatment
extended to sponsors and beneficiaries of tax-qualified retirement plans.
   (C)   If the Retirement Committee determines that the retirement system has
previously overpaid or underpaid a benefit payable under this subchapter, it
shall have the power to correct the error. In the event of an overpayment, the
retirement system may, in addition to any other remedy that the retirement
system may possess, offset future benefit payments by the amount of the prior
overpayment, together with regular interest thereon.
   (D)   A police officer whose benefit payment is adjusted by the Retirement
Committee pursuant to division (C) of this section may request a review by the
City Council of the adjustment made by the Retirement Committee.
   (E)   In order to provide the necessary amounts to pay for or fund a pension
plan established under this subchapter, the Mayor and Council may make a levy
in addition to the multiple levies or the all-purpose and exclusive levy which
the city is authorized by law to make.
(Prior Code, § 30-79)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1019
CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCIES
Section
Civil Emergencies
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   Declaration of local disaster; powers of Mayor during disaster
Alarm Systems
   
36.20   Definitions
   
36.21   Responsibilities of alarm user and vendor
   
36.22   Information to be provided to city
   
36.23   Excessive false alarms
   
36.24   Permits
   
36.25   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Nebraska Disaster and Civil Defense Act, see Neb. RS 81-829.36—81-829.68
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural cause, including but not
limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind storm, tornado or snowstorm.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of such
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as being necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood,
earthquakes, tornado, storm or other natural causes. These functions include,
without limitation, firefighting services, police services, engineering,
communications, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for the carrying out of such functions.
(Prior Code, § 16-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definitions, see Neb. RS 81-829.39
§ 36.02 DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER; POWERS OF MAYOR DURING DISASTER.
   (A)   Declaration by Mayor; assumption of duties of Mayor by other officer.
Whenever a local disaster, as defined in §
36.01, exists, the Mayor shall declare its existence by means of a written
declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the disaster and shall
perform the duties and obligations of Mayor as prescribed in this chapter. In
the absence of the Mayor, the president of the Council, or, if the Mayor and
president of the Council are both unable to perform the duties of Mayor through
either absence from the city or physical or mental disability for such a length
of time or of a severity as would reasonably require someone other than the
Mayor or president of the Council to perform the duties of the Mayor, then the
member of the City Council presently physically and mentally able to perform
the duties of Mayor prescribed in this chapter with the longest length of
continuous service as a member of the City Council immediately preceding the
existence of the disaster, shall declare its existence by means of a written
declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency and shall
otherwise perform the duties and obligations of the Mayor prescribed in this
chapter until the Mayor, President of the Council or a more senior member of
the City Council returns to the community or becomes physically and mentally
able to discharge the duties of Mayor prescribed in this chapter, at which time
the person shall assume these duties and responsibilities.
   (B)   Powers of Mayor during disaster. After proclamation of the local
disaster, the Mayor may, in the interest of public safety and welfare, expend
city monies and issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   (C)   Effective period of declaration. The proclamation authorized in this
section shall be effective for a period of 48 hours unless sooner terminated by
proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the local disaster no longer exists.
The Mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a local disaster
at the end of each 48-hour period during the time the emergency exists. The
Mayor may make no more than 2 consecutive proclamations after the initial
proclamation without the consent of the City Council in regular or special
session so convened.
   (D)   Public notice of declaration. Upon issuance of the proclamation
authorized in this section, the Chief of Police shall notify local news media
and shall cause 3 copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the
emergency to be posted at the following places within the city: the City Hall,
the North Platte Public Library and the County Courthouse.
   (E)   Effect of declaration. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster
is to activate the response and recovery aspect of any and all applicable local
or interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorize the furnishing of
aid and assistance thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 16-2)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to declare an emergency, see Neb. RS 81-829.50
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 36.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed
or used to signal the occurrence in the city of a burglary, robbery or other
criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency requiring urgent
attention and to which law enforcement, fire or emergency medical personnel are
expected to respond. ALARM SYSTEMS include, but are not limited to, those
through which public safety personnel are notified directly of the signals
through automatic recording devices and those which are connected to out-of-
town security agencies, which then call the city’s 911 center by telephone.
This definition shall not include alarm systems in private dwellings or
residences, nor shall it include telephone calls from private individuals
concerning a possible burglary, robbery or other criminal offense, fire
emergency or medical emergency requiring urgent attention and to which law
enforcement, fire or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER. Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or obtains an
alarm system.
   ALARM VENDOR. Any person associated with an alarm business or company,
either indirectly or directly, whose duties include but are not limited to any
of the following: selling, replacing, moving, repairing, maintaining or
installing an alarm system on or in any structure, building or facility.
   FALSE ALARM. Any alarm signal eliciting a response by emergency personnel
where a situation requiring an emergency response by the emergency personnel
does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not  reasonably
subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. Alarms
resulting from a utility service malfunction or interruption, verified in
writing by the local utility company manager, shall be considered an exception
to this definition. The final determination of whether or not an alarm signal
is a false alarm shall be made by the Chief of Police.
   NEW OR ALTERED ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system which had installed a different
or additional method of detection which the previous alarm system did not
contain.
(Prior Code, § 20-31) (Am. Ord. 3789, § 1, 5-18-2010)
§ 36.21 RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM USER AND VENDOR.
   (A)   Responsibilities of user. It shall be the responsibility of each alarm
user to ensure that the standards of installation and maintenance set forth in
this subchapter are maintained. All burglar alarm systems connected to the
public safety emergency center must be tested at least once a month. All fire
alarm systems connected to the public safety emergency center must be tested 4
times a year on a quarterly basis. Without the prior express consent of the
Fire or Police Department, systems shall not be tested so as to transmit a
signal to public safety personnel.
   (B)   Responsibilities of vendor. It shall be the responsibility of any
alarm vendor installing or maintaining an alarm system to cause the
installation or maintenance to conform to the requirements of the Fire Code and
the Electrical Code applicable to the city.
   (C)   Responsibilities of both user and vendor. Each alarm system shall be
utilized only for the purpose of summoning the public safety personnel for
emergency or life hazard situations.
(Prior Code, § 20-32)
§ 36.22 INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED TO CITY.
   (A)   Each alarm user must provide to the city, on a form provided by the
Police Department, the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user and
of the vendor, if any, with whom the alarm user has contracted for maintenance
of the alarm system.
   (B)   Each alarm user shall provide the city with the name and address of
the individual to whom legal notices should be sent.
   (C)   Each alarm user shall also provide the city with the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of those persons (not less than 2) who can be contacted
to turn off or deactivate an alarm system.
   (D)   It shall be the obligation of the alarm user to keep this information
current and correct through supplementary notification filed on the same form.
(Prior Code, § 20-33)
§ 36.23 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   New and altered alarm systems shall be afforded a 30-day adjustment
period commencing with the date of activation in order that the system be
brought to maximum efficiency. During those periods of time, no false alarms
shall be charged against the system.
   (B)   If any alarm system produces 4 false alarms in any 12-consecutive-
month period, written notice of that fact shall be given by certified mail or
personal delivery to the alarm user’s designee at the address listed on the
notification and permit form. Thereafter, the Chief of Police shall have the
power to require that the alarm user be charged an amount determined by the
City Council from time to time per false alarm above the 4 false alarms within
a 12-month consecutive period. The 12-consecutive-month period is any
consecutive 12 months. Determination of this service charge will be made by the
Chief of Police, and notice of determination shall be given by certified mail
or by personal delivery to the alarm user’s designee at the address listed on
the notification and permit form. All service charges shall become delinquent
30 days after receipt of notice. All delinquent service charge payments shall
draw interest at the rate of 16% per annum from date of delinquency.
(Prior Code, § 20-34) (Am. Ord. 3789, § 2, 5-18-2010)
§ 36.24 PERMITS.
   (A)   Alarm system permit. There shall be a permit fee in an amount to be
determined from time to time for all alarm systems to cover administrative
costs. A permit must be obtained within 30 days of installation of a new or
altered system. Permits, including renewals of permits, shall be obtained by
all alarm system users by September 1 of each year. If permits are not obtained
on or before September 30 of each year, they are deemed delinquent. There shall
be an additional charge to be determined from time to time for delinquent
permits. Charges may be filed in county court against the individual
responsible for the alarm system for failure to obtain a permit on or before
October 15 of each year.
   (B)   Alarm vendor permit. There shall be a permit fee in an amount to be
determined from time to time for all alarm vendors. A permit must be obtained
within 30 days of the alarm vendor beginning business within the city. Permits,
including renewals of permits, shall be obtained by all alarm vendors by
September 1 of each year. If permits are not obtained on or before September 30
of each year, they are deemed delinquent. There shall be an additional charge
to be determined from time to time for delinquent permits. Charges may be filed
in county court against the vendor for failure to obtain a permit on or before
October 15 of each year.
   (C)   Purchase of permits. Alarm system permits and alarm vendor permits
shall be purchased from the city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 20-35) (Am. Ord. 3789, § 3, 5-18-2010)
§ 36.25 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter nor the existence of any other fact shall
be construed to require a response by public safety personnel to an address or
a location registering an alarm.
   (B)   The city shall neither assume nor bear any liability for its failure
to respond to such an alarm signal.
(Prior Code, § 20-38)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person in violation of §§
36.20 et seq. shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. Unless otherwise
specified in the particular section which the person stands convicted of
violating, the penalty for the violation shall be $100. Each day any person
shall be in violation of §§
36.20 et seq. shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 20-39)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   ELECTRICITY
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
      
54.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
      
55.   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   City Light and Water Department created
   
50.02   Diversion of service prohibited; unlawful connections
   
50.03   Civil action against person committing diversion of services
   
50.04   Discontinuance of service on failure to pay charges
   
50.05   Abatement of nuisances
   
50.06   Notice to make utility connections prior to paving construction
   
50.07   Public works involving architecture or engineering requirements
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 CITY LIGHT AND WATER DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There is hereby created the city’s Light and Water Department.
(Prior Code, § 52-1)
§ 50.02 DIVERSION OF SERVICE PROHIBITED; UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any person who connects any wire, cord, socket, motor, pipe, conduit
or other instrument, device or contrivance with any wire transmitting or
supplying or intending to transmit or supply electricity or electric current,
or connects any pipe or conduit supplying gas or water, without the knowledge
and consent of the person furnishing the electricity or electric current
transmitted or supplied by the wire, or gas or water supplied by the pipe or
conduit, in such manner that any portion of the electricity, electric current,
gas or water may be transmitted or supplied to any globe, lamp, heating
apparatus, motor or other instrument by or at which electricity, electric
current, gas or water may be consumed, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in §
50.99.
   (B)   Any person who connects or changes any wire, cord, socket, motor, pipe
or conduit or other instrument, device or contrivance with any wire, pipe or
conduit transmitting or supplying or intended to transmit or supply
electricity, electric current, gas or water, without the knowledge and consent
of the person furnishing the electricity, electric current, gas or water
transmitted or supplied by the wire, pipe or conduit, in such manner as to
transmit or supply any such electricity, electric current, gas or water to any
globe, lamp, heating apparatus, motor or other instrument by or at which
electricity, electric current, gas or water may be consumed without passing
through the meter provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity
of electricity, gas or water passing through it, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
50.99.
   (C)   Any person who wilfully injures, alters or, by any instrument, device
or contrivance in any manner, interferes with or obstructs the action or
operation of any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount
or quantity of electricity, gas or water passing through it, without the
knowledge and consent of the person furnishing or supplying the electricity,
electric current, gas or water passing or intended to pass through the meter,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
50.99.
   (D)   Any person who knowingly uses or who knowingly permits the use of any
electricity, electric current, gas or water in any globe, electric motor,
heating apparatus or other instrument or device by which electricity, gas or
water may be consumed, owned, leased or used by such person when any portion or
quantity of the electricity, electric current, gas or water passes through or
along any line, cord, socket, motor, pipe, conduit or other instrument, device
or contrivance which has been connected with any wire, pipe or conduit
transmitting or supplying electricity, gas or water without the knowledge and
consent of the person furnishing the electricity, electric current, gas or
water transmitted or supplied by the wire, pipe or conduit, or when any portion
or quantity of the electricity, electric current, gas or water passes around,
by, or through any meter provided for measuring or registering the amount or
quantity thereof, without being so measured or registered by reason of the
meter having been changed, interfered with or obstructed without the knowledge
and consent of the person furnishing the electricity, electric current, gas or
water passing or intended to pass through the meter, or by reason of some wire,
cord, socket, motor, pipe, conduit or other instrument, device or contrivance
having been connected with a transmitting or supplying wire, pipe or conduit,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
50.99.
(Prior Code, § 52-2) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 CIVIL ACTION AGAINST PERSON COMMITTING DIVERSION OF SERVICES.
   (A)   The city may bring a civil action for damages against any person who
commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets or attempts bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering when such act results in damages to a city utility. The
city may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to this section against any
person receiving the benefit of utility service through means of bypassing,
tampering or unauthorized metering.
   (B)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city shall
be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:
      (1)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the damage or
loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or
      (2)   Liquidated damages of:
         (a)   Until July 1, 1985: $500; and
         (b)   On July 1, 1985, and thereafter: $2,500; if the amount of actual
damage or loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.
   (C)   In addition to damage or loss under divisions (B)(1) or (2) of this
section, the city may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on
account of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering, including but not
limited to disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs of the
suit and reasonable attorneys’ fees in cases within the scope of Neb. RS 25-
1801.
   (D)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or occupant at
any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized
metering if the tenant or occupant:
      (1)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the premises
where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to exist; and
      (2)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for utility
services to the premises.
   (E)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to exist
caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering if
the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply system on the
premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering was proven to
exist.
   (F)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws, and the
remedies provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of
any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies.
(Prior Code, § 52-3)
§ 50.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE ON FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
   (A)   Authorized; notice required. The city shall have the right to
discontinue utility services and remove its properties if the charges for the
services are not paid within 7 days after the date that the charges become
delinquent. Before any termination, the Department of Utilities shall first
give notice by first class mail or in person to any domestic subscriber whose
service is proposed to be terminated.  If notice is given by first class mail,
the mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not
be discontinued for at least 7 days, weekends and holidays excluded.
   (B)   Contents of notice. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the department
regarding payment of the bill;
      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      (5)   The domestic subscriber’s right, prior to the disconnection date,
to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      (6)   A statement that the Department may not disconnect service pending
the conclusion of the conference;
      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection may be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician’s certificate which
shall certify that the domestic subscriber or resident within the subscriber’s
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause the subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the utility’s service to that household. The certificate shall
be filed with the Department of Utilities within 5 days of receiving notice
under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the Department’s
services for a period of 30 days from the filing. Only 1 postponement of
disconnection shall be allowed under this section for each incidence of non-
payment of any due account;
      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
Department for an installment payment plan;
      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section
which has received prior approval from the governing body.
   (C)   Dispute by subscriber. A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed
discontinuance of service by notifying the utility with a written statement
that sets forth the reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a
statement has been made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before
the utility may discontinue services.
   (D)   Additional procedures. The procedures adopted by the governing body
for resolving utility bills, 3 copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition to any amendments
thereto, and are made a part of this section as though set out in full.
   (E)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any disconnections or
interruptions of services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair
or maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or
of the general public.
(Prior Code, § 52-4)
Statutory reference:
   Denial or discontinuance of utility service, see Neb. RS 70-1601 et seq.
§ 50.05 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the city may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the nuisance, in the manner
provided by law.
   (B)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Prior Code, § 52-6)
§ 50.06 NOTICE TO MAKE UTILITY CONNECTIONS PRIOR TO PAVING CONSTRUCTION.
   Whenever a street or alley or a part thereof is to be put under contract for
paving or repaving, the City Clerk shall notify the owners in fee simple of
real estate abutting such street or alley, and their tenants or lessees, and
also all gas and telephone companies and all sewer service patrons and water
consumers, by publication or otherwise, of the purpose of the city to pave, and
that all gas, water, sewer and underground connections must be made prior to
the paving or repaving of the street or alley at the owner’s expense, and that
the city will make the underground water and sewer connections required and
assess the cost thereof as a special assessment against the property served by
the underground connection according to benefits when the paving district cost
is equalized and assessed. The notice shall be published 1 time in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city at least 20 days
prior to the beginning of the operation by the party having the work under
construction.
(Prior Code, § 52-7)
§ 50.07 PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and Neb. RS 81-3449
and 81-3453, the municipality shall not engage in the construction of any
public works involving architecture or engineering unless the plans,
specifications, and estimates have been prepared and the construction has been
observed by an architect, a professional engineer, or a person under the direct
supervision of an architect, professional engineer, or those under the direct
supervision of an architect or professional engineer.
      (2)   This division (A) shall not apply to any public work in which the
contemplated expenditure for the complete project does not exceed $100,000 or
the adjusted dollar amount set by the Board of Engineers and Architects.
(Neb. RS 81-3445)
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section regulating the practice
of architecture do not apply to the following activities or the other
activities specified in Neb. RS 81-3449:
      (2)   A public service provider who employs a design professional
performing professional services for itself;
      (3)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized
profession;
      (4)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water
conservation practices performed any land owned by the municipality that is not
subject to a permit from the Department of Natural Resources; and
      (5)   The work of employees and agents of the municipality performing, in
accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land-use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation, and maintenance.
(Neb. RS 81-3449)
   (C)   The provisions of division (A) of this section regulating the practice
of engineering do not apply to the following activities, the activities
specified in division (B) of this section, or the other activities specified in
Neb. RS 81-3453:
      (1)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct
supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly designated as
locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant operating
engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or operate machinery
or equipment or who supervise construction within their own plant; and
      (2)   The construction of water wells as defined in Neb. RS 46-1212, the
installation of pumps and pumping equipment into water wells, and the
decommissioning of water wells, unless such construction, installation, or
decommissioning is required by the municipality to be designed or supervised by
an engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the municipality as a
part of a public water supply.
(Neb. RS 81-3453)
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the municipality is considered a
public service provider if it appoints a Municipal Engineer or employs a full-
time person licensed under the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act who is
in responsible charge of architectural or engineering work.
(Neb. RS 81-3423)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any chapter
or section of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless
otherwise specified in the particular chapter or section which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in
accordance with §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 52-5)
CHAPTER 51: ELECTRICITY
Section
   
51.01   Electrical service generally; provisions constitute contract with
consumer
   
51.02   Rates
   
51.03   Application for service
   
51.04   Service connection; deposit
   
51.05   Tampering with meter
   
51.06   Access to premises
   
51.07   Connections with supply wires to be made by authorized personnel
   
51.08   Service contracts not transferable; notice to discontinue service to
premises
   
51.09   Computation of charges in case of defective meter
   
51.10   City not guarantor of service; right of city to discontinue service
   
51.11   Repair and maintenance of meters; loss or destruction of meter or
service wire
   
51.12   Measurement of current; billing; payment of bills; delinquency
   
51.13   Special rates for temporary users
   
51.14   Service outside corporate limits
   
51.15   Deposit fund
   
51.16   Amendment of regulations
   
51.17   Permission of city required for trimming of trees near power lines
   
51.18   Right of city to remove tree limbs overhanging power lines
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 ELECTRICAL SERVICE GENERALLY; PROVISIONS CONSTITUTE CONTRACT WITH
CONSUMER.
   The city shall furnish electric current for light, heating, cooking, power
and other purposes to persons within its service area whose premises abut on
any supply wire of the electric distribution system of the city, and may
furnish electric current to such other persons within or without its corporate
limits as and when, according to law, and on such reasonable terms as, the city
may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations and rates for electric service set
out in this chapter shall be deemed and considered a part of every application
hereafter made for electric service to the city and shall be considered a part
of the contract with every customer now served by the city. Without further
formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant for the use
or consumption of electrical energy by present consumers thereof and the
furnishing of electric service to the applicant or customer by the city shall
constitute a contract between the applicant or customer and the city, to which
contract both parties are bound. If the customer shall violate any of the
provisions of the contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the
city may hereafter adopt, the Utilities Manager, or his or her agent, shall cut
off or disconnect the electric service from the building or place of the
violation, and no further connection for electric service to the building or
place shall again be made, except by order of the Utilities Manager or his or
her agent.
(Prior Code, § 52-31)
§ 51.02 RATES.
   The city shall, from time to time, recommend electrical rates to be charged
to the customers of the city’s Light and Water Department. The Council shall
approve the rates recommended before the city shall put them into effect. Upon
approval of these rates by the City Council, the rates shall be placed on file
with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 52-32)
§ 51.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Every person desiring a supply of electric current shall make application
therefor to the city upon blanks to be furnished for that purpose, which
application shall be made to the Utilities Manager in the city’s Water and
Light Building. The application shall state truly and fully all the uses to
which the electric current is to be applied, and no additional use will be
allowed except by permission of the city or the Utilities Manager.
(Prior Code, § 52-33)
§ 51.04 SERVICE CONNECTION; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Overhead service wires. When an application shall be made for electric
service to the city and accepted by the Utilities Manager, the city will run or
cause to be run overhead service wires, when the service is available, to the
customer’s attachment at the nearest reasonable location on the building or
pole of the applicant or customer, and thereafter will keep the service wires
in good repair and safe condition at the expense of the city. The wires for
overhead service shall be considered the property of the city.
   (B)   Underground service wires. If the customer requests underground
service, the service wires shall be the property of the customer and the
customer shall be responsible for keeping the underground service wires in good
repair and in a safe condition.
   (C)   Deposit. Applicants for electric service shall be required to
accompany their application with a service deposit, to ensure the prompt
payment of electric service bills and other charges, in an amount in each case
as the Manager shall determine, taking into consideration the volume of service
and the type of meter necessary to measure the volume of service under
conditions acceptable to the manager. A financial guarantee bond may be
substituted in lieu of the required cash deposit. All meters and instrument
transformers required for measuring electric current used by the applicant or
customer shall be furnished, shall be set in place and shall remain the
property of the city. All service deposits shall be managed by the city and
shall be refunded to the customer when service is no longer desired, subject to
conditions as provided in this chapter. Not more than 1 house or building shall
be supplied from 1 connection except by special permission.
(Prior Code, § 52-34)
§ 51.05 TAMPERING WITH METER.
   No electric service customer shall be permitted to take current for
residence or commercial lighting purposes at power rates, nor shall any
lighting apparatus be attached or suffered to remain attached to any power
meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any scheme, device or
contrivance for the purpose of evading the proper service and registration of
any meter or to employ any scheme or device whereby he or she may obtain
current which does not pass through the meter furnished him or her by the city.
Finding lighting apparatus attached to a power meter or any device in or near
any meter which causes the meter to register incorrectly shall be prima facie
evidence of the intent of the occupier of the premises, or of the customer, to
convert electric current to his or her own use, which is hereby declared
unlawful and the person convicted of the violation shall be punished as
provided in this chapter. If it shall appear to the city that any light or
power meter shall have been tapped or tampered with, it is hereby empowered to
direct the Utilities Manager to install or cause to be installed, at the
customer’s expense, a meter installed in iron conduit mechanically sealed in a
closed meter box accessible only to the city or its agents.
(Prior Code, § 52-35) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Utilities Manager, or his or her agents, shall have access at all
reasonable hours to premises in which electric current is being used to
determine if it is being carried, distributed and used in the proper manner.
(Prior Code, § 52-36)
§ 51.07 CONNECTIONS WITH SUPPLY WIRES TO BE MADE BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL.
   Under no circumstances shall connections be made with the wires of the
electric distribution system and supply wires and the wires of customer except
by an employee or agent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-38)
§ 51.08 SERVICE CONTRACTS NOT TRANSFERABLE; NOTICE TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE TO
PREMISES.
   Contracts for electric service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from 1 location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any customer shall sell, dispose of or move from the premises
where service is furnished, or if the premises are destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he or she shall, at once, so inform the Utilities Manager, who shall
cause the electric current to be shut off from the premises. If the customer
shall fail to give the notice, he or she shall be charged for all electric
current used on the premises until the city or its agent is otherwise advised
of the change.
(Prior Code, § 52-39)
§ 51.09 COMPUTATION OF CHARGES IN CASE OF DEFECTIVE METER.
   Should an electric service customer’s meter become out of repair or fail to
register properly, the customer will be charged for electric current during the
time the meter is out of order or repair on the basis of monthly consumption
during the same month of the preceding year; provided, however, if no basis for
comparison exists, then the customer shall pay such amount as reasonably fixed
by the Utilities Manager.
(Prior Code, § 52-40)
§ 51.10 CITY NOT GUARANTOR OF SERVICE; RIGHT OF CITY TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE.
   (A)   The city does not guarantee the delivery of electric current over the
lines of its distribution system at any time, to any person, except when its
power and connections are in good working order and it has sufficient power,
current, equipment and machinery so to do. The city expressly reserves the
right to disconnect or discontinue the service for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   For repairs necessary to be made on any part of its plant, power
house, equipment, system or distribution system;
      (2)   For non-payment of bills when due;
      (3)   For fraudulent representations in regard to the consumption of
current for light, cooking, heat and power;
      (4)   For the protection of persons or property; and/or
      (5)   For violation of any of the rules or requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The city shall use due and reasonable diligence to provide and supply
uninterrupted service to customers, but shall not be liable for damages
resulting from interruption of service due to causes over which the city has no
control, and the city expressly reserves the right to discontinue or disconnect
any customer’s service without any preliminary notice.
(Prior Code, § 52-41)
§ 51.11 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF METERS; LOSS OR DESTRUCTION OF METER OR
SERVICE WIRE.
   No person, except an authorized agent of the city, shall be allowed to set
the meters as mentioned in this chapter, or to make connections to the electric
service of the city. The owner or tenant of premises where a meter is located
shall provide ready and convenient access to the meter so that it may easily be
examined and read by the city or its authorized agents. Any customer of
electric current from the city has the right to request the city to test his or
her meter any reasonable number of times, and the city or its agents shall
comply with the request, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as
the city may adopt. The city reserves the right to test and replace any meter
in use at any time. The city will keep clean and in proper repair and will
replace without cost to customer any service meter where the repair or
replacement results from ordinary wear and tear and not from the wilful
negligence or recklessness of customer. In consideration of the service
rendered or to be rendered in the matter or repairing or replacing the meter,
the applicant or customer specifically consents and agrees to keep all service
meters and service wires insured for the benefit of city against fire or other
casualty and hereby designates the Utilities Manager as his or her agent or
attorney in fact to collect from the insurance carrier, in the event of the
loss or destruction of the meter or service wire by fire or other casualty,
from the proceeds payable to customer out of any policy of insurance in which
he or she is made beneficiary affecting the premises where the meter or service
wire is located, the reasonable value of the meter or service wire, and deduct
the value from payment to be made to the insured under the policy; provided
that, if the customer carries no insurance on the premises or contents of the
premises or place where the meter is set, the customer hereby consents and
agrees to reimburse the city for the reasonable value of such meter or service
wire in the event of destruction by fire or other casualty.
(Prior Code, § 52-42)
§ 51.12 MEASUREMENT OF CURRENT; BILLING; PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENCY.
   All electric current furnished customers of the city shall be measured by
meters of a type as approved by the Utilities Manager. Accounts between the
customer and the city shall be kept under a bookkeeping system as shall be
provided by the Utilities Manager. All meters shall be read monthly and the
electric service meter readings shall be delivered to the Utilities Manager for
billing and collection by his or her Department. Statements of monthly electric
service bills shall be mailed or delivered to customers each month. All
customers shall pay in net cash to the Manager, at his or her office in the
city’s Water and Light Building, the amount due the city for electric service
or other proper charges due the city for any month. If the customer shall
neglect or refuse to pay his or her bill within 10 days after the mailing date
designated on his or her bill, the bill shall be considered delinquent. If the
bill is not paid by 7 days following mailing of the cutoff notice, service may
be discontinued and disconnected until all amounts in arrears are paid in full,
together with a fee equivalent to a 1-hour charge at the regular labor charge
rate set by the city for the resumption of service.
(Prior Code, § 52-43)
§ 51.13 SPECIAL RATES FOR TEMPORARY USERS.
   Temporary users of electric current shall obtain charges for service from
the Utilities Manager on application and payment of the charge therefor.
(Prior Code, § 52-44)
§ 51.14 SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The city shall have the power and authority to contract with any person,
including other municipalities, to sell electric current for light, heat, power
or other purposes beyond the corporate limits of the city when it is beneficial
to the city to do so. For furnishing the electric service outside the corporate
limits to other municipalities, other public service companies or government
authorities for purposes of resale, the rates shall be set by the city;
provided that, the contract rate made in such cases shall be uniform insofar as
it affects the users of equal amounts of current under the contracts under
similar circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 52-45)
§ 51.15 DEPOSIT FUND.
   All electric service deposits, when received by the city, shall be held
separate and apart in a fund to be known as the Electric Service Deposit Fund.
This Fund is a trust fund for customers of electric service from the city, and
may be invested by the city as other idle or surplus funds under its
jurisdiction are invested, and such rate of interest per annum may be paid to
the beneficiaries of the fund as the city may determine from time to time.
When, for any reason, electric service is no longer required, the service
deposit shall, upon demand, be returned to the customer by the Utilities
Manager, with proper deductions for unpaid service charges and other arrearages
due the city. The Utilities Manager shall give each applicant or customer a
separate receipt for all service deposits received by this Department.
(Prior Code, § 52-46)
§ 51.16 AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor and Council reserve the right to alter or amend by ordinance the
rules and regulations pertaining to electric service, when they so deem
advisable.
(Prior Code, § 52-47)
§ 51.17 PERMISSION OF CITY REQUIRED FOR TRIMMING OF TREES NEAR POWER LINES.
   Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof, or to fell
trees or branches thereof, in close proximity to the lines of the electric
distribution system of the city, and which work might cause injury or damage to
the lines thereof, shall, before doing the work, give reasonable notice to the
Utilities Manager, and shall secure permission from the Utilities Manager so to
do, and shall seek the assistance of the city to do the work so that electric
service shall not be interrupted or damage done to the lines or property of the
city. Any person felling or removing the trees, or branches of trees, resulting
in the interruption of electric service or damage to the lines or property of
the city, without having given notice to the city as provided in this section,
and without having received the permission from the Utilities Manager to do so
as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this chapter. Nothing
contained in this section is intended to relieve any person of liability for
damage to property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-48) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.18 RIGHT OF CITY TO REMOVE TREE LIMBS OVERHANGING POWER LINES.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to protect the lines or property of the
electric distribution system of the city, the city or the Utilities Manager
shall have the right to remove and cut away, in a careful and prudent manner,
interfering branches or limbs of trees, so that its lines shall be free and
open.
(Prior Code, § 52-49)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall wilfully or carelessly break, injure or deface,
interfere with or disturb any machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the electric generating plant or distribution system of the
city, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the
rules and regulations of the city legally adopted, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
50.99.
(Prior Code, § 52-50)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Water system generally
   
52.002   Availability of water service
   
52.003   Installation and ownership of mains and service pipes
   
52.004   Connection with city system required
   
52.005   Duty of owner to make and maintain connection
   
52.006   Making or repair of connection by city; collection of costs
   
52.007   Notice to make or repair connection
   
52.008   Water service generally; provisions constitute contract with consumer
   
52.009   Service contracts non-transferable; notice to discontinue service to
premises
   
52.010   Duty of Water Division to maintain water supply
   
52.011   Fee for resuming service after discontinuance of service for violation
   
52.012   Application for service
   
52.013   Remedies for failure to pay charges
   
52.014   Supplying water to other premises
   
52.015   Written authorization required to turn on water
   
52.016   Access to premises
   
52.017   Turning water off in case of fire
   
52.018   Replacement of galvanized iron service pipes
   
52.019   Charge for installation of service connection
   
52.020   Curbstops
   
52.021   Private fire hydrants
   
52.022   Tapping of mains to be done by authorized personnel
   
52.023   Injuring or tampering with system
   
52.024   Opening or tampering with fire hydrants
   
52.025   Excavations when ground is frozen
   
52.026   Duty of police to report violations or waste of water
   
52.027   Computation of charges in case of defective meter
   
52.028   Definitions
   
52.029   Repair of leaks required
   
52.030   Disconnection of service for failure to repair leaks
   
52.031   Installation of service
   
52.032   Use of same service pipe by separate premises
   
52.033   Service charge and main assessments for customers outside city
   
52.034   Water supply not to be contaminated
   
52.035   Disclaimer of liability
   
52.036   Right of city to shut off water; amendment of regulations or rates
   
52.037   Payment of water district assessment cost
   
52.038   Fluoride
Meters
   
52.050   Meter required
   
52.051   Type and placement of meters; access to meter
   
52.052   Installation of meters
   
52.053   Furnishing and ownership of meters
   
52.054   Protection of meters; responsibility for damage
   
52.055   Rates; billing; payment of bills; delinquency
   
52.056   Meter testing
   
52.057   Repair of meters
Cross Connection Control
   
52.070   General policy and purpose; applicability of subchapter
   
52.071   Definitions
   
52.072   Cross connections prohibited
   
52.073   Survey and investigations; responsibilities of consumer
   
52.074   Type of protection required
   
52.075   Premises where protection is required
   
52.076   Approved backflow prevention devices
   
52.077   Installation of backflow prevention devices
   
52.078   Inspection and maintenance of backflow prevention devices
   
52.079   Violations; abatement actions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 WATER SYSTEM GENERALLY.
   The water system consists of all pumps, motors and reservoirs, and the
plants wherein they are housed and operated, and all accessories and
appurtenances thereto, which derive their water supply therefrom; also the
central administrative office, located in the water and light building,
together with all equipment, supplies and paraphernalia connected therewith and
all records, books and data kept and built up in the conduct of the office.
Whenever the words DIVISION or WATER DIVISION are used in this chapter, they
shall mean the water system.
(Prior Code, § 52-71)
§ 52.002 AVAILABILITY OF WATER SERVICE.
   In all lands within the corporate limits of the city, or 1 mile thereof,
water service shall be available therein or, upon the creation of water
extension districts as provided by the laws of the state, payment for which
shall be by special assessment against the property specially benefitted in
proportion to the benefits, as provided by law, upon creation of a water
extension district and installation of a main by the Water Division and payment
of proper connection charges, or upon installation of a main by private
contract under the direction of the City Engineer, whose fees are to be paid by
the private contract.
(Prior Code, § 52-72)
§ 52.003 INSTALLATION AND OWNERSHIP OF MAINS AND SERVICE PIPES.
   Water mains may be installed by either the Water Division or by private
contractor under the direction of the City Engineer. Service pipes, valves and
curbstops will be installed only by the Water Division. After inspection and
acceptance by the City Engineer, the mains and service pipe (except the
galvanized service pipe and accompanying curbstop), up to and including the
curbstop or valve for customers’ supply connections within the corporate limits
or zoning area and located within the boundaries of a dedicated street, alley
or easement when used for the city water supply, shall become the property of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-73)
§ 52.004 CONNECTION WITH CITY SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   All private property within the city, located upon any street, avenue or
alley through which opposite or abutting the private property runs or hereafter
shall run any water main or lateral of the city water system, shall be equipped
with a proper connection to the water main or lateral, if water being used for
human consumption is determined by proper authority to not meet safe drinking
water requirements.
(Prior Code, § 52-74)
§ 52.005 DUTY OF OWNER TO MAKE AND MAINTAIN CONNECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of the private property as described in §
52.004, upon 10 days’ notice as provided in §
52.006, to make or cause to be made and maintained and repaired proper
connection with the city water system.
(Prior Code, § 52-75)
§ 52.006 MAKING OR REPAIR OF CONNECTION BY CITY; COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   Should the owner of any such property as described in §
52.004 fail or neglect for 10 days after the service of notice to comply with
this chapter and such notice and make or cause the connection to be made or to
make any repairs which may be necessary, then the Manager of Utilities shall
cause the connection to be made, and the costs thereof, including all necessary
water meters, when certified by the Manager of Utilities to the Mayor and
Council, shall by the Council be assessed against the property as a special
assessment, and the costs shall be collected as other special assessments and
special taxes as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 52-76)
§ 52.007 NOTICE TO MAKE OR REPAIR CONNECTION.
   (A)   Method of service. The notice referred to in §
52.006 shall be in writing and shall be served by the Water Division, under
direction of the Mayor and Council or the Board of Health, upon the owner of
record of any such private property, either by personal service or by
publication 1 time in some legal daily newspaper published in and of general
circulation in the city.
   (B)   Publication. Should such notice be made by publication, the notice
shall be published not less than 10 days preceding the day when the city
undertakes to make the connection or repairs pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Contents. The notice shall describe the real estate required to be
connected with the city water system, and shall notify the owner that he or she
is required to make the connection or repairs to existing connections with 10
days after the service or publication thereof, and that if he or she fails to
comply with the notice, the Manager of Utilities will cause the connection or
repairs to be made and will certify the costs thereof to the Mayor and Council
for assessment against the property, the costs to be collected as other special
assessments and special taxes as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 52-77)
§ 52.008 WATER SERVICE GENERALLY; PROVISIONS CONSTITUTE CONTRACT WITH CONSUMER.
   The city shall furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose
premises abut a street or alley in which a city commercial main now is or may
hereafter be laid, and may furnish water to persons within its corporate limits
whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which a city commercial main
now is or may hereafter be laid, and may also furnish water to persons whose
premises are situated outside the corporate limits, as and when, according to
law, the city may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations and water rates
named in this chapter shall be considered a part of every application hereafter
made for water service and shall be considered a part of the contract between
every consumer now or hereafter served by the city. Without further formality,
the making of application on the part of any applicant or the use or
consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing of
water service to the applicant or consumer by the city shall constitute a
contract between the consumer and the city, to which contract both parties are
bound. If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of the contract or
any reasonable rules and regulations that the city may hereafter adopt, the
city or its agent may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building
or premises or place of the violation, and no further connection for water
service to the building, premises or place shall again be made, except by order
of the city or its agent.
(Prior Code, § 52-78)
§ 52.009 SERVICE CONTRACTS NONTRANSFERABLE; NOTICE TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE TO
PREMISES.
   Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from 1 location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose of or remove from the premises
where service is furnished or if the premises are destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he or she shall, at once, so inform the city, which shall cause the
water service to be shut off from the premises. If the consumer shall fail to
give the notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the premises
until the city is otherwise advised of the change.
(Prior Code, § 52-79)
§ 52.010 DUTY OF WATER DIVISION TO MAINTAIN WATER SUPPLY.
   It shall be the duty of the Water Division to maintain the water system, at
all times in a high state of efficiency and to have at all hours sufficient
water pressure to furnish an efficient service to consumers, and to develop
without delay to the Fire Department pressure sufficiently high as to be
commensurate with the exigencies of the occasion.
(Prior Code, § 52-80)
§ 52.011 FEE FOR RESUMING SERVICE AFTER DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR
VIOLATION.
   When a consumer’s water service is cut off and discontinued for violation of
the consumer’s contract, as provided in §
52.008, the consumer shall pay, and the city shall collect as water rent is
collected, a resumption fee equivalent to a 1-hour charge at the regular labor
charge rate as set by the city for the expense of shutting off water and
turning it on again, when water service is resumed.
(Prior Code, § 52-81)
§ 52.012 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Every person desiring a supply of water shall make application therefor to
the city upon blanks to be furnished him or her for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 52-82)
§ 52.013 REMEDIES FOR FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
   All unpaid water service and water usage charges shall be charged to and
collected from the owner of the premises, and the charges shall be a lien on
the premises and real estate where used, and may be collected by the city at
any time after the charges become due, by civil action in the courts. It shall
be the duty of the Department of Utilities, in its quarterly report, to report
the names of all parties delinquent in payment of their water charges, showing
the amount due from each delinquent, together with a description of the
property upon or for which the water or service has been used or supplied, and
thereupon the Council shall, by resolution, direct the City Clerk to file with
the County Clerk a certified copy of the report and resolution directing that
the amount assessed against the different premises, as shown by the report, be
placed upon the assessment rolls and tax books of the county for collection as
other taxes. Water will not be turned on in any house or private service pipe,
except upon the order of the city or its duly authorized agent, nor until the
consumer shall have paid the charges due, and plumbers are strictly prohibited
from turning the water into any service pipe except on the order or permission
of the city or its duly authorized agent. This section shall not be construed
to prevent any plumber from admitting water to test pipes, for that purpose
only.
(Prior Code, § 52-83)
§ 52.014 SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHER PREMISES.
   No consumer shall supply water to other families or suffer them to take
water off his or her premises, nor, after water is introduced into building or
upon any premises, shall any person make, or employ any plumber or other person
to make, any tap or connection with the pipe upon the premises for alteration,
extension or attachment, for the purpose of supplying water to separate
premises, without permission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-84)
§ 52.015 WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED TO TURN ON WATER.
   When the water has been turned off from any consumer, he or she shall not
turn it on or permit it to be turned on without the written consent of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 52-93)
§ 52.016 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   Every person taking water supplied through the water system shall permit the
city or its duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter
his or her premises or buildings to examine the pipes and fixtures and the
manner in which the water is used, and must at all times, frankly and without
concealment, answer all questions relative to its consumption.
(Prior Code, § 52-94)
§ 52.017 TURNING WATER OFF IN CASE OF FIRE.
   If requested by the Utilities Manager, all private hydrants, fountains,
street washers and sprinklers shall be shut off in emergency fire conditions,
and not turned on again that day until permission is given.
(Prior Code, § 52-95)
§ 52.018 REPLACEMENT OF GALVANIZED IRON SERVICE PIPES.
   Within any paving districts or street improvements hereafter created,
service pipes of galvanized iron supplying consumers or which could supply
consumers are hereby required to be replaced forthwith. All connections and
service pipes in paving districts hereafter created are required to be replaced
with polyethylene tubing, at the city’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-96)
§ 52.019 CHARGE FOR INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Applicants for water service shall be charged, for a 1-inch service,
the actual cost of construction, computed from the center of the street in each
instance, for all service pipe, trenching and fittings. For services larger
than 1 inch, the customer shall be charged the actual cost of construction.
   (B)   If, however, the water mains are not laid in the street abutting the
premises of applicants for water service, the applicants shall file a written
request with the city specifying the connection to be made. If approved, the
construction work in extending the commercial main shall be under the
supervision of the city and the city shall have the exclusive control and
supervision of the pipe and connections at all times after the work is
completed.
   (C)   All service connections shall be provided with a curbstop or valve.
(Prior Code, § 52-97)
§ 52.020 CURBSTOPS.
   (A)   (1)   Every water service pipe shall be provided with a curbstop for
each consumer, easily accessible, and so situated that the water can be
conveniently shut off.
      (2)   Curbstops shall be of a pattern as shall be approved by the city.
   (B)   Unless otherwise permitted, curbstops shall be placed in the service
pipe at a point near the property line and protected by a service box leading
from the top of the curbstop to the surface, of suitable size to admit a curb
key for turning on and off the stop, and with a cast iron cover having the
letter “W” marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement or planking.
(Prior Code, § 52-98)
§ 52.021 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS.
   If proprietors of lumberyards, manufacturers, stores, elevators, warehouses,
hotels or public buildings who are regular consumers of water from the
waterworks system of the city wish to lay large pipes with hydrants and hose
couplings to be used only in case of fire, they shall be permitted to connect
with the street mains at their own expense, upon application to the city, and
under its direction, and will be allowed the use of water free of charge for
fire purposes only.
(Prior Code, § 52-99)
§ 52.022 TAPPING OF MAINS TO BE DONE BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL.
   No person, except the city or authorized employees of the Water Division,
shall be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the mains or distributing
pipes or insert corporation stops therein.
(Prior Code, § 52-100) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.023 INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM.
   No person shall break, injure or deface, interfere with or disturb any
building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or appurtenance of the
waterworks of the city, or any public or private hydrant, curbstop, service
box, meter, water supply or service pipe, or any part thereof; nor shall any
person deposit anything in any service box, or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the intended use of the property mentioned in this section,
without permission of the city, or except in cases otherwise regulated by this
chapter or other ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-101) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.024 OPENING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All the hydrants erected in the city for the purpose of extinguishing
fire are declared to be public hydrants, and no person, other than members of
the Fire Department, and then only for the use and purpose of the Department,
or persons especially authorized by the city, and then only in exercise of the
authority delegated by the city, shall open any of the hydrants or attempt to
draw water from the hydrants, or at any time uncover or remove any protection
from any of the hydrants or in any manner interfere with the hydrants.
   (B)   No person authorized to open fire hydrants shall delegate this
authority to another, or let out or suffer any person to take the wrenches
furnished him or her, or suffer the wrenches furnished him or her to be taken
from any house in the city, except for the purposes strictly connected with the
Fire Department, or as they accompany engines or other fire equipment on
occasion of fire.
(Prior Code, § 52-102) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.025 EXCAVATIONS WHEN GROUND IS FROZEN.
   No person shall make any excavation in any street or highway within 6 feet
of any laid water pipe while the ground is frozen or dig or uncover so as to
expose to the frost any water pipe of the city, except under the direction of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-103) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.026 DUTY OF POLICE TO REPORT VIOLATIONS OR WASTE OF WATER.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and police officers to report to
the city all cases of leakage, waste or unnecessary profusion in the use of
water; and they shall likewise report all violations of this chapter or any
other ordinance relating to the waterworks that may be brought to their notice,
and they shall enforce the observance of all such ordinances so far as they
have authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 52-104)
§ 52.027 COMPUTATION OF CHARGES IN CASE OF DEFECTIVE METER.
   Should a water consumer’s meter get out of repair or fail to register
properly, the consumer shall be billed and charged and shall pay for water
during the time the meter is out of order or repair on the basis of monthly
consumption during the same month of the preceding year; provided that, if no
such basis for comparison exists, then the consumer shall be charged the amount
as reasonably fixed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-105)
§ 52.028 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BELT LINE, MAIN AND COMMERCIAL MAIN. Any pipe other than a service pipe used
for the purpose of carrying water to or distributing it in the city.
   SEPARATE PREMISES. A separate dwelling, each apartment in an apartment
house, each mobile home in a mobile home court, each separate business in a
business building, or each business and living quarters in a building or
structure.
   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe tapped into a main and extending thence to a point at
or near the lot line of consumers’ premises where a curbstop or valve is
generally located.
   SUPPLY PIPE. The pipe extending from the curbstop or valve to and beyond the
property line of the consumer.
(Prior Code, § 52-106)
§ 52.029 REPAIR OF LEAKS REQUIRED.
   If any leak or break in any supply pipe or galvanized iron supply pipe shall
occur, the city or its agent shall forthwith shut off water to the premises
until the leak or break is repaired by the consumer. If any leak or break in
any service pipe, corporation stop, curbstop, service box or main (except
galvanized iron service pipe and the accompanying curbstop) occurs, the city or
its agent shall repair the leak or break at the city’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-107)
§ 52.030 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO REPAIR LEAKS.
   Should any water consumer fail, neglect or refuse to take steps to replace
his or her galvanized leaking service or supply pipe, after having been
notified in writing by the city to do so forthwith, the service or supply pipe
may be cut off at the curb cock or shutoff until the service or supply pipe is
satisfactorily repaired or until a new service or supply pipe is installed.
(Prior Code, § 52-108)
§ 52.031 INSTALLATION OF SERVICE.
   No person except the city or its agent designated for that purpose shall,
under any circumstances, tap the commercial mains. Upon the filing of an
application and payment of the service charge and other main assessments due,
computed as provided in this chapter, the city will install the service pipe
and curbstop or valve as required.
(Prior Code, § 52-109)
§ 52.032 USE OF SAME SERVICE PIPE BY SEPARATE PREMISES.
   Not more than 1 separate premises, except by special permission from the
city, shall be supplied from the same tap and service pipe.
(Prior Code, § 52-110)
§ 52.033 SERVICE CHARGE AND MAIN ASSESSMENTS FOR CUSTOMERS OUTSIDE CITY.
   Applicants for water service whose property is situated outside the city
shall pay a service charge and main assessments in such sums as the city shall
in each case fix; provided that, nothing in this section shall be construed to
obligate the city to furnish water service to non-residents unless it is able
to do so without curtailing the demands of resident consumers or without
overloading its pumps, machinery or other equipment.
(Prior Code, § 52-111)
§ 52.034 WATER SUPPLY NOT TO BE CONTAMINATED.
   No person shall place in or near or around the city wells, storage tank or
any other part of the waterworks system of the city any dirt, filth or impure
substance whatsoever, or any substance or fluid by which the water could be
rendered impure, unpalatable or dangerous for human or animal consumption. No
person shall allow on his or her premises any cross connection or possible
cross connection between the city water supply and any private water supply,
sewer or drain line or any other possible source of contamination.
(Prior Code, § 52-112)
§ 52.035 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The city shall, in no manner, be liable for any damages caused by shutting
off the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any part thereof is
undergoing repairs, or caused by the freezing of the main or the breaking of
any pipe or service cock, or by a shortage of water due to accident, or due to
circumstances over which the city has no control, or due to any act of God.
(Prior Code, § 52-113)
§ 52.036 RIGHT OF CITY TO SHUT OFF WATER; AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS OR RATES.
   The Mayor and Council reserve the right at all times to shut off the water
for necessary repairs or extensions. The Mayor and Council reserve the right to
amend or alter, by ordinance, rules and regulations pertaining to water and
water service, including the rates established under this chapter, when by them
deemed advisable.
(Prior Code, § 52-114)
§ 52.037 PAYMENT OF WATER DISTRICT ASSESSMENT COST.
   A property owner who has not previously shared in water main costs shall not
be entitled to make connection to the existing main until he or she has paid to
the city’s Water Division the current average equivalent water district
assessment cost as determined by the Manager of the city’s Light and Water
Department. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from
supplying water by separate agreement.
(Prior Code, § 52-115)
§ 52.038 FLUORIDE.
   Fluoride shall not be added to the water system of the City of North Platte.
(Ord. 3748, passed 12-16-2008)
METERS
§ 52.050 METER REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the city to see that all water furnished by the city
shall be delivered through and measured by water meters, and no new water
connections shall be allowed to remain, or new water service furnished, until
water meters have been installed to measure the water furnished.
(Prior Code, § 52-85)
§ 52.051 TYPE AND PLACEMENT OF METERS; ACCESS TO METER.
   (A)   All water meters shall be 1 of the following types:
      (1)   A meter installed in a pit;
      (2)   A meter installed in a meter tile; or
      (3)   A remote reader type meter installed in a building.
   (B)   Installation of any of the meters shall be in accordance with rules
and regulations of the city.
   (C)   When an inside meter setting is used, the meter must be accessible for
service and protected from freezing. All meters, regardless of the type of
installation, shall be set in a horizontal position with the meter register on
the top and with ample space allowed to permit the meter to be easily read or
serviced by the city or its agents or its employees. The city or its agents,
whenever it is inconvenient to make readings of any meter set in a meter pit or
meter tile, or inside the building in the case of an inside type meter, is
empowered to give the consumer 20 days’ notice in writing to reset the meter to
a position meeting the approval of the city or its agents, and if the consumer
refuses or neglects to do so within the 20-day period then the city or its
agents shall reset it at the consumer’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-86)
§ 52.052 INSTALLATION OF METERS.
   All water meters hereafter used in connection with the waterworks system of
the city shall be of standard manufacture, shall be approved by the city, and
shall be put in place, removed or reset at the direction of the city or its
agent or by an employee of the city. All meters shall be placed in a horizontal
position. The cost thereof shall be charged to and paid by the consumer as
water rent. All meter pits and meter tile installed shall be constructed of
such design and in such manner as prescribed by the city or its agents.
(Prior Code, § 52-87)
§ 52.053 FURNISHING AND OWNERSHIP OF METERS.
   All water meters 5/8 inch to one inch in size shall be furnished by the
city, at the city’s expense, and shall remain the property of the city. All
water meters in excess of 1 inch in size shall be furnished by the applicant or
consumer, at applicant’s or consumer’s expense, and shall become the property
of the city, to be maintained or replaced by the city, at the option of the
city, up to the original size purchased by the customer.
(Prior Code, § 52-88)
§ 52.054 PROTECTION OF METERS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   All property owners on whose property water meters are installed will be
held responsible for their safekeeping and for any and all injury or damage to
the meters, whether from external sources, due to hot water or freezing, or
from any other source or cause whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 52-89)
§ 52.055 RATES; BILLING; PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Bills for water rent shall be paid monthly. All officers of the Water
Division are prohibited from extending or allowing credit for water rent to any
person. The city shall shut off and discontinue the water to any premises when
the owner or occupant fails to pay the water rent after due notice as required
by law. Bills are due and payable upon receipt, and delinquent 10 days after
the mailing date, and service may be disconnected 7 days following mailing of
the cutoff notice.
   (B)   The city shall, from time to time, recommend water rates to be charged
to the customers of city water service. The Council shall approve the rates
recommended before putting them into effect. Upon approval of the rates by the
City Council, the rates shall be placed on file with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 52-90)
§ 52.056 METER TESTING.
   All water meters shall be tested at the customer’s request at the expense of
the customer any reasonable number of times; provided that, if the test shows
the water meter to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of the test shall be
borne by the city. The city reserves the right to test any water service meter
at any time, and if the meter is found to be beyond repair the city shall
always have the right to replace the meter on the customer’s water service
fixtures at city expense. Should a consumer’s meter fail to register properly,
the customer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of
repair on the basis of the monthly consumption during the same month of the
preceding year; provided that, if no such basis for comparison exists, the
customer shall be charged an amount as may be reasonably fixed by the Utilities
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 52-91)
§ 52.057 REPAIR OF METERS.
   Except as outlined in §
52.056, all meters owned by the city requiring maintenance shall be repaired by
the city at the city’s expense. All meters owned by the consumer requiring
maintenance shall be repaired by either the owner or the city at the owner’s
expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-92)
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 52.070 GENERAL POLICY AND PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Protect the public potable water supply of the city water system
from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating real or
potential sources of contamination or pollutants which may backflow or cause
back siphonage through the service connection into the public potable water
supply system, as required by Title 179, NAC 2 “Regulations Governing Public
Water Supply Systems”;
      (2)   Promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of
existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or
consumer’s potable water systems and non-potable water systems, plumbing
fixtures and industrial process systems; and
      (3)   Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
   (B)   Applicability. This subchapter shall apply to all premises served by
the public potable water system of the city.
   (C)   Policy.
      (1)   This subchapter will be reasonably interpreted as the city’s intent
to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the
degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
      (2)   The city water division shall be primarily responsible for
protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination
or pollution due to backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water
service connection. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement
and maintain the program to control cross connections. The consumer is
responsible for preventing contamination of the water system within the
consumer’s own premises.
      (3)   If, in the judgment of the Water Division or the state’s Department
of Health or their authorized representative, cross connection protection is
required through either piping modification or installation of an approved
backflow prevention device, 30 days’ notice shall be given to the consumer. The
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to provide requested
protection with 30 days shall make the consumer subject to discontinuance of
water service at the discretion of the Water Division, according to the degree
of hazard, without further notice.
(Prior Code, § 52-141) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.071 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the overflow level rim of the
receptacle.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water source or system, other than the public
water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.
   BACKFLOW. The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or substances into the distribution system of a public
water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system, provided backflow
preventers have been tested and approved by a reputable testing laboratory.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONTAINMENT. Protection of the public water supply by installing a cross
connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a
facility, or as an installation within equipment handling potentially hazardous
materials.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process
fluids or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS CONNECTION. Any physical link between a potable water supply and any
other substance, fluid or source which makes possible contamination of the
potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or
distribution system.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. An evaluation of the potential risk to public health and
the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
      (1)   HAZARD, HEALTH. Any condition, device or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to
the health and well-being of the water consumer.
      (2)   HAZARD, PLUMBING. A plumbing type cross connection in a consumer’s
potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker,
air gap separation or backflow prevention device.
      (3)   HAZARD, POLLUTION. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer’s potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
      (4)   HAZARD, SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to
the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer’s
potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL PROCESS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution which
may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form
or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or
plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water supply.
   ISOLATION. Protection of a facility service line by installing a cross
connection control device or air gap separation on an individual fixture,
appurtenance or system.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health but which, does adversely and
unreasonably affect the water for domestic use.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the appropriate
state or local regulatory agency.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the term
SERVICE CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   WATER DIVISION. The owner, operator or individual in responsible charge of a
public water system.
(Prior Code, § 52-142) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.072 CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross connections as required by the laws
and regulations of the state to the public potable or consumer’s water system
may exist.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system.
   (C)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been
constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices of the latest
edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code as considered by the city’s Water Division
as necessary for the protection of health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 52-143) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.073 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS; RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONSUMER.
   (A)   The consumer shall provide access to the premises at reasonable times
to the city’s Water Division, or its authorized representative, for the
conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross
connections to the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system.
   (B)   On request by the city’s Water Division or its authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices
within his or her premises.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
or the public potable water system.
(Prior Code, § 52-144) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.074 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection required by this subchapter shall depend on the
degree of hazard which exists, as follows. An approved air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or an approved
double checkvalve assembly shall be installed where the public potable water
system may be polluted with substances that could cause a health hazard.
(Prior Code, § 52-145) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.075 PREMISES WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in the
service connection line to a consumer’s water system or within any premises
where actual or potential hazards to the public potable water system exist. The
type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of
hazard.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any
premises where the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the
materials used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the
premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a
cross connection occur, even though the cross connection may not exist at the
time the backflow prevention device is required to be installed. This includes
but is not limited to the following situations:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply;
      (2)   Premises having internal cross connections that are not
correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to
ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;
      (3)   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to ensure that cross connections do not exist;
      (4)   Premises that although not covered by this subchapter are subject
to frequent modification which would change their status, or premises that have
had violations of this subchapter;
      (5)   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters; and/or
      (6)   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
such that, if back siphonage or back pressure should occur, a serious health
hazard may result.
   (C)   The following types of facilities must install or have in operation an
approved air gap separation, atmospheric vacuum breaker, pressure vacuum
breaker, double check valve assembly, or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device as required by the city’ Water Division to protect the public
water supply, and the equipment must be installed at these facilities unless
all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or
corrected:
      (1)   Auxiliary water systems;
      (2)   Beverage bottling plants and food processing plants;
      (3)   Canneries, packinghouses and reduction plants;
      (4)   Carwashing facilities and automobile servicing facilities;
      (5)   Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment
plants;
      (6)   Chemically contaminated water systems;
      (7)   Dairies and cold storage plants;
      (8)   Film laboratories, film development facilities and testing
laboratories;
      (9)   Fire protection systems;
      (10)   Hazardous waste storage and disposal;
      (11)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes and
medical facilities;
      (12)   Sprinkler systems and hose connections injecting directly material
of a toxic or hazardous nature;
      (13)   Laundries and dye works and dry cleaners;
      (14)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants;
      (15)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties;
      (16)   Plating plants;
      (17)   Printing and publishing facilities;
      (18)   Research and analytical laboratories;
      (19)   Sewage and storm drainage facilities pumping stations;
      (20)   Zoological and horticultural gardens;
      (21)   All cemetery sprinkler systems;
      (22)   Pet grooming and veterinarian facilities, kennels, stockyards and
feedyards;
      (23)   Swimming pools;
      (24)   Cooling coil service lines (refrigeration, air conditioning and
the like);
      (25)   All hot water and steam boiler heating systems with water
recirculating;
      (26)   Lawn irrigation systems. All lawn irrigation systems must have a
pressure vacuum breaker or reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device.
Backflow devices must be tested at the time of installation and at least every
36 months thereafter;
      (27)   Hose connections. All garden hose type connections must have hose
bib vacuum breakers;
      (28)   Yard hydrants. The installation of new or replacement yard
hydrants where water is available or accessible for drinking or culinary
purposes, and which have a drip opening below the ground surface, is prohibited
unless the hydrants are equipped with an approved device to prevent entrance of
groundwater into chambers connected with the water supply. Yard hydrants or
hose bibs which would be used by the consumer to provide water to mix
pesticides, fertilizer or other chemicals for direct use or aerial application
to surface areas shall be equipped with an anti-siphon vacuum breaker;
      (29)   Booster pumps. No person shall install or maintain a water service
connection to any premises where a booster pump has been installed on the
service line to or within such premises, unless the booster pump is equipped
with a low pressure cutoff designed to shut off the booster pump when the
pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 pounds
per square inch gauge or less. It shall be the duty of the customer to maintain
the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order. The Utilities Manager
may require testing at any time if it is suspected that a problem exists with
the device; and
      (30)   Multistoried buildings greater than 3 stories. These facilities,
falling into 1 or more of the categories listed in this section, will be given
6 months after passage of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived
to comply with this subchapter, except those facilities or systems which are
determined by the city’s Water Division to be an immediate or severe health
hazard, in which case that system or facility shall be required to comply
immediately with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-146) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.076 APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention device required by this subchapter shall be of
a model or construction approved by the city’s Water Division.
      (1)   An air gap separation, to be approved, shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of
the vessel, but in no case less than 1 inch.
      (2)   A double checkvalve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the city’s Water Division and
shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention devices
established by the Water Division.
   (B)   Existing testable backflow prevention devices approved by the water
purveyor at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of
this subchapter so long as the city’s Water Division is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the water system. Whenever the existing device is moved
from its present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when
the Water Division finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health,
the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-147) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993)
§ 52.077 INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter shall be
installed by licensed state-certified tester/repair technicians at a location
and in a manner approved by the city’s Water Division or according to the
latest addition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, and shall be installed at the
expense of the water consumer.
   (B)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, and prior to any other connection.
   (C)   Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily
accessible for maintenance and testing, and protected from freezing, and where
no part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.
   (D)   Backflow prevention devices for underground sprinklers that have an
opening to the atmosphere shall be located at least 12 inches from the bottom
of the valve above the highest ground served by the sprinkler system.
(Prior Code, § 52-148) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.078 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this subchapter are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhauls made by licensed state-certified backflow
tester/repair technicians in accordance with the following schedule, or more
often where inspections indicate a need.
      (1)   Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter.
      (2)   Double checkvalve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever
needed, and at least every 3 years.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned and repaired whenever needed, and at least every 5 years.
   (B)   Overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be made at the expense
of the water consumer and shall be performed by a state-certified backflow
prevention device tester.
   (C)   Backflow prevention devices designed with testing cocks shall be
inspected and tested each year, and the tests shall be performed by a state-
certified backflow prevention device tester and will be at the expense of the
water consumer except as stated in division (G) below.
   (D)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (E)   The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device that has test cocks, from purchase to retirement. Records of
inspections, tests, repairs and overhauls performed by others shall be
submitted to the city’s Water Division annually.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective.
   (G)   Lawn irrigation backflow devices designed with testing cocks shall be
inspected and tested at the time of installation and at least every 3 years
thereafter. The tests shall be performed by a state-certified backflow
prevention device tester and will be at the expense of the water consumer.
   (H)   Further regulations concerning the installation of sprinkler systems
and backflow prevention devices are found in the latest edition of the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 52-149) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
§ 52.079 VIOLATIONS; ABATEMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   The city’s Water Division or water purveyor shall have the right to
deny or discontinue, after 10 days’ notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this
subchapter is not installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to
the city’s Water Division, or if it is found that the backflow prevention
device has been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection
exists on the premises.
   (B)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
subchapter to the satisfaction of the city’s Water Division.
   (C)   The appropriate state or local regulatory agency, the Mayor and the
City Council shall be advised of inspection findings, and the violation
abatement action pursued by the city’s Water Division, and consulted prior to
violation abatement action on items having to do with public health
significance.
(Prior Code, § 52-150) (Ord. 2939, § 1, 12-14-1993; Am. Ord. 3080, § 1, 12-3-
1996)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
Discharges
   
53.020   Discharge of sewage or polluted water to natural outlet
   
53.021   Discharge of stormwater or other unpolluted water
   
53.022   Prohibited discharges; excessive wastes or flow rate
   
53.023   Restricted discharges
   
53.024   Authority of Manager with respect to restricted discharges
   
53.025   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
Sewer Usage
   
53.040   Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities
   
53.041   Sampling stations
   
53.042   Method of sampling waters and wastes
   
53.043   Sewer connection required; notice to make or repair connection
   
53.044   Privies, cesspools and septic tanks
   
53.045   Sewer facilities for commercial and industrial establishments
   
53.046   Special agreements for treatment of industrial waste
   
53.047   Permit for discharge of industrial wastes
   
53.048   Damaging or tampering with facilities or equipment
   
53.049   Right of entry
   
53.050   Non-liability of Manager
   
53.051   Penalty; notice of violation; additional remedies; accidental
discharges
   
53.052   Sewer use charge established; purpose
   
53.053   Billing cycles for sewer use charge
   
53.054   Computation of basic sewer use charge
   
53.055   Minimum sewer use charge
   
53.056   Applicability of sewer use surcharge
   
53.057   Determination of sewer use surcharge
   
53.058   Sewer use surcharge formula
   
53.059   Rate for users having private water supply
   
53.060   Sewage meters
   
53.061   Special rates
   
53.062   Discontinuance of service for non-payment of charges
   
53.063   Use charges to constitute lien
   
53.064   Computation of charges in case of defective meter
   
53.065   Billing adjustments
   
53.066   Administration of chapter
   
53.067   Billing period
   
53.068   Installation of taps
   
53.069   Connection to sewer prior to acceptance of sewer by city
   
53.070   Tap fee
   
53.071   Location for payment of tap fees and other charges
   
53.072   Time limit for installing tap after making application
   
53.073   Sewer assessment; installation and ownership of mains
   
53.074   Repair or replacement of service lines
Illicit Discharge to Storm Sewer System
   
53.100   Findings
   
53.101   Discharges prohibited
   
53.102   Connections prohibited
   
53.103   Industrial discharges
   
53.104   Detection, reporting and cost recovery
   
53.105   Access; suspension of
   
53.106   Watercourse protection
   
53.107   Appeal
   
53.998   Civil enforcement
 
   
53.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Sewer systems, see Neb. RS 18-501 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BASIC SEWER USE UNIT CHARGE. The basic charge per 1,000 gallons of water, or
sewage, if a sewage measuring device is required or permitted and used, made
against a property for using the  sanitary sewer system, and shall be
determined by dividing the total annual sewage treatment and collection costs
for the fiscal year of sewer use, by the total sewage flow, in 1,000 gallons,
into the sewage treatment facilities of the sanitary sewer system during the
city’s fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year of sewer use.
   BOD and BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions in
5 days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, the
building sewer beginning outside the outer wall of the building.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the city sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The weight of chlorine, expressed in milligrams per
liter, which must be added per unit volume to produce the desired result under
stated conditions.
   CITY SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by public authority.
   COD and CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The oxygen equivalent of that portion of an
organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong
chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The water-carried wastes from commercial
and industrial establishments, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms in which kitchen facilities are provided,
located in a building or structure used by a family or household as a home or
residence of the family or household.
   GARBAGE. Solid food wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any
other body of surface water or groundwater.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property other than residential property.
   NORMAL SEWAGE. Sewage which, when analyzed, shows, by weight, a daily
average of not more than 300 parts per million (2,500 pounds) of suspended
solids, not more than 250 parts per million (2,085 pounds) of biochemical
oxygen demand (or, where biochemical oxygen demand cannot accurately be
determined, a chemical oxygen demand greater than 400 parts per million (3,336
pounds)), and not  more than 100 parts per million (834 pounds) of ether-
soluble matter (grease and oil), each per million gallons of daily flow.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has legal
title to or charge, care or control, in any capacity, of property.
   pH. The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the number of gram
ionic hydrogen equivalents per liter of solution.
   ppm denoting CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Milligrams per liter.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in the city sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch in any
direction.
   PROPERTY. Any piece or portion of real estate, including all buildings and
structures located thereon, having a sewer or drainage system which immediately
or remotely discharges into a public sewer, natural outlet or both.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is controlled by public authority.
   RECEIVING STREAM. Any natural watercourse into which sewage is discharged.
   RESIDENCE. Property, or that portion of property, used exclusively as
dwelling or living quarters by 1 or more natural persons.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A property consisting primarily, on an area basis, of
1 or more dwelling units.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Those wastes which are comparable to wastes which originate
in residential units and contain only human excrement and wastes from kitchen,
laundry, bathing and other household facilities.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater,
surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
   SHALL AND MAY. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive, subject to
approval by the Manager.
   SLUG. Any water or wastes exceeding a concentration greater than 5 times the
average 24-hour concentration, and which is discharged continuously for a
period longer than 15 minutes, or at a rate exceeding 1,000 gallons per minute.
   STANDARD LABORATORY METHODS. Methods of analysis and testing as outlined in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage,
published by the American Publishing Company.
   TOTAL ANNUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT AND COLLECTION COSTS. The total amount
sufficient:
      (1)   To meet the costs and expenses of the operation and maintenance of
the sanitary sewer system, including both the sewage treatment and collection
system facilities;
      (2)   For the amortization of the indebtedness of the facilities; and
      (3)   For additional costs as may be necessary to ensure adequate waste
collection and treatment on a continuing basis; all as pertaining to and
reflecting the total operation of the sanitary sewer system, as determined by
the City Council for 1 fiscal year.
   TOTAL ANNUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT COSTS. The total amount sufficient:
      (1)   To meet the costs and expenses of the operation and maintenance of
the sewage treatment facilities;
      (2)   For the amortization of the indebtedness of the facilities; and
      (3)   For additional costs as may be necessary to ensure adequate waste
treatment on a continuing basis; all as pertaining to and reflecting the total
operation of the sewage treatment facilities of the sanitary sewer system, as
determined by the City Council for 1 fiscal year.
   UTILITIES MANAGER. The Utilities Manager or his or her authorized agent or
representative.
(Prior Code, § 52-181)
DISCHARGES
§ 53.020 DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE OR POLLUTED WATER TO NATURAL OUTLET.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
within 2 miles of the corporate limits thereof, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-182) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 53.021 DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER OR OTHER UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
drainage from interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters shall be discharged, at the request of the Manager, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 52-183) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 53.022 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; EXCESSIVE WASTES OR FLOW RATE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited
to cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as
discharged to the public sewer;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works; and
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper
operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, towels, milk containers and the like, either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes having a 5-day biochemical oxygen demand greater
than 250 parts per million by weight, or containing more than 300 parts per
million by weight of suspended solids, or having an average daily flow greater
than 2% of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review
of the Manager. Where necessary in the opinion of the Manager, the owner shall
provide, at his or her expense, the preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 250 parts per million by weight, or
reduce the suspended solids to 300 parts per million by weight, or control the
quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Manager, and no construction of the facilities shall be commenced until the
approvals are obtained in writing.
(Prior Code, § 52-184) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 53.023 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public
sewer the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it
appears likely, in the opinion of the Manager, that the wastes can harm the
public sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Manager will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and
150°F (0° and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower
(0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Director;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Manager for the materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Manager as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but
not limited to Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions); and/or
         (c)   Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the sewage treatment works.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 52-185)
§ 53.024 AUTHORITY OF MANAGER WITH RESPECT TO RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged into the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in §
53.023, and which in the judgment of the Manager may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Manager
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
53.057.
   (B)   If the Manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Manager, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 52-186)
§ 53.025 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner of a
property when, in the opinion of the Manager, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the
interceptors shall not be required for residences. All interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the Manager, and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 52-187)
SEWER USAGE
§ 53.040 MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner, at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-188)
§ 53.041 SAMPLING STATIONS.
   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall, at the request of the Manager, install suitable sampling stations
upon each and every building sewer, or shall combine the building sewers into 1
common building sewer upon which 1 sampling station shall be placed. The
sampling stations shall be furnished with the necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. The sampling stations shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Manager. The sampling stations shall be installed by the owner, at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
(Prior Code, § 52-189)
§ 53.042 METHOD OF SAMPLING WATERS AND WASTES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the sampling station provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the sampling station. Not less than 3 copies of the latest edition of
the volume shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and
examination by the public. If no special sampling station has been required,
the sampling station shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property.
(Prior Code, § 52-190)
§ 53.043 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED; NOTICE TO MAKE OR REPAIR CONNECTION.
   All private property within the city located upon any street or alley
through which, opposite or abutting the private property runs, or hereafter
shall run, any main, belt line or lateral sanitary sewer shall be equipped with
a proper connection to the main, belt line or lateral sanitary sewer, for the
disposal of all sewage, offal, filth, swill, slop or other refuse. It shall be
the duty of the owner of any such private property so situated as described in
this section, upon 10 days’ notice, as provided in this section, to make or
cause to be made and to maintain and repair a proper connection with the sewer
main or lateral, and to install or cause to be installed proper sewer pipe
connections to convey the refuse into the main or lateral. If the owner of the
property shall fail or neglect for 10 days after the service of the notice to
comply with this section, to make the connection, to install the drainage
pipes, or to make any repairs which may be necessary therein, then the city
shall cause the work to be done, and the cost thereof, when certified to the
Mayor and Council, shall be by the Council assessed against the property as a
special assessment, and the cost shall be collected as other special
assessments and special taxes as provided by law. The notice referred to in
this section shall be in writing and shall be served by the Chief of Police,
under direction from the city, upon the owner of record of any such property,
either by personal service or by publication 1 time in some legal daily
newspaper published in and of general circulation in the city. The notice shall
describe the real estate required to be connected with the sewer and shall
notify the owner that he or she is required to make the connection or to make
repairs to existing connections within 10 days after the service or publication
thereof, and that if he or she fails to comply with the notice the city will
cause the connection or repairs to be made and will certify the cost and
expense thereof to the Mayor and Council for assessment against the property.
If the notice is made by publication, the notice shall be published not less
than ten days preceding the day when the city undertakes to make the connection
or repairs pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 52-191)
§ 53.044 PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   No privy for the reception of sewage or waste shall be permitted or allowed
when the city sewer system is available to the premises on which the privy is
located or which the privy serves. The city sewer system shall be considered
available for the purposes of this section when the system is within 200 feet
of any part of the premises on which the privy is located. All cesspools and
septic tanks constructed on premises to which the city sewer system is not
available shall only be permitted, allowed or suffered to remain if their use
and operation complies strictly with rules promulgated as authorized and
provided under this chapter. Any person violating this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in §
53.051, and the court shall, moreover, in case of conviction of the offense,
order as part of the judgment of conviction that every such nuisance be abated
or removed, and that any such privy, vault, cesspool, septic tank or other
contrivance shall be cleaned and filled up. In case any such person so
convicted shall fail to abate the nuisance within 5 days after the entry of the
order of abatement or removal, then the person may be proceeded against by the
court as for contempt, or the court may direct the city through the Chief of
Police and Plumbing Inspector to cause the abatement or removal of the
nuisance, and, upon the Chief of Police making a return showing the abatement
or removal of the nuisance, the expense thereof shall be taxed as costs of the
prosecution and collected as other costs. This section is cumulative and shall
not prevent or exclude the removal of any such nuisance by any other lawful
means.
(Prior Code, § 52-192)
§ 53.045 SEWER FACILITIES FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The owner of any commercial or industrial establishment situated within the
city or within 1 mile thereof and having a city sanitary sewer available shall
install, at his or her expense, suitable facilities for the conveying of all
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the city sewer in accordance with
provisions set forth in this code.
(Prior Code, § 52-193)
§ 53.046 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS FOR TREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a
special agreement or arrangement between the city and the owner of any property
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 52-194)
§ 53.047 PERMIT FOR DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
into any public sewer any industrial wastes without a valid permit from the
Manager. When the Manager has reason to believe that an owner of property has
been discharging, is discharging or is about to discharge any industrial wastes
into a public sewer, he or she may request the person to file an application
for such a permit, which application shall be completed and returned to the
Manager within 30 days after the receipt thereof.
   (B)   Application. All applications for a permit under this section shall
require the applicant to provide the name, address and telephone number of the
applicant; the location and legal description of the property to be covered by
the permit; a general statement of the type of operations conducted and to be
conducted on the property; a plat of the property showing accurately all sewers
and drains; plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under the permit; a complete schedule of all process waters and industrial
wastes produced or expected to be produced for discharge from the property,
including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and
maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses; and the name, address
and telephone number of the person who will perform the work covered by the
permit. All applications shall also require the applicant to agree to furnish
at the request of the Manager any additional information relating to the
installation or use of the industrial sewer for which the permit is sought; to
accept and abide by all provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent
ordinances and regulations which may be adopted in the future; to operate and
maintain any waste pretreatment facilities as may be required as a condition of
the acceptance into the public sewers of the industrial wastes involved in an
efficient manner at all times, and at no expense to the city; to cooperate at
all times with the Manager in the inspecting, sampling and study of the
industrial wastes and in the inspecting of any facilities provided for
pretreatment; and to notify the Manager immediately in the event of any
accident, negligence or other occurrence which occasions discharge to the
public sewers of any wastes or process waters not covered by the permit.
   (C)   Issuance or denial. If, after examination by the Manager of the
information contained in an application for a permit under this section, it is
determined that the characteristics of the proposed discharge do not conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall forthwith be issued
allowing the discharge of the wastes to the public sewers. If it is determined
that the characteristics of the wastes are not in compliance with provisions of
this chapter, the application shall be denied and the applicant forthwith
advised of steps which must be taken to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-195)
§ 53.048 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH FACILITIES OR EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person unauthorized by the city to damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
(Prior Code, § 52-196) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 53.049 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Manager or his or her designee shall be permitted to enter any
property other than residences, at any time, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling or testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter; provided that if the property is occupied he shall first
present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his or
her reasons therefor, and if the property is unoccupied he or she shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of the property and request entry,
explaining his or her reasons therefor. If the entry is refused or cannot be
obtained because the owner of the property cannot be found after due diligence,
the Manager shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
lawful entry for the purposes stated in this division.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section,
if the Manager has reasonable cause to believe that waters or wastes of the
types referred to in §§
53.022 and
53.023 are being discharged from any property into a public sewer or natural
outlet, and has reasonable cause to believe that the discharge is so dangerous,
hazardous or unsafe as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public
health or safety, he or she shall have the right to immediately enter and
inspect the property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect the
entry and make the inspection, whether the property is occupied or unoccupied,
and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is
occupied, he or she shall first present the proper credentials to the occupant
and demand entry, explaining his or her reasons therefor and the purpose of his
or her inspection. No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been
made upon him or her, as provided in this subchapter, to promptly permit the
Manager to make any inspection provided for by this subchapter.
      (2)   Any person violating this subchapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   The Manager shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities or waste treatment.
   (D)   While performing the necessary work on property referred to in this
section, the Manager shall observe all applicable safety rules established by
the owner of the property.
(Prior Code, § 52-197)
§ 53.050 NON-LIABILITY OF MANAGER.
   (A)   The city shall hold harmless the Manager, when acting in good faith
and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue
to any person or property as a result of any act required by this chapter or by
reason of any act or omission of the Manager in the discharge of his or her
duties under this chapter.
   (B)   Any suit brought against the Manager because of any such act or
omission in carrying out of the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by
the city’s Law Department through final determination of the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 52-198)
§ 53.051 PENALTY; NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; ACCIDENTAL
DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Penalty; continuing violations. Any person upon whom a duty is placed
by the provisions of this chapter, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform
the duty, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
in accordance with §
10.99. Each 24-hour period that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
   (B)   Notice of violation. Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the
provisions of §§
53.001, 53.021 through 53.025, 53.046 and 53.047 who shall fail, neglect or
refuse to perform the duty, or who shall violate any of the provisions of the
sections, may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the duty or of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction of the duty or violation. The person shall, within the
period of time, perform the duty or cease the violation; otherwise, for each
24-hour period after the period of time that the person fails, neglects or
refuses to perform the duty or violates the provision, he or she shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Additional remedies. In addition to or in lieu of other remedies
provided the city by this section to correct or abate a failure, neglect or
refusal to perform a duty imposed by this chapter or a violation of a provision
of this chapter, the Manager may revoke any permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter, and may effect the discontinuation of water or sewer service,
or the discontinuation of both the services, to the owner of the property. The
Manager may also institute injunction or other appropriate action or
proceeding. However, with the exception of repeated non-accidental discharges
to the public sewers of waters or wastes of the types referred to in §
53.022(B)(1), (2) or (3), the Manager shall give the owner at least 15 days’
written notice before revoking the permit or discontinuing water or sewer
service.
   (D)   Accidental discharges. Any person who accidentally discharges into a
public sewer any waters or wastes of the types referred to in §
53.022(B)(1), (2) or (3) shall immediately notify the Manager by the quickest
means available, supplying him or her will all information pertaining to the
discharge as the Manager may request to enable the Manager to take proper
action to protect persons, the public sewers and sewage treatment processes
which may be endangered by the discharge. Such an accidental discharge shall
not constitute a violation of this chapter, provided that prompt report of such
discharge is made as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-199)
§ 53.052 SEWER USE CHARGE ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of providing revenue for the operation, maintenance,
improvement, enlargement and expansion of the sanitary sewer system of the
city, for the purpose of providing revenue for the prevention of water and
stream pollution by the control of sewage and its discharge, for the purpose of
paying the principal and interest of any bonds issued for any of such purposes,
and for the purpose of creating reserves first to guarantee funds for
replacements and then for any of the purposes mentioned in this section, and
for no other purpose, there is hereby imposed a sanitary sewer use charge,
including, where appropriate, both a basic sewer use charge and a sewer use
surcharge, against each property served by the sanitary sewer system, or which
may otherwise discharge sewage, either directly or indirectly, into the sewer
system or any parts thereof or into any water or stream subject to the
jurisdiction of the city. The use charges, including the collection thereof,
shall be as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 52-200)
§ 53.053 BILLING CYCLES FOR SEWER USE CHARGE.
   For the convenient and economical computation of the sanitary sewer charge
for all premises, the Manager shall divide the city into billing cycles in such
a manner as he or she shall determine, using January, February and March as a
base.
(Prior Code, § 52-201)
§ 53.054 COMPUTATION OF BASIC SEWER USE CHARGE.
   (A)   Each property using the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be
subject to a basic sewer use charge. For a given residential property, the
basic sewer use charge for each billing cycle shall be determined by
multiplying for each such cycle the total amount of water, in thousand gallons,
metered for the property during a billing cycle chosen from the most recent
past winter, by the basic sewer use unit charge. For a given non-residential
property, the basic sewer use charge for a given billing cycle shall be
determined by multiplying for the cycle the total amount of water or sewage, in
thousand gallons, measured for the property during the cycle, by the basic
sewer use unit charge. Upon approval of these rates by the City Council, the
rates shall be placed on file with the City Clerk.
   (B)   In the case of change of occupancy of residential property, the new
occupant shall be required to pay a sewer use charge based on the fee paid by
the previous occupant until the next review period. Upon approval of these
rates by the City Council, the rates shall be placed on file with the City
Clerk.
   (C)   Where a sewage flow meter or other sewage measuring device is required
or permitted by the Manager and is used to measure the volume of sewage
discharged into the sanitary sewer system, the sewer use charge shall be
computed thereon at the basic sewer use unit charge.
   (D)   The Manager shall review the basic sewer use unit charge every year,
or more often if conditions so warrant, and based upon the review shall make
recommendations to the City Council for its consideration.
(Prior Code, § 52-202)
§ 53.055 MINIMUM SEWER USE CHARGE.
   (A)   Regardless of whether a sewage meter is used, there shall be a minimum
sewer use charge per month to each property using the city sanitary sewer
system, determined by the number and size of the water meters serving the
property. The schedule of the sewer use charges is on file and available in the
city offices.
   (B)   If a customer can be provided adequate service with a smaller meter
and desires to have his or her existing meter replaced with a smaller meter,
the city shall make the requested change, provided that the customer installs
all necessary meter connections.
   (C)   Sewer use charges shall commence as of the date that the sanitary
sewer tap is made.
(Prior Code, § 52-203)
§ 53.056 APPLICABILITY OF SEWER USE SURCHARGE.
   In addition to the basic sewer use charge required by §
53.054, when any property discharges into the sanitary sewer system industrial
wastes or other high strength sewage, which sewage has a strength greater than
normal sewage, the property shall be subject to a sewer use surcharge, to be
determined as set forth in this chapter, the purpose of the surcharge being to
help defray the extra cost to the city of treating the sewage.
(Prior Code, § 52-204)
§ 53.057 DETERMINATION OF SEWER USE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   For use in determining the sewer use surcharge to be made against a
given property for a given period of time, the Manager shall sample and analyze
the sewage discharge from the property into the sanitary sewer system in order
to determine the strength of the sewage over the period. Usually samples shall
be taken from such sewage discharge on at least 3 composites during operations
on the property. The Manager shall annually determine the unit cost (dollars
per pound) to the city of removing suspended solids by dividing the city’s
annual operation and maintenance (including depreciation) sewage treatment
costs allocated to removing suspended solids by the total annual pounds of
suspended solids flowing into the city’s treatment facilities, shall annually
determine the unit cost to the city of removing biochemical oxygen demand (or
chemical oxygen demand) by dividing the city’s annual operation and maintenance
(including depreciation) sewage treatment costs allocated to removing
biochemical oxygen demand (or chemical oxygen demand) by the total annual
pounds of biochemical oxygen demand (or chemical oxygen demand) flowing into
the city’s treatment facilities, and shall annually determine the unit cost to
the city of removing other substances requiring treatment by dividing the
city’s annual operation and maintenance (including depreciation) sewage
treatment costs allocated to removing other substances requiring treatment by
the total annual pounds of such other substances requiring treatment flowing
into the city’s treatment facilities.
   (B)   It is hereby determined that the unit annual operation and maintenance
cost for treatment of biochemical oxygen demand shall be based upon the formula
set forth in §
53.058.
   (C)   The Manager shall review sewer use surcharge unit costs every year, or
more often if conditions so warrant, and, based upon the review, shall make
recommendations to the City Council for its consideration.
   (D)   All such sampling and analyzing of the sewer discharge from a given
property shall be in accordance with the provisions of §§
53.041 and
53.042; provided, however, that the Manager may, at his or her discretion,
accept the sampling and analyzing results as may be submitted to him or her by
the sewer user on the property if the Manager reasonably determines that the
results properly reflect the overall nature of the discharge.
   (E)   Each property for which more than 2 sampling stations are used shall
reimburse the city for the city’s sampling and analyzing costs resulting from
samples taken from more than 2 such stations.
(Prior Code, § 52-205)
§ 53.058 SEWER USE SURCHARGE FORMULA.
   (A)   At the approximate end of each month or quarter, or semiannually, the
Manager shall make a computation of the sewer use surcharge for each property
discharging high strength user’s waste, using the following formula:
SC = [Rp (Pi – Pn) + Rs (Si – Sn) + Rx (Xi – Xn)] x 8.34 x V
   (B)   Where:
      (1)   SC = Surcharge.
      (2)   Rp = Unit annual operation and maintenance costs for treatment of
BOD, COD.
      (3)   Pi = BOD, COD in the industrial waste, ppm.
      (4)   Pn = BOD, COD in normal sewage, ppm.
      (5)   Rs = Unit annual operation and maintenance costs of treatment of
suspended solids.
      (6)   Si = Suspended solids in the industrial waste, ppm.
      (7)   Sn = Suspended solids in normal sewage, ppm.
      (8)   Rx = Unit annual operation and maintenance costs for treatment of
any additional substance in the high strength user’s wastes.
      (9)   Xi = Substance requiring additional treatment in the industrial
waste, ppm.
      (10)   Xn = Substance requiring additional treatment in normal sewage,
ppm 8.34 = lb./million gallon-mg/1.
      (11)   V = Wastewater volume, million gallons.
(Prior Code, § 52-206)
§ 53.059 RATE FOR USERS HAVING PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   Users of the sanitary sewage system of the city having a private water
supply which is discharged into such sanitary sewage system shall meter the
water supply at the user’s expense and be billed at the same rate as that
applied to like customers using the city water supply. Where, in the judgment
of the Manager, the meter requirements would be unreasonable under the
circumstances, a special rate may be established by the Manager which is
proportional to that rate charged similar users of the same user class and
based upon a reasonable estimate of such user’s quantity and strength of
discharge to the system.
(Prior Code, § 52-207)
§ 53.060 SEWAGE METERS.
   Subject to the approval of the Manager, any user of the city sanitary sewer
system may, at the user’s option and expense, install 1 or more sewage meters
or other sewage-measuring device to measure all sewage discharged into the
system; and, if required by the Manager, any user of the system shall install 1
or more meters or devices at the user’s expense. The Manager shall not require
the installation of sewage meters or other sewage-measuring devices if the
property is not discharging industrial wastes or other high strength sewage,
unless special or unusual conditions merit the making of such a requirement.
The Manager shall have the right to remove, repair and install any such
permitted or required meter or device at the meter owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 52-208)
§ 53.061 SPECIAL RATES.
   Where in the judgment of the Manager, by reason of special conditions, the
application of the use charges set forth in this chapter would be inequitable
or unfair to either the city or the user, or in cases where the character of
the sewage from a non-residential user is such that an additional burden is
placed upon the sewage system greater than that imposed by the average sewage
delivered to the sewage disposal plant, a special rate may be established by a
contract or by administrative rule or regulation with the approval of the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 52-209)
§ 53.062 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   If any sewer use charge is not paid within a period of 30 days after the
charge becomes due, the water may be turned off and the service not renewed
until all arrearages are paid, including a fee equivalent to a 1-hour charge at
the regular labor charge rate set by the city for the resumption of service.
(Prior Code, § 52-210)
§ 53.063 USE CHARGES TO CONSTITUTE LIEN.
   The sewer use charges provided for in this chapter, together with all other
charges and penalties, shall be and are hereby declared to be a lien upon the
property from the time such charge becomes due until paid, and may be collected
from either the owner or the person requesting the service, and may be
collected in the same manner as other city taxes are certified, assessed,
collected and returned.
(Prior Code, § 52-211)
§ 53.064 COMPUTATION OF CHARGES IN CASE OF DEFECTIVE METER.
   In any case where it has been impossible to read any water meter or sewage
meter or other measuring device, or if the Manager reasonably determines that
any such meter or device has failed to measure accurately during the billing
period in question, the sewer use charges shall be computed upon an estimated
water or sewage flow for the period, and the meter or device repaired and
tested at the expense of the meter owner.
(Prior Code, § 52-212)
§ 53.065 BILLING ADJUSTMENTS.
   Where, by reason of special or unusual conditions, the water consumption
fails to reflect properly the quantity of sewage actually discharged from a
property into the city sanitary sewer system, the Manager shall have the power
to adjust the billings.
(Prior Code, § 52-213)
§ 53.066 ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
   There is hereby created the city sanitary sewer system for the purpose of
performing the functions of sanitary sewage collection, treatment and disposal,
and charged with the administration of the provisions of this chapter, all
under the direction of the city. The personnel and facilities of the city water
system shall be utilized to bill and collect sewage use charges and to conduct
such other administrative and business affairs of the city sanitary sewer
system as the Manager may direct.
(Prior Code, § 52-214)
§ 53.067 BILLING PERIOD.
   The basic sewer use charges imposed by this chapter and the sewer use
surcharges imposed by this chapter shall be billed commencing on and after
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the
billings to be made monthly, quarterly or semiannually, as determined by the
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 52-215)
§ 53.068 INSTALLATION OF TAPS.
   Taps to all public, city or private sewers shall be made by the city. The
plumber or layer shall make application to the city’s Water Division, giving
the location by address and the approximate time the tap will be required.
Three working days will be considered the minimum time for notification to make
the tap.
(Prior Code, § 52-216)
§ 53.069 CONNECTION TO SEWER PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE OF SEWER BY CITY.
   When a sewer connection is sought to be made before the sewer is fully
completed and accepted by the city, then, in such cases, the Plumbing Inspector
may issue a permit to make the connections when the party making application
for such connection shall have secured, in writing, the consent of the Public
Service Department and the contractor of the sewer to allow such a connection
to be made.
(Prior Code, § 52-217)
§ 53.070 TAP FEE.
   The tap fee for tapping a sanitary sewer shall be established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-218)
§ 53.071 LOCATION FOR PAYMENT OF TAP FEES AND OTHER CHARGES.
   Any necessary charges or tap fees established by this chapter shall be
payable at the offices of the city’s Light and Power Department during normal
business hours.
(Prior Code, § 52-219)
§ 53.072 TIME LIMIT FOR INSTALLING TAP AFTER MAKING APPLICATION.
   If any tap is not made within 6 months from the date of application, the
application shall become null and void, unless the applicant notifies the city
before the expiration of the 6-month period after the application date.
(Prior Code, § 52-220)
§ 53.073 SEWER ASSESSMENT; INSTALLATION AND OWNERSHIP OF MAINS.
   (A)   Where the property with which sewer connection is sought to be made is
not within the bounds of a regular sanitary sewer district, or where such
property has not been assessed, or has not paid for the construction of the
sewer to which connection is sought to be made, then, in such case, the city’s
Sewer Division shall not accept a tap application for the sewer connection
until an amount shall have been paid to the Sewer Division in an amount
equivalent to the front footage charge for the number of front feet or an
equivalent square footage charge for the number of square feet of the entire
property with which the connection is sought to be made.
   (B)   The equivalent front footage charge or equivalent square footage
charge shall be the average unit amount as assessed per front foot or per
square foot on the most current sewer districts and be no less than the
appropriate costs of the main connected to, and shall be determined by the
Manager.
   (C)   Mains may be installed by either the Sewer Department or by private
contractor under the direction of the City Engineer. After inspection and
acceptance by the City Engineer, the mains within the corporate limits or
zoning area and located within the boundaries of a dedicated street, alley or
easement, when used for the city sewer collection system, shall be the property
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52-221)
§ 53.074 REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Duty of property owner. The city’s Sewer Department may require the
owner of any property which is within the city and connected to the public
sewers or drains to repair or replace any connection line which serves the
owner’s property and is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or
replacement. The property owner’s duty to repair or replace such a connection
line shall include those portions upon the owner’s property and those portions
upon public property or easements up to and including the point of junction
with the public main.
   (B)   Notice; repair by city. The city shall give the property owner notice
by registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of
the owner or the agent of the owner, directing the repair or replacement of the
connection line. If within 30 days of mailing the notice the property owner
fails or neglects to cause the repairs or replacements to be made, the city may
cause the work to be done and assess the cost upon the property served by the
connection.
(Prior Code, § 52-222)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
§ 53.100 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The U.S. EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPES”) permit program (Program) administered by the Nebraska Department of
Environmental Quality (“NDEQ”) requires that cities meeting certain demographic
and environmental impact criteria obtain from the NDEQ an NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)(MS4
Permit). The City of North Platte (City) is subject to the program and is
required to obtain, and has obtained an MS4 permit; the city's MS4 permit is on
file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection
during regular office hours.
   (B)   As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to adopt
and enforce an illicit discharge to storm sewer system ordinance.
   (C)   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city
in administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city shall fund
its operations under this subchapter entirely by charges imposed on the owners
of properties which are made subject to the program by virtue of state and
federal law, and/or other sources of funding, if any, established by a separate
ordinance.
   (D)   Terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings specified in the
program.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
§ 53.101 ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, a “responsible party” is 1 or more
persons that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible
parties shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this
subchapter and jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the
property controlled, possessed or owned. For purposes of this subchapter,
“property” includes but is not limited to real estate, fixtures, facilities and
premises of any kind located upon, under or above the surface of real estate.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible
party subject to an NDEQ-issued industrial discharge permit or any other
federal, state or city permit, statute, ordinance or rule from any obligation
imposed by such permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any such obligation is
greater than any obligation imposed by this subchapter.
   (C)   Any discharge into the city's storm sewer system prohibited by the
city's MS4 permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
shall be deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on a
construction site not otherwise subject to city ordinance or sediment pollution
entering a municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality violation as
determined by the NDEQ shall be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.102 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, an illicit connection to the city's
storm sewer system is any physical connection or other topographical or other
condition, natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized by
ordinance or written rule of the city, which causes or facilitates, directly or
indirectly, an illicit discharge.
   (B)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any
illicit connection shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.103 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the NDEQ shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
   (B)   Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the enforcement officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer
system authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
§ 53.104 DETECTION, REPORTING AND COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   All detection activities permitted under this subchapter shall be
conducted by the City Engineer, or his or her designee, hereinbefore and after
referred to as the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances
which may cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the city.
   (C)   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the Enforcement Officer illicit discharges which the responsible
party knows or should have known to have occurred. Failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
      (1)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge,
the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible
party's sole cost.
      (2)   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
      (3)   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least 3 years.
      (4)   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by
phone or facsimile or email to the Enforcement Officer immediately but in any
event within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to
the Enforcement Officer within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
   (D)   Any person or entity shall also report to the city any illicit
discharge or circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose
a risk of an illicit discharge.
   (E)   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, or
otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the Enforcement Officer shall conduct an inspection
of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide to the
responsible party, and any third party reporter, a written report of the
conditions which may cause or which have already caused an illicit discharge.
The responsible party shall immediately commence corrective action or
remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within 24
hours.
   (F)   The Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to
determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party has security
measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its property
or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access by the Enforcement Officer. By way of specification but not
limitation:
      (1)   A responsible party shall allow the Enforcement Officer ready
access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent
illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (2)   The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to set up on any
property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Enforcement
Officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual or
imminent illicit discharge.
      (3)   The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to require any
responsible party, at responsible party's sole expense, to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the Enforcement Officer as
the Enforcement Officer directs. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
responsible party at responsible party's sole expense. All devices shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the Enforcement Officer and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party.
      (5)   Refusing to allow the Enforcement Officer access to a property is a
violation of this subchapter.
      (6)   If the Enforcement Officer has been refused access to any part of
the property from an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge to a municipal
storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the enforcement officer may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has
occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the
enforcement of this subchapter shall be recovered from the responsible party.
The Enforcement Officer shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the actual costs and wages and expenses incurred by the city for the
enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced under this
subchapter within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.105 ACCESS; SUSPENSION OF.
   (A)   Emergency suspension. The Enforcement Officer may, without prior
notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such emergency
suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If
the responsible party fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension
order, the Enforcement Officer shall take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize the illicit discharge. All costs of such action shall be
recovered from the responsible party for the property identified as the source
of the illicit discharge.
   (B)   Non-emergency suspension. If the Enforcement Officer detects or is
informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but such
illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of storm
sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce the
potential illicit discharge, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the
responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and
the time and date of such suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the
property shall be sufficient notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances
shall avoid a violation of this subchapter provided that no illicit discharge
occurs. In the alternative, the responsible party may request a meeting with
the Enforcement Officer for the purpose of presenting information which the
responsible party believes will show that remediation is unnecessary, and if
the Enforcement Officer finds such information is satisfactory, the Enforcement
Officer may rescind or modify the notice of suspension. If the Enforcement
Officer finds such information unsatisfactory, the Enforcement Officer shall
issue a final written order of suspension including the date and time of
suspension and the order may be appealed as provided hereinafter. Any physical
action to reinstate storm sewer system access to property subject to such order
prior to obtaining a court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this
subchapter. An order of suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible
party with a municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any other
enforcement action permitted by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.106 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood elevation as determined
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, free of trash, debris, grass
clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity
of the watercourse.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
§ 53.107 APPEAL.
   (A)   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the
city may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council pursuant to the
following rules:
      (1)   The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within 10
business days of the date of mailing a decision or the taking of an enforcement
action.
      (2)   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed
from, the errors allegedly made by the Enforcement Officer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of
applicant and all witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all
documents the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, and the relief
requested.
      (3)   The Enforcement Officer shall specify in writing the reasons for
the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the Enforcement Officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
      (4)   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the Enforcement
Officer by ordinary mail, addressed to the applicant at the address reflected
in the applicant's appeal, and shall give notice to the applicant of the date,
time and place for the regular or special meeting of the City Council at which
the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a
date not less than 10 nor more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal. The
strict rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply, and the standard of
proof to be applied, shall be a preponderance of the evidence. The applicant
may be represented by counsel at the applicant's expense. The Enforcement
Officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney designated by
the City Council at the city’s expense.
   (B)   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may
be appealed to the Nebraska District Court.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
§ 53.998 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   Violation of any provision of §§
53.100 through
53.107 may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive
relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to an action for injunctive relief, any person violating
any provision of §§
53.100 through
53.107 shall be liable to criminal prosecution and fine in an amount up to $500
for each day that a violation exists.
   (B)   Remedies provided in §§
53.100 through
53.107 shall not be exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law.
(Ord. 3705, § 1, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 54: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
Collection and Disposal
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   City disposal system created
   
54.03   Rates for city disposal system; billing; delinquent payments
   
54.04   Exclusions from city disposal system
   
54.05   Approved receptacles for household waste and yard waste
   
54.06   Disposal of garbage; receptacles to be maintained in sanitary condition
   
54.07   Placement of receptacles
   
54.08   Receptacles to be property of city
   
54.09   Collections by city generally
   
54.10   Collection of bulky trash
   
54.11   Disposal of manure
   
54.12   Disposal of dead animals
   
54.13   Private disposal authorized
   
54.14   Vehicles used for hauling waste
Municipal Landfill
   
54.30   Operation and funding
   
54.31   State regulation
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BULKY TRASH. Trash or waste of a bulky nature and therefore not susceptible
of being placed within approved receptacles.
   CITY DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system of gathering and disposing of materials,
defined in this section, from the city, but specifically exclusive of
industrial and commercial enterprises. Home occupations and professional
offices shall not be considered as industrial or commercial enterprises.
   GARBAGE. Animal, fruit, vegetable or other material that will or may
decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health, but not including dead
animals or manure.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity carried on in a dwelling by a
member of the immediate family residing therein, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and
does not change the character thereof.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Any solid waste, including garbage and trash, derived from
households, including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels,
bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds and
day-use recreation areas, but shall not include yard waste.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Household waste or the combination of household waste
with industrial or commercial solid wastes.
   OCCUPIED CHARGING UNIT. Any occupied single-family dwelling or any unit
being used for occupancy by 1 or more persons for living and cooking in a
multiple dwelling or apartment. Each unit in a multi-family dwelling shall pay
the monthly sanitation surcharge, including churches and professional offices
in a residential zone. This definition shall not apply to those dwellings and
units required by this chapter to utilize private sanitation disposal service,
as set forth in §
54.04.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Those persons that are engaged in a pursuit or activity
professionally, such as accountants, dentists, real estate offices, insurance
offices, mortuaries, physicians, attorneys, osteopaths and chiropractors.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. A public or private site, location, tract
of land, installation or building which has been used for the collection,
source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or
disposal of solid waste, and shall include solid waste disposal areas and solid
waste processing facilities.
   UNOCCUPIED CHARGING UNIT. Any unoccupied single-family dwelling or any unit
ready for occupancy by 1 or more persons for living and cooking in a multiple-
family dwelling or apartment. This includes unoccupied churches or professional
offices in a residential zone.
   YARD WASTE. Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves and other
organic materials collected as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines
and gardens.
(Prior Code, § 44-31) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994; Am. Ord. 3580, § 1, 4-19-
2005)
§ 54.02 CITY DISPOSAL SYSTEM CREATED.
   There is hereby created, within and for the city, a city disposal system as
defined in this chapter. The operation and control of the system is vested in
the Mayor and Council of the city. Such system shall be operated at the expense
of the city and annual appropriations for that purpose shall be made.
(Prior Code, § 44-32) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.03 RATES FOR CITY DISPOSAL SYSTEM; BILLING; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
   By resolution, the Mayor and Council will set monthly fees per charging unit
for sanitation service within the corporate limits, the fees to be assessed on
the billings for city utility services, and collected in accordance with the
terms thereof. Each charging unit shall receive 2 approved receptacles 1 for
household waste and 1 for yard waste. Additional approved receptacles, in
excess of the basic 2, may be obtained from the Public Service Department for
an additional monthly fee and will be billed for in the same manner. Upon
notice and approval of the Public Service Department, a charging unit may have
the option of only retaining the approved receptacle for household waste at a
reduced monthly fee assessed in the manner stated in this section.
(Prior Code, § 44-33) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994; Am. Ord. 3497, § 1, 10-7-
2003)
§ 54.04 EXCLUSIONS FROM CITY DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   With the exception of city-owned buildings, property and parks, all
commercial, business or industrial enterprises, including motels, mobile home
parks, and multifamily dwellings housing more than 8 families, shall, at their
own expense, dispose of, or cause to be disposed of, all municipal solid waste;
provided, however, that the materials may be deposited at solid waste
management facilities maintained by the city disposal system, except hazardous
waste, which shall not be deposited at solid waste management facilities
maintained by the city.
(Prior Code, § 44-34) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.05 APPROVED RECEPTACLES FOR HOUSEHOLD WASTE AND YARD WASTE.
   (A)   All household waste and yard waste other than bulky trash shall be
placed in receptacles, as defined in this chapter. Household waste or yard
waste shall not exceed 200 pounds in any 1 approved receptacle. During periods
of heaviest yard waste disposal, such as during spring and fall cleanup, this
requirement may be waived and charging units may be allowed to place excess
yard waste in 2-ply degradable paper bags. Plastic bags shall not be used for
yard waste disposal at any time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in or on or about any
dwelling house, building or premises within the corporate limits of the city
any household waste, unless the waste is kept in approved receptacles; except
for containers used for storage of recyclable materials.
(Prior Code, § 44-35) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.06 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE; RECEPTACLES TO BE MAINTAINED IN SANITARY
CONDITION.
   (A)   All garbage shall be drained free of liquids and wrapped in single-use
plastic bags sealed to prevent spillage, or similar material, prior to
disposal. Liquid wastes shall not be placed in approved receptacles. All cans,
bottles or other food containers shall be drained before disposal.
   (B)   Users shall be responsible for maintaining the lids or covers of the
approved receptacle in a closed position and users shall be responsible to
maintain the approved receptacle in sanitary condition, keeping odors and
nuisances from existing or accumulating.
(Prior Code, § 44-36) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.07 PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES.
   All receptacles used for the deposit of household waste and yard waste shall
be placed near the alley, where easily accessible. Should there be no alley,
they shall be placed near the curbline of the street adjacent to the property
where easily accessible.
(Prior Code, § 44-37) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.08 RECEPTACLES TO BE PROPERTY OF CITY.
   All approved receptacles are the property of the city and shall remain
placed with the property or charging unit to which they are assigned. The city
may remove its approved receptacles from any charging unit upon termination of
city electrical service. Upon notice to, and approval of, the Public Service
Department, an unoccupied charging unit that has terminated city electrical
service and is being readied for occupancy may retain city disposal service at
the same rates as charged by the city for occupied charging units. If an
approved receptacle is destroyed or damaged by the occupants of a charging
unit, either by a negligent act or an intentional act, the charging unit shall
be assessed the cost of replacing the approved receptacle as determined by the
Public Service Director. The fee or cost shall be collected in the same manner
as provided in §
54.03.
(Prior Code, § 44-38) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994; Am. Ord. 3580, § 2, 4-19-
2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.09 COLLECTIONS BY CITY GENERALLY.
   (A)   The city disposal system shall empty and carry away the contents of
approved receptacles and bulky trash at such times as the Mayor and City
Council may direct.
   (B)   The city disposal system shall not be required to make collections
where employees are menaced by dogs.
(Prior Code, § 44-39) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.10 COLLECTION OF BULKY TRASH.
   (A)   For all property having city disposal system collection, trash or
waste of a bulky nature and therefore not susceptible of being placed within
approved receptacles shall be placed near the approved receptacles in separate
piles or groups in such a manner that the piles or groups do not block the
alley, or street if collections are made at the street. No bulky trash created
by firms engaged in work for hire or created by building or construction
contractors will be collected.
   (B)   The only bulky trash items acceptable for collection are:
      (1)   Tree debris, including limbs cut in lengths of no more than 10 feet
and no larger than 10 inches in diameter, stumps no greater than 18 inches in
diameter with the majority of dirt removed, and larger trunk and limb parts up
to 18 inches in diameter cut in lengths of no more than 3 feet;
      (2)   Christmas trees;
      (3)   Large household appliances such as cooking stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, washers, dryers and the like. All doors and lids must be removed or
made totally inoperable prior to the placement for collection;
      (4)   Furniture such as chairs, tables, couches, hide-a-beds and the
like;
      (5)   Mattresses and box springs;
      (6)   Carpet and linoleum rolls;
      (7)   Railroad ties, landscaping timbers, posts and poles no more than 10
feet in length or 12 inches in diameter;
      (8)   Fencing materials such as posts, wire fabric, wood slats and
supports;
      (9)   Vehicle parts such as fenders, grilles, hoods, trunk lids, doors,
seats, tires, wheels and drive train components, but no whole vehicles;
      (10)   Totally empty cleaned barrels and steel drums;
      (11)   Concrete, asphalt and brick;
      (12)   Used oil and lubricants placed in plastic or metal containers no
larger in capacity than 1 gallon with tightfitting lids; and
      (13)   Used vehicle batteries.
(Prior Code, § 44-40) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.11 DISPOSAL OF MANURE.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners and tenants occupying premises
upon which manure of any kind accumulates to place the manure in sealed bags so
as not to be obnoxious to the smell or constitute a hazard to health, and place
the bags of manure in the approved receptacle for household waste.
(Prior Code, § 44-41) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.12 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   All dead animals shall be immediately removed and buried by the owner of the
animals. If the owner of the animal cannot be found within 2 hours after the
animal is discovered, then the animal shall be removed and buried or otherwise
disposed of by the city’s Animal Control Division. Dead animals shall not be
buried within the corporate limits of the city, or within 2 miles thereof, or
in or above the course of groundwater that is used for drinking purposes by the
city or its inhabitants.
(Prior Code, § 44-42) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994)
§ 54.13 PRIVATE DISPOSAL AUTHORIZED.
   Any person may remove municipal solid waste or hire the waste to be removed
by some person; provided however, that each charging unit will continue to be
billed pursuant to §
54.03, unless that charging unit provides written proof that his or her solid
waste was lawfully collected by a private hauler and deposited at a permitted
facility or provide written proof that his or her solid waste was deposited by
him or her at a permitted facility. The proof shall be provided by a receipt
from a permitted facility or a statement from a private hauler. All such waste,
unless prohibited by the city, such as hazardous wastes, may be disposed of at
solid waste management facilities maintained by the city disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 44-43) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994; Am. Ord. 3580, § 3, 4-19-
2005)
§ 54.14 VEHICLES USED FOR HAULING WASTE.
   No person shall carry, cart, haul or convey any municipal solid waste upon
or through the streets and alleys of the city, except in some tight wagon or
truck box or bed so made, placed and loaded that none of its contents shall be
spilled or strewn over or along such street, alley or other place. No person
shall carry, cart, haul or convey any municipal solid waste in any wagon, truck
or other conveyance unless the box or bed is watertight and is equipped with a
cover and end gates of such nature as to prevent any municipal solid waste from
blowing out of or falling from the wagon, truck or other conveyance. The wagon,
truck or other conveyance shall be cleaned and disinfected with sufficient
frequency so as not to cause offense to the eye or nose, and shall be enclosed.
The Mayor and Council may, at any time by resolution; provided that, all such
conveyances be constructed or provided with metal bodies or beds.
(Prior Code, § 44-44) (Ord. 2964, § 1, 6-21-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
§ 54.30 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city provides the municipal solid waste management facilities either
though ownership or by contract with a private firm. The city shall have the
supervisory management and control of the municipal solid waste management
facilities. The city shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations
for the sanitary and efficient management of the solid waste management
facilities. The governing body shall provide by ordinance for the management
and operation of the solid waste management facilities and shall set the rates
to be charged for services rendered by resolution and file the rates in the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 44-71)
§ 54.31 STATE REGULATION.
   The city shall obtain the proper permits from the Nebraska Department of
Environmental Quality for those solid waste management facilities under its
control.
(Prior Code, § 44-72)
CHAPTER 55: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
   
55.01   Findings
   
55.02   Application procedure for obtaining and maintaining a city construction
site erosion and sediment control (CCSESC) permit
   
55.03   Inspection procedures for city CCSESC permits
   
55.04   Monitoring procedures for city CCSESC permits
   
55.05   Enforcement
   
55.06   Performance bond or cash security
   
55.07   Appeal
§ 55.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The U.S. EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program (program) administered by the Nebraska Department of Environment
Quality (NDEQ) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the NDEQ a NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4
permit). The City of North Platte, Nebraska (city) is subject to the program
and is required to obtain, and has obtained, a MS4 permit; the city's MS4
permit is on file at the office of the City Engineer and is available for
public inspection during regular office hours.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every applicant bears
final and complete responsibility for compliance with a city construction site
erosion and sediment control (CCSESC) permit (applicant) and any other
requirement of state or federal law or administrative rule.
   (C)   (1)   As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to
undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the
program by adopting a city construction site erosion and sediment control
(CCSESC) ordinance designed to achieve the following objectives.
      (2)   The city shall have primary responsibility for inspection,
monitoring and enforcement procedures to promote applicants' compliance with
city CCSESC permits.
   (D)   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city
in administering and enforcing the program.
   (E)   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the
program.
   (F)   This chapter shall be known as the North Platte Construction Site
Erosion and Sediment Control Act.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.02 APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING AND MAINTAINING A CITY CONSTRUCTION
SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (CCSESC) PERMIT.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all activities leading to land disturbance
or land filling activities or to soil storage when the disturbed area is a
portion of a parcel of land 1 acre or larger in size. This chapter shall apply
to parcels of land less than 1 acre in size, if the land disturbance, land
filling or soil storage impacting the parcel is part of a larger development
that effects 1 acre or more.
      (1)   Land disturbances, land filling, or soil storage activities which
do not require approved plans or permits under this chapter must still provide
BMPs.
      (2)   Anyone conducting land disturbance, land filling or soil storage
activities which may impact any surface intended for vehicular traffic shall
provide vehicle sediment tracking control (VSTC).
      (3)   Areas with sediment runoff will require protective measures at the
direction of the City of North Platte Engineering Department in order to
minimize pollution to the storm sewer system.
      (4)   Minimum requirements for other activities covered by this chapter
may be obtained by written request to the City North Platte Engineering
Department accompanied by an adequate description of proposed location and
activities.
      (5)   Land disturbing activity shall include land changes which may
result in soil erosion from water or wind or the movement of sediments into
state waters or onto lands of the state, including but not limited to,
clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except as
follows:
         (a)   Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public
utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road,
street or sidewalk, provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the
area of the road, street, or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced.
         (b)   Surface or deep mining.
         (c)   Minor land-disturbing activities such as gardens.
         (d)   Emergency work to protect life, limb and property.
         (e)   Agricultural activities in areas zoned for such agricultural
activity.
   (B)   Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association,
joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, or other legal entity.
   (C)   Applications for city CCSESC permits shall be made on forms approved
by the city which may be obtained from the office of the City Building
Inspector.
   (D)   An applicant shall submit to the city full copies of the materials
described below as a basis for the city to determine whether to issue a city
CCSESC permit:
      (1)   Applicant's plans, specifications and supporting materials.
      (2)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in
accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for
a city CCSESC permit shall comply with all current minimum mandatory
requirements for SWPPPs promulgated by the NDEQ and shall be prepared by a
professional in erosion and sediment control credentialed in a manner
acceptable to the city and shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated
certification by the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with
all requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   An application for a city CCSESC permit shall comply with the
Nebraska Department of Roads Design and Specifications standard design
criteria, other acceptable design criteria including but not limited to design,
location, and phased implementation of effective, practicable stormwater
pollution prevention measures, and shall also:
         (a)   Identify the nature of the construction activity and the
potential for sediment and other pollutant discharges from the site;
         (b)   Assure that stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to
erosion by wind or water are covered, vegetated, or otherwise effectively
protected from erosion and sedimentation in accordance with the amount of time
the material will be on site and the manner of its proposed use; no stockpiling
is allowed in the street;
         (c)   Identify measures and procedures to reasonably minimize site
soil compaction and provide soil quality restoration as specified; and assure
that all temporary erosion and sediment controls shall not be removed until the
city has determined that the site has been permanently stabilized;
         (d)   Assure that all undeveloped disturbed sites be permanently
stabilized with 70% perennial cover as measured by the USDA line transect
method;
         (e)   Identify methods to prevent sediment damage to adjacent
properties;
         (f)   Provide for design and construction methods to stabilize steep
or long continuous slopes; steep slopes shall mean those which have a rise/rim
of less than 2.5/1; long slopes shall mean those which have an unimpeded slope
distance of 40 feet or more;
         (g)   Include measures to control the quantity and quality of
stormwater leaving a site before, during and after construction including
adequate control of an increase in the amount and duration of stormwater run-
off to adjacent properties;
         (h)   Provide for stabilization of all waterways and outlets;
         (i)   Provide for protection of storm sewer infrastructure from
sediment loading/plugging;
         (j)   Specify precautions to be taken to contain sediment when working
in or crossing water bodies;
         (k)   Assure stabilization of disturbed areas, including utility
construction areas, as soon as possible; and protect outlying roads from
sediment and mud from construction site activities, including tracking;
         (l)   Provide precautions such as vehicle sediment control at
construction entrances and exits. Assure that if mud is tracked onto a street,
it will not be washed into storm drains unless the storm drain is diverted to
an approved sediment trapping device;
         (m)   Provide for disposal of collected sediment and floating debris;
         (n)   Assure that when working near sensitive waters, the specific
practices itemized immediately below are utilized:
            1.   During construction: all exposed soil areas with a slope
steeper than 3:1 that have a continuous positive slope to a sensitive water,
will have temporary erosion protection or permanent cover within 7 days after
the area is no longer actively being worked; all other slopes that have a
continuous positive slope to a sensitive water shall have temporary erosion
protection or permanent cover within 14 days after the area is no longer
actively being worked; and
            2.   Temporary sediment basin requirements shall be used for common
drainage locations that serve an area with 5 or more acres disturbed at 1 time.
   (E)   Issuance by the city of a city CCSESC permit shall be a condition
precedent for the issuance of a city building permit or site plan approval.
   (F)   For so long as a construction site is subject to a city CCSESC permit,
the applicant shall provide the city with current information as follows:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person on site
designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the city CCSESC permit;
      (2)   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contractor
(s) and/or subcontractor(s) that will implement each erosion and sediment
control measure identified in the SWPPP;
      (3)   Applicants' failure to provide current information shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
   (G)   Developers can transfer the city CCSESC permit responsibility to
homebuilders, new lot owners, contractors and subcontractors, with the written
consent of the city and transferees must agree to the transfer in writing, must
agree to fulfill all obligations of the SWPPP, and the city CCSESC permit.
Absent consent from city and written confirmation of transfer of obligations,
the developer remains responsible for compliance on any lot that has been sold.
   (H)   Upon receipt of an application for a city CCSESC permit, the city
shall either find that the application complies with this chapter and issue a
city CCSESC permit in accordance with this chapter or that the application
fails to comply with this chapter, in which case the city shall provide a bill
of particulars identifying non-compliant elements of the application.
   (I)   Application for termination of a city CCSESC permit shall be made in
the following manner:
      (1)   A CCSESC permit may be terminated at any time by city, upon written
notice to the applicant; or
      (2)   Upon written request by permit holder and written termination by
city if all requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.03 INSPECTION PROCEDURES FOR CITY CCSESC PERMITS.
   (A)   All inspections required under this chapter shall be conducted by a
City Code Enforcement Officer hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement
officer". Upon receipt of a complaint by the city, the city shall conduct an
inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter, and
shall within a reasonable time thereafter report to the applicant either that
compliance appears to have been achieved, or that compliance has not been
achieved, in which case the city shall provide a bill of particulars
identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately
commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24
hours of receiving the city's bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the
city may extend the deadline for taking corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (B)   Construction shall not occur on the site at any time when the city has
identified conditions of non-compliance. Construction activities undertaken by
an applicant prior to resolution of all discrepancies specified in the bill of
particulars shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.04 MONITORING PROCEDURES FOR CITY CCSESC PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon issuance of a city CCSESC permit, an applicant has an absolute
duty to monitor site conditions and to report to the enforcement officer any
change of circumstances or site conditions which the applicant knows or should
know poses a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner inconsistent with
applicant's SWPPP and or city CCSESC permit.
   (B)   Such report shall be made by the applicant to the enforcement officer
immediately but in any event within 24 hours of change of circumstances or site
conditions.
   (C)   Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (D)   Any third party may also report to the city site conditions which the
third party reasonably believes poses a risk of stormwater discharge in a
manner inconsistent with applicant's SWPPP, and/or city CCSESC permit.
   (E)   Upon receiving a report pursuant to this section, the enforcement
officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible
and thereafter shall provide the applicant with a bill of particulars
identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately
commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24
hours of receiving the city's bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the
city may extend the deadline for completing corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence
enforcement actions specified in §
55.05.
   (F)   Unless a report is made to the enforcement officer pursuant to this
section, the enforcement officer reserves the right to conduct unannounced
inspection(s) during the course of construction to monitor compliance with the
city CCSESC permit and its conditions. If the inspection(s) discloses any non-
compliance, the enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a bill of
particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective
action within 24 hours of receiving the city's bill of particulars. For good
cause shown, the city may extend the deadline for completing corrective action.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately
commence enforcement actions specified in §
55.05.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its
attorney's fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
violation within the meaning of §
10.99.
   (C)   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.06 PERFORMANCE BOND OR CASH SECURITY.
   (A)   Along with the application for a city CCSESC permit, the applicant
shall post security for compliance with all requirements imposed by the city
CCSESC permit as well as necessary remedial work resulting from violation of
any provision of this chapter in an amount of $500 per gross acre or $500 for
each single or twin family home, whichever is greater. This amount shall apply
to the maximum acreage of soil that will be simultaneously exposed during the
projects construction as determined by the city.
   (B)   Acceptable forms of performance security payable to the city include
the following:
      (1)   Performance bonds;
      (2)   Surety bonds;
      (3)   Money orders;
      (4)   Certificates of deposit;
      (5)   Certified check;
      (6)   Cashiers check.
   (C)   The application form signed by the applicant for a city CCSESC permit
shall include the following commitment by the applicant:
      "In addition to the performance security posted with this application,
the undersigned applicant hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any and all claims, damages or suites arising directly or
indirectly out of any act of commission or omission by the applicant, or any
employee, agent, assign or contractor or subcontractor of the applicant, in
connection with applicant's City CCSESC Permit."
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 55.07 APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council
pursuant to the following rules:
   (A)   The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within 10
business days of the date that the decision or enforcement action is placed in
the mail.
   (B)   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal,
a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to
introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall be prepared to explain at the appeal
hearing the reasons for the enforcement action, an explanation of all oral and
written evidence relied upon, including witnesses and copies of all documents
the enforcement officer intends to rely upon in explaining his/her decision.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer
by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice of the date, time and place for
the regular or special meeting of the City Council at which the hearing on the
appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than 4
nor more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply. The standard of proof shall be preponderance. The
applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant's expense. The
enforcement officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney
designated by the City Council at city expense.
   (E)   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may
be appealed to District Court.
(Ord. 3736, passed 10-21-2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; TRAFFIC CITATIONS
      
71.   CODE ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
      
72.   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
      
73.   VEHICLE OPERATION
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   BICYCLES
      
76.   PARKING RULES
      
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
78.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
79.   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS; TRAFFIC CITATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Traffic Citations
   
70.20   Citation deemed lawful complaint
   
70.21   Failure to appear
   
70.22   Tickets for parking violations
   
70.23   Erasing mark or sign placed on vehicle by police
   
70.24   Payment of fine for parking violations; amount of fine
   
70.25   Notice to vehicle owner upon failure to pay parking fine
   
70.26   Presumption of responsibility for parking violations
   
70.27   Filing of complaint upon failure to appear for parking violation
   
70.28   Impoundment of vehicles
   
70.29   Removal of illegally parked vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions and those in Neb. RS Ch. 39, shall be applied
throughout this chapter. Where no definition is specified, the normal
dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. All streets and portions of streets within the
area bounded by Dewey Street from “B” to Front Street, Jeffers Street from “B”
to 12th Street, Bailey Street from “B” to Front Street, and Vine Street from
Third Street to Front Street and Chestnut from Third Street to Front Street.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
for vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   TIME STANDARD. When certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean
Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use
in the city.
(Prior Code, § 50-1)
TRAFFIC CITATIONS
§ 70.20 CITATION DEEMED LAWFUL COMPLAINT.
   Whenever any citation issued under the provisions of this subchapter
includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of this
state in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense alleged in
the citation to have been committed, then the citation, when filed with a court
having jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose
of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 50-281)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-685
§ 70.21 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his or her written promise to
appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless
of the disposition of the charge for which the citation was originally issued.
(Prior Code, § 50-282) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 29-426
§ 70.22 TICKETS FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Whenever a police officer or public safety employee of the
city shall observe any motor vehicle in violation of a motor vehicle parking
ordinance or duly established parking regulation, or stopped or parked in
violation of the Emergency Snow Ordinance of the city, it shall be his or her
duty to attach to the vehicle a parking ticket, which shall be directed to the
owner or operator of the vehicle and shall set forth the nature of the
violation.
   (B)   Parking in space reserved for handicapped persons. Whenever a police
officer, a public safety employee or a volunteer under the jurisdiction of the
handicapped parking enforcement specialist program of the city shall observe
any motor vehicle in violation of §
76.03, providing for reservation of parking for handicapped individuals, it
shall be his or her duty to attach to the vehicle a parking ticket, which shall
be directed to the owner or operator of the vehicle and shall set forth the
nature of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 50-283)
§ 70.23 ERASING MARK OR SIGN PLACED ON VEHICLE BY POLICE.
   No person shall remove or erase any mark or sign placed on a motor vehicle
by the city’s Police Department, for the purpose of evading or avoiding the
receipt of a parking violation citation.
(Prior Code, § 50-284) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 PAYMENT OF FINE FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS; AMOUNT OF FINE.
   (A)   Any person accused of a violation of a motor vehicle parking ordinance
or duly established parking regulation of the city may appear before the
Traffic Violations Bureau of the city’s Police Department and waive arraignment
and right to hearing and enter a plea of guilty by payment to the city, in
those complaints involving a violation of a parking ordinance or regulation,
the sum of $5 if payment is received within 5 days after issuance of the
traffic citation as described in this subchapter, or the sum of $10 if payment
is not received within 5 days but is received within 15 days after issuance.
   (B)   A fine of $100 shall apply to the following violations:
      (1)   Violation of §
94.041, fire lanes.
      (2)   Violation of
Ch. 78, Sch. I, prohibited parking zones- parking on Newberry Access.
      (3)   Violation of §
76.03, reservation of parking spaces for use by handicapped persons.
   (C)   A fine of $35 shall apply to the following violations:
      (1)   Violation of the city’s Emergency Snow Ordinance.
      (2)   Violation of §
76.15, parking trucks in residential districts.
      (3)   Violation of §
76.21, parking of boats and boat trailers.
      (4)   Violation of §
76.22, parking and storing of RVs (recreational vehicles).
   (D)   If payment is not made within 15 days after issuance of any citation
referred to in this section, prosecution shall be in the courts in the same
manner as other ordinance violations.
(Prior Code, § 50-285) (Ord. 2960, § 1, 5-17-1994; Am. Ord. 3039, § 1, 10-17-
1995; Am. Ord. 3134, § 2, 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 3407, § 1, 2-5-2002; Am. Ord.
3591, § 1, 4-5-2005; Am. Ord. 4159, § 1, 1-16- 2024)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish a traffic violations bureau, see Neb. RS 18-1729
§ 70.25 NOTICE TO VEHICLE OWNER UPON FAILURE TO PAY PARKING FINE.
   If a person accused of a violation of a motor vehicle parking ordinance or a
duly established parking regulation, or of parking or stopping of a motor
vehicle in violation of the Emergency Snow Ordinance of the city, does not
appear before the Police Department within 5 days after the date of the
issuance of the traffic citation, a letter shall be mailed to the last known
address of the registered owner of the vehicle found to be in violation of the
ordinance or regulation, setting forth the date and nature of the alleged
offense, the disposition that can be made of the matter by appearing within 15
days of the issuance of the traffic citation, and that, if payment is not made
prior to the expiration of the 15-day period from the issuance of the traffic
citation, a complaint charging the violation will be filed by the City
Prosecutor in the County Court.
(Prior Code, § 50-286)
§ 70.26 PRESUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of the law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   (B)   The presumption stated in division (A) above shall apply only when the
procedure as prescribed in this subchapter has been followed.
(Prior Code, § 50-287)
§ 70.27 FILING OF COMPLAINT UPON FAILURE TO APPEAR FOR PARKING VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever any person fails to appear within 15 days after the issuance
of a parking ticket for violation of a motor vehicle parking ordinance or duly
established parking regulation, or violation of the Emergency Snow Ordinance of
the city, the City Prosecutor may file a complaint charging the violation with
the County Court.
   (B)   If the person is convicted of a violation of a motor vehicle parking
ordinance or duly established parking regulation, or of parking or stopping of
a motor vehicle in violation of the Emergency Snow Ordinance of the city, the
fine shall be as set forth in §
70.24.
(Prior Code, § 50-288)
§ 70.28 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Authorized. When authorized by this code or the laws of this state,
members of the Police Department may remove a vehicle from a street or highway
to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the Police Department or otherwise maintained by the city.
   (B)   Notice to owner. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street
as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain
from the registration records the owner thereof, the Evidence Technician shall
immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the
fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which the
vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.
   (C)   Report when notice cannot be given to owner. Whenever an officer
removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not
able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to
give the notice to the owner as provided in this section, and if the vehicle is
not returned to the owner within a period of 3 days, then the Evidence
Technician shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the
removal by mail to the state’s Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall file a
copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the
vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete description of the
vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for the
removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
(Prior Code, § 50-289)
§ 70.29 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Authorized. Whenever any police officer or Public Safety employee
shall find a vehicle standing upon a street or alley in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the individual may remove or have the vehicle
removed or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move
the vehicle to a position off the roadway of the street or alley or from the
street or alley.
   (B)   Payment of costs. The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the
possession of any vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable
cost of towing and storage fees. Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien
upon the vehicle prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a
vehicle shall be entitled to retain possession of the vehicle until the charges
are paid. The lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents
of any vehicles.
   (C)   “Vehicle” defined. For purposes of this section, the term VEHICLE
shall be defined to include, in addition to the definition of vehicle by state
statute, any mobile home, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, pontoon, pontoon
trailer, car trailer, utility trailer, pickup camper, horse trailer, stock
trailer or machinery of any kind not in immediate use.
(Prior Code, § 50-290)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to remove certain vehicles, see Neb. RS 60-6,165
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any removal or erasure, except by the driving of the motor vehicle, as
set out in §
70.23, shall constitute a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not less than $50 and not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 50-284)
Cross-reference:
   Additional penalties, see §
70.24
   Compliance and Enforcement, see
Chapter 71
CHAPTER 71: ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
Section
   
71.01   Adoption of Nebraska Rules of the Road
   
71.02   Enforcement generally; authority of police to direct traffic
   
71.03   Authority of Fire Department to direct traffic at scene of fire
   
71.04   Authority of railroad watchpersons to direct traffic at railroad
crossings
   
71.05   Compliance with orders of person directing traffic
   
71.06   Pushcarts
   
71.07   Persons riding animals; animal-drawn vehicles
   
71.08   Coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices
   
71.09   Vehicles operated by public employees
   
71.10   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.11   Authority to prescribe additional regulations; emergency regulations
   71.12   Utility-type vehicles
Statutory reference:
   Penalty and enforcement provisions, see Neb. RS 60-682 et seq.
§ 71.01 ADOPTION OF NEBRASKA RULES OF THE ROAD.
   The Nebraska Rules of the Road, together with all subsequent amendments
thereto, as adopted by the state, relating to traffic regulations, are
incorporated by reference into this code and made a part of this chapter as
though spread at large in this chapter, except those provisions in conflict
with this code when the governing body has the authority to alter the
regulations. One copy of the Nebraska Rules of the Road shall be on file with
the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time.
(Prior Code, § 50-31)
§ 71.02 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY; AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Prior Code, § 50-32)
§ 71.03 AUTHORITY OF FIRE DEPARTMENT TO DIRECT TRAFFIC AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 50-33)
§ 71.04 AUTHORITY OF RAILROAD WATCHPERSONS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC AT RAILROAD
CROSSINGS.
   Each watchperson, trainperson or other agent of any railroad or railway
company, if and when stationed at a railway crossing within the city, shall be
vested with authority to regulate and control traffic of vehicles at the
railway crossing where he or she is so stationed. It shall be his or her duty
to direct the movement of traffic at the railway crossing in such a manner as
will facilitate the movement of traffic, and prevent congestion and accidents,
and to stop all movement of vehicles at the railway crossing when any engine,
car or conveyance of the railway company approaches the railway crossing upon
the tracks by arm signals or by holding a stop signal in his or her hand
extended straight out from his or her shoulder while facing the street. It
shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order or signal of any
watchperson, and any person so violating shall be punished as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-34) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS OF PERSON DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer, Fire Department official or railroad watchperson
under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 PUSHCARTS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this chapter and the Nebraska Rules of the Road, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 50-36)
§ 71.07 PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS; ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 50-37)
§ 71.08 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any
skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, the person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians.
   (B)   This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play
street as authorized in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-38)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate persons on skates, coasters and the like, see Neb. RS
60-680(t)
§ 71.09 VEHICLES OPERATED BY PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, town,
district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the Nebraska Rules
of the Road.
(Prior Code, § 50-39)
§ 71.10 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may park
or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to park or stand with
due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the
driver from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of
others.
(Prior Code, § 50-40)
§ 71.11 AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the city’s Traffic
Engineer, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic regulations of the city and to make and enforce
temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such
temporary regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 50-41)
§ 71.12 UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES.
   Snowmobiles, minibikes, golf carts, go-carts, gas -or electric-powered
scooters, all-terrain vehicles and any off-road or other vehicle which cannot
be registered for operation on streets, highways or roadways are generally
prohibited on streets, highways or roadways, except as hereinafter provided.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon any
public street or highway within the corporate limits of the city; provided,
however, that a snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or highway
within the corporate limits of the city when, and at locations where, snow upon
the roadway renders travel by motor vehicles impractical.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon any roadway within
the corporate limits of the city a minibike, golf cart, go-cart, gas- or
electric-powered scooter, all-terrain vehicle or any off-road or other vehicle
which cannot be registered for operation on any roadway except as provided in
this chapter. This division shall not be applicable to scooters, power chairs,
or electric wheelchairs having more than 2 wheels which are designed for and
being utilized by individuals with limited mobility.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon any publicly owned
parking lot or other publicly owned property within the corporate limits of the
city a minibike, golf cart, go-cart, gas- or electric-powered scooter, all-
terrain vehicle or any off-road or other vehicle which cannot be registered for
operation on any roadway unless operation of the minibike, golf cart, go-cart,
gas- or electric-powered scooter, all-terrain vehicle or any off-road or other
vehicle is expressly authorized or is provided for in this chapter. This
division shall not be applicable to scooters, power chairs, or electric
wheelchairs having more than 2 wheels which are designed for and being utilized
by individuals with limited mobility.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense. A subsequent violation of any
aforementioned provision shall be punished by a fine of $250 to $500. In
addition to any penalties for violation hereof, the Police Department may
impound any all-terrain or utility-type vehicle when operated in violation of
Nebraska law or this Code.
(Ord. 4080, § 1, 2-1-2022)
Cross-reference:
   All-Terrain Vehicles and Utility-Type Vehicles, see Chapter 79
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
72.01   Authority to install; stop signs
   
72.02   Specifications
   
72.03   Compliance
   
72.04   Placement required for enforcement of certain regulations
   
72.05   Presumption of legality
   
72.06   Authority to establish traffic lanes
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL; STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall place and maintain official traffic control
devices and markings, when and as required by resolution of the governing body
under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of
the regulations, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic
control devices and markings as he or she may deem necessary to regulate, warn
or guide traffic under the traffic regulations of the city or the Nebraska
Rules of the Road. The City Engineer may test experimental traffic control
devices and markings under actual traffic conditions to ensure their
feasibility and effectiveness.
   (B)   A current copy of the Council’s resolution relating to the placement
of traffic control devices shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk at all
times. The signs designated in this section are on the official stop sign map
designating all stop signs within the city as adopted to date.
(Prior Code, § 50-61)
§ 72.02 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to
the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, the Manual being hereby incorporated by reference as
though printed in full in this section. One copy of the Manual shall be on file
in the office of the City Engineer and available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. All signs, signals, devices and markings required under this
chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to
type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected
or posted and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter
shall be official traffic control devices.
(Prior Code, § 50-62)
§ 72.03 COMPLIANCE.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 50-63)
§ 72.04 PLACEMENT REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN REGULATIONS.
   No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices or
markings are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 50-64)
§ 72.05 PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic control devices or markings are placed in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, the
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
   (B)   Any official traffic control device or marking placed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to the devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(Prior Code, § 50-65)
§ 72.06 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH TRAFFIC LANES.
   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary as directed by resolution of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 50-66)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
CHAPTER 73: VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
Speed Regulations
   
73.01   Speed limits generally
   
73.02   Increased speed zones
   
73.03   Decreased speed zones
   
73.04   Regulation of speed by traffic signals
Vehicular Movement
   
73.20   One-way streets and alleys
   
73.21   Arterial streets designated
   
73.22   Stop sign or yield sign at arterial street intersections
   
73.23   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
   
73.24   Funeral processions and other processions
   
73.25   Truck routes
   
73.26   Weight limitations
   
73.27   Transporting sand, gravel or refuse
   
73.28   Routes for hazardous material vehicles and oversized vehicles
   
73.29   Careless driving
   
73.30   Unlawful riding
   
73.31   Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion
   
73.32   Emergency snow routes
   
73.33   Engine braking; prohibited
 
   
73.99   Penalty
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 73.01 SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY.
   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within the city, except as this subchapter, as authorized by
state law, declares and determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified
streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person
to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this
subchapter when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50-101) Penalty, see §
73.99
Cross-reference:
   Specific speed limits, see
Chapter 77, Sch. II and
III
Statutory reference:
   Speed restrictions, see Neb. RS 60-6,185-60-6,195
§ 73.02 INCREASED SPEED ZONES.
   It is hereby determined by the governing body upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law
upon those streets or portions thereof described in
Chapter 77, Sch. II, is less than is necessary for operation of vehicles
thereon by reason of the designation and signposting of the streets as through
highways, or by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby
declared that the maximum speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof
described in
Chapter 77, Sch. II, shall be as therein stated, which speeds so declared shall
be effective at the time specified therein when signs are erected giving notice
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50-102)
§ 73.03 DECREASED SPEED ZONES.
   It is hereby determined by the governing body upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law
upon those streets or portions thereof as described in
Chapter 77, Sch. III, is greater than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist upon the streets, and it is hereby declared that the
maximum speed upon those streets or portions thereof described in
Chapter 77, Sch. III, shall be as therein stated, which speeds so declared
shall be effective at the time specified therein when signs are erected giving
notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50-103)
§ 73.04 REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   The city’s Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing signals so
as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50-104)
VEHICULAR MOVEMENT
§ 73.20 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in
Chapter 77, Sch. IV, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 50-111)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate one-way streets, see Neb. RS 60-680(d)
§ 73.21 ARTERIAL STREETS DESIGNATED.
   Those streets and parts of streets described in
Chapter 77, Sch. V, are hereby declared to be arterial streets for the purpose
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-112)
§ 73.22 STOP SIGN OR YIELD SIGN AT ARTERIAL STREET INTERSECTIONS.
   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes an arterial
street it shall be the duty of the city’s Traffic Engineer to place and
maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street
intersecting the arterial street, unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that, at
the intersection of 2 arterial streets or at the intersection of an arterial
street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be
erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be directed by the
governing body upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
(Prior Code, § 50-113)
§ 73.23 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 50-114)
§ 73.24 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND OTHER PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Right-of-way. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter.
   (B)   Manner of driving. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall
drive as near to the right- hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
   (C)   Identification of vehicles. A funeral composed of a procession of
vehicles shall be identified as such by the display of vehicle headlights or by
such other method as may be determined and designated by the Police Department.
   (D)   Designation of identification. The Police Department may designate a
type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other
method to be employed to identify, the vehicles in the funeral processions.
(Prior Code, § 50-115) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate processions, see Neb. RS 60-680(c)
§ 73.25 TRUCK ROUTES.
   The Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the city that
trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for persons operating the
trucks to travel on other streets than those designated by the resolution for
trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares or merchandise, and in that
event the operator of the truck shall return to the truck routes as soon as
possible in traveling through or about the city. The Council shall cause
notices to be posted or shall erect signs indicating the streets so designated
as truck routes. Truck routes are listed in
Chapter 77, Sch. VII.
(Prior Code, § 50-116)
§ 73.26 WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified in
Chapter 77, Sch. VI, at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in
Chapter 77, Sch. VI.
(Prior Code, § 50-117)
§ 73.27 TRANSPORTING SAND, GRAVEL OR REFUSE.
   (A)   No person shall transport any sand, gravel or rock less than 2 inches
in diameter, or refuse, in any motor vehicle on any local street if the
material protrudes above the side of that part of the vehicle in which it is
being transported, unless the material is enclosed or completely covered with
canvas or similar covering.
   (B)   All parts of the vehicles, other than the box in which the sand,
gravel or dirt is contained, shall be kept free and clean of loose sand, gravel
or dirt so that the sand, gravel or dirt will not blow or fall off the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 50-118) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28 ROUTES FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL VEHICLES AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the city
on which hazardous material vehicles and oversized vehicles (combines, mobile
homes and modular homes) shall be driven or towed upon, and it shall be
unlawful for persons towing the through vehicles to travel on other streets
than those so designated. The Council shall cause notices to be posted or shall
erect signs indicating the streets so designated as hazardous material vehicle
and oversized vehicle routes. These routes are listed in
Chapter 77, Sch. VIII.
   (B)   Hazardous materials are defined in 49 C.F.R. parts 100—177.
(Prior Code, § 50-119) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.29 CARELESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any motor vehicle in the city carelessly or without
due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless
driving.
(Prior Code, § 50-120) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.30 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck
bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 50-121) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.31 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE IN MOTION.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 50-122) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.32 EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES.
   The streets or portions of streets within the city to be designated as
emergency snow routes shall be so designated by City Council resolution from
time to time.
(Prior Code, § 50-123) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.33 ENGINE BRAKING; PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any operator of a motor
vehicle with a total gross vehicle weight rating of 7,000 pounds or more,
including its towed unit or units, to attempt to retard the forward movement of
the vehicle by initiating a device commonly known as jake brakes to contain the
engine’s compression, thus rapidly slowing the engine’s revolutions per minute.
(Prior Code, § 50-124) (Ord. 3486, § 1, 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
73.33 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 50-124) (Ord. 3486, § 1, 8-19-2003)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Crossing roadway
   
74.02   Compliance with signals at railroad crossing
   
74.03   Duties of drivers
   
74.04   Hitchhiking
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians, see Neb. RS 60-6,152—60-6,158
§ 74.01 CROSSING ROADWAY.
   Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic
control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb.
(Prior Code, § 50-151)
§ 74.02 COMPLIANCE WITH SIGNALS AT RAILROAD CROSSING.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 50-152) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 DUTIES OF DRIVERS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused
or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 50-153) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 HITCHHIKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the traveled portion of any
street or alley for the purpose of soliciting rides from the driver of any
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 50-154) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES
Section
Registration Provisions
   
75.01   Generally
   
75.02   Application; issuance; records
   
75.03   Registration sticker
   
75.04   Transfer of ownership of bicycle
Operation
   
75.20   Generally
   
75.21   Compliance with traffic regulations
   
75.22   Parking
   
75.23   Riding bicycle or skateboard on sidewalk
   
75.24   Parent’s responsibility for violations by children
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for registration, see Neb. RS 60-6,317(4)
   Bicycles, see Neb. RS 60-6,314 et seq.
REGISTRATION PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 GENERALLY.
   Any person who resides within the city and rides a bicycle on any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall have the
bicycle registered and a registration sticker attached as provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-181) (Am. Ord. 3681, § 1, 1-2-2007)
§ 75.02 APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; RECORDS.
   (A)   Application for a bicycle registration and registration sticker shall
be made upon a form provided by the city.
   (B)   The Police Department, upon receiving a completed bicycle registration
form, shall keep a record of the number of each registration, the date issued
and the name and address of the person to whom issued.
(Prior Code, § 50-182) (Am. Ord. 3681, § 1, 1-2-2007)
§ 75.03 REGISTRATION STICKER.
   Upon registering a bicycle, a registration sticker bearing the registration
number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city shall be issued. The
registration sticker must be firmly attached to the main frame of the bicycle
for which issued in a position as to be plainly visible.
(Prior Code, § 50-183) (Am. Ord. 3681, § 1, 1-2-2007)
§ 75.04 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BICYCLE.
   Upon the sale or other transfer of a registered bicycle, the prior owner
shall notify the Police Department to have the registration reassigned to the
new owner.
(Prior Code, § 50-186) (Am. Ord. 3681, § 1, 1-2-2007)
OPERATION
§ 75.20 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public
highway of the city with another person on the handlebars or in any position in
front of the operator.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
operator and any other persons upon the streets and public highways.
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at
all stop signs.
   (D)   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway
from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise without a headlight,
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less
than 500 feet, indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly
attached to the bicycle, and properly lighted, or without a yellow or red light
reflector attached to the bicycle and visible 100 to 600 feet from the rear
thereof when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor
vehicle. The bicycle headlight shall give a clear, white light.
   (E)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway abreast of more than 1 other person riding or propelling a
bicycle.
   (F)   Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable
thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at
the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing
overtaken vehicles and individuals that are slower moving, and pass vehicles to
the right when meeting.
(Prior Code, § 50-201) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.21 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this
subchapter and except as to those sections of this chapter which by their
nature can have no application.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (C)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn or
left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such signs, except where the person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 50-202)
§ 75.22 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or in a rack to support the bicycle or in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 50-203) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.23 RIDING BICYCLE OR SKATEBOARD ON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk within the
central business district. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or
skateboard upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 50-204) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.24 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS BY CHILDREN.
   The parent or guardian of any child who is less than 16 years old shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 50-205) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 76: PARKING RULES
Section
   
76.01   Loading and unloading permits
   
76.02   Parking prohibited in certain places
   
76.03   Reservation of parking spaces for use by handicapped persons
   
76.04   Obstructing traffic
   
76.05   Parking in alleys
   
76.06   Parking vehicle for purpose of washing or repair
   
76.07   Parallel parking and angle parking
   
76.08   Position of vehicle in parking lot spaces
   
76.09   Parking prohibited on certain streets
   
76.10   Maximum time limit
   
76.11   Time limits on certain streets
   
76.12   Signs required
   
76.13   Truck parking prohibited in certain places
   
76.14   No truck parking zones
   
76.15   Parking trucks in residential districts
   
76.16   Oil tankers, gasoline transports and tank trucks
   
76.17   Parking truck with end gate down
   
76.18   Applicability of chapter
   
76.19   Parking regulations not exclusive
   
76.20   Special permits
   
76.21   Parking of boats and boat trailers
   
76.22   Parking and storing of RVs (recreational vehicles)
 
   
76.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate stopping, standing or parking, see Neb. RS 60-680(b)
   Stopping, standing and parking generally, see Neb. RS 60-6,164-60-6,169
§ 76.01 LOADING AND UNLOADING PERMITS.
   (A)   The Police Department is authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. The
permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the
owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to such person the privileges as therein
stated and authorized in this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any
of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(Prior Code, § 50-231) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.02 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      (2)   On a sidewalk or on the right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      (7)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (8)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
      (9)   On any railroad tracks;
      (10)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (11)   On any median or traffic island located on a city street or alley
and designed to regulate the flow of traffic;
      (12)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (13)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (14)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (15)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance, when properly signposted; and/or
      (16)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 50-232) Penalty, see §
76.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,166
§ 76.03 RESERVATION OF PARKING SPACES FOR USE BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   Designation of spaces.
      (1)   The City Engineer and any person in lawful possession of any off-
street parking facility may designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of:
         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3113;
         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a
distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person by
another state;
         (c)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose motor vehicles
display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and
         (d)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the city which
display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739.
      (2)   All such permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the
motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible from the front
windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be displayed on
the dashboard. Whenever the city so designates a parking space or stall, it
shall be indicated by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each
stall or space a sign as described in Neb. RS 18-1737. In addition to such
sign, the space or stall may also be indicated by blue paint on the curb or
edge or the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein.
      HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE. Any space, including any associated access
aisle, provided for the parking of motor vehicles, which space and access aisle
have been designated exclusively for the use of handicapped or disabled
persons.
      HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any individual with a severe visual or
physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an inability
to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a wheelchair,
crutch, walker or prosthetic, orthodic or other assistant device, any
individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or
her functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any
individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of 1 or
more limbs.
      TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any handicapped or disabled
person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such manner for no
longer than 1 year.
   (C)   Handicapped parking; violation.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any on-
street or off-street handicapped parking space without properly displaying the
proper permit or distinguishing license plates issued pursuant to law.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle displaying
such permit or plates in any handicapped parking space when the person to whom
or for whom the permit or license plate so displayed has been issued will not
or does not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the space.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to block access to any
handicapped parking space by parking a vehicle in such a manner as to render
the handicapped parking space unavailable for its intended use.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct any
wheelchair ramp constructed or created in accordance and in conformity with the
Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
   (D)   Revocation of permit. Permits issued under this chapter are intended
for the use of handicapped persons only, and in addition to any other penalties
provided herein, any misuse or abuse of the permits may result in the
revocation of the permit by the city and such other penalties as provided by
law.
   (E)   Applicable law. The issuance of a handicapped permit shall in no
manner waive or impair the application of any ordinance of the city, including
time limitations and other parking regulations established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 50-233) (Ord. 3477, § 1, 5-20-2003) Penalty, see §
76.99
Statutory reference:
   Handicapped parking, see Neb. RS 18-1736-18-1741
§ 76.04 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 50-234) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   (B)   Drive-up windows may be granted by Council action permitting the
stopping or standing of a vehicle during hours designated as long as the
vehicle is not left unattended by the driver.
(Prior Code, § 50-235) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.06 PARKING VEHICLE FOR PURPOSE OF WASHING OR REPAIR.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of
washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 50-236) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 PARALLEL PARKING AND ANGLE PARKING.
   No person shall park any vehicle or approach the curb with a vehicle except
when headed in the direction of traffic. Vehicles when parked parallel shall
stand adjacent to the curb and so as to have both right wheels within 12 inches
of the curb and so as to leave at least 4 feet between the vehicle so parked
and any other parked vehicle. In the angle parking zone, stalls shall be marked
on the curb or pavement of the street or portion thereof designated for parking
at an angle. All vehicles parked at an angle shall be parked within the stalls
and with the right front wheel at the curb.
(Prior Code, § 50-237) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.08 POSITION OF VEHICLE IN PARKING LOT SPACES.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle in a city parking lot except in a
designated parking stall. Cars shall park in the lots within designated stalls
at the designated angles.
   (B)   No car shall park on a stall line or straddle a stall line.
(Prior Code, § 50-238) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.09 PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in
Chapter 78, Sch. I.
(Prior Code, § 50-239) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.10 MAXIMUM TIME LIMIT.
   Unless otherwise posted with appropriate signs, and subject to the
provisions of §
76.21, it shall be unlawful for anyone to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle, truck trailer, mobile home, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer,
pontoon trailer, utility trailer, pickup camper, horse trailer, car trailer,
stock trailer or machinery of any kind upon the public streets for more than 72
consecutive hours.
(Prior Code, § 50-240) (Ord. 3409, § 1, 3-19-2002) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.11 TIME LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than the time specified on signs between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays within
the district or upon any of the streets described in
Chapter 78, Sch. II.
(Prior Code, § 50-241) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.12 SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution of the city
any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated
streets, it shall be the duty of the city’s Traffic Engineer to erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be
effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged
offense.
(Prior Code, § 50-242)
§ 76.13 TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, truck tractor or semi-
trailer, regardless of length, to stop, stand or park the vehicle within a
street intersection, on a crosswalk, in front of a private driveway or on a
sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 50-243) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.14 NO TRUCK PARKING ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. for the
operator of any truck, truck tractor or semi-trailer or for the operator of any
type of vehicle with an attached trailer of an overall length of 20 feet,
including load, to stop or park the vehicle for loading or unloading on those
portions of streets in the no truck parking area described as follows:
 
North Dewey Street, from Fourth Street to Sixth Street
South Dewey and South Jeffers Streets, from First Street to Leota Street
 
(Prior Code, § 50-244) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.15 PARKING TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No motor carrier shall stop or park a truck tractor, semi-trailer, common
carrier or contract carrier on or in any residential street or alley, except in
compliance with traffic control devices, and except when making a pickup or
delivery, and no such vehicle shall use or employ any portion of the parking
space in the residential districts of the municipality, except while making a
pickup or delivery. Definitions found in Neb. RS 75-302 shall apply to the
terms used herein.
(Prior Code, § 50-245) (Ord. 3134, § 1, 9-2-1997)
§ 76.16 OIL TANKERS, GASOLINE TRANSPORTS AND TANK TRUCKS.
   No oil tanker, gasoline transport or tank truck transporting inflammable
liquids shall park or stop for any period of time within the limits of any
street or alley of the city except to load or unload its cargo in a safe and
expeditious manner; provided that drivers of oil tankers, gasoline transports
or tank trucks may stop or park their vehicles 1 time while enroute through the
city on arterial streets or highways therein for a period of time not more than
30 minutes for rest and meals; and provided further that, in case of breakdown
or stalling on account of exhaustion of its motor fuel on any of the streets,
the stopping of the disabled vehicle for the reasonable time necessary to
remove the vehicle to the next point where repairs can be made or to meet the
emergency shall not be a violation of this section. No oil tanker, gasoline
transport or tank truck, whether containing any inflammable materials or not,
shall park or stop for any period of time on any private premises within the
city, save and except for purposes of loading or unloading, or breakdowns,
unless the private premises are situated outside the fire limits and are used
and employed exclusively for the conduct of the wholesale or retail petroleum
business with ample facilities for parking oil tankers and gasoline transports
or tank trucks.
(Prior Code, § 50-246) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.17 PARKING TRUCK WITH END GATE DOWN.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, truck tractor or semi-
trailer, regardless of length of the vehicle, to park the vehicle with the end
gate of the vehicle down and extended beyond the body of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 50-247) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.18 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter or
as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic control device.
(Prior Code, § 50-248)
§ 76.19 PARKING REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Prior Code, § 50-249)
§ 76.20 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council may authorize the issuance of special courtesy
parking permits. These courtesy parking permits will allow cars to park on city
streets or in city parking lots for an indefinite period of time on the date to
be specified on the permit.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall allow vehicles having a special courtesy
parking permit to violate any other parking provisions, including but not
limited to restrictions on handicapped parking stalls, the position of a
vehicle in a parking space, and the obstruction of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 50-250)
§ 76.21 PARKING OF BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS.
   During the months of November, December, January, February and March of
every calendar year, it shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in
custody or control of the boat or trailer to park or leave standing on the
streets of the city any boat, boat trailer, pontoon or pontoon trailer, except
for the purposes of loading and unloading, and then only for the length of time
necessary to load or unload the boat or trailer.
(Prior Code, § 50-251) (Ord. 2944, § 1, 12-14-1993) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.22 PARKING AND STORING OF RVS (RECREATIONAL VEHICLES).
   No owner, lessee, or bailee, of a recreational vehicle as defined in §
156.003, shall park or store such recreational vehicle within a residential
district, except as follows:
   (A)   Such recreational vehicle shall be licensed, registered, and operable
and maintained in a clean, sanitary state so as not to attract pests or vermin
of any nature, and shall not exceed the maximum width, length or height
permitted by Neb. RS Ch. 60, Article 6, as amended.
   (B)   If such recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied petroleum gas
containers, such containers shall meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce
Commission or the Federal Department of Transportation or the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers, as such standards existed on September 23, 1975.
Further, the valves of such liquefied petroleum gas containers must be closed
when the recreational vehicle is not being readied for immediate use, and in
the event that leakage is detected from such liquefied petroleum gas
containers, immediate corrective action must be taken.
   (C)   At no time shall such parked or stored recreational vehicles be
occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except as
provided in division (D) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be lawful for only nonpaying guests at a residence in a
residential district to occupy one recreational vehicle parked or stored on a
residential property, subject to the provisions of this chapter, for sleeping
purposes only for a period not exceeding 1 week. The total number of days
during which a recreational vehicle may be occupied under this division shall
not exceed 30 days in any calendar year.
   (E)   Such recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in the following
manner:
      (1)   Parking is permitted inside any closed structure, which structure
otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone where
located.
      (2)   Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or in the rear yard
behind a required front yard.
      (3)   Parking is permitted outside within the required front yard area on
a driveway or a hard-surfaced pad adjacent to the driveway for one recreational
vehicle, provided:
         (a)   The recreational vehicle is parked perpendicular to the front
curb.
         (b)   The recreational vehicle is not parked within or obstructing a
public sidewalk space.
         (c)   The recreational vehicle must be at least 10 feet in back of the
front curbing.
      (4)   Parking is permitted upon the public street for a maximum of 72
hours from April through October; however, no such vehicle shall be parked in a
manner that blocks or obstructs the street traffic lane or sidewalk space
located in the public right-of-way. Parking is not permitted upon the public
street from November through March.
   (F)   The City Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant relief from
any of the foregoing provisions in such selected instances as it may deem
appropriate under the circumstances.
(Ord. 4153, § 1, 1-7-2023)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
76.14 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to fine not
to exceed $100.
(Prior Code, § 50-244)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Generally
      
II.   Increased speed limits
      
III.   Decreased speed limits
      
IV.   One-way streets
      
V.   Stops at arterial streets
      
VI.   Weight limitations
      
VII.   Truck routes
      
VIII.   Routes for hazardous material vehicles and oversized vehicles
      
IX.   Official traffic signals
      
X.   No left turn signs
SCHEDULE I. GENERALLY.
   The schedules included within this chapter and
Chapter 78 reflect resolutions passed by the Mayor and City Council, as
authorized by this title. The schedules shall be considered a part of this
title and enforceable when appropriate signs are posted indicating the action
by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 50-311)
SCHEDULE II. INCREASED SPEED LIMITS.
   In accordance with this title, and when properly signposted and when no
special hazard exists, the following maximum speeds are permitted.
   (A)   Twenty-five miles per hour.
 
Dewey Street, between First Street and C Street.
Eugene Avenue, between US Highway 83 and Willow Street.
Front Street, between Elm Street and Silber Street.
Jeffers Street, between Sixth Street and C Street.
 
   (B)   Thirty miles per hour.
 
Fourth Street, between Poplar Street and Belmont Street.
Twelfth Street, between Roosevelt Avenue and Willow Street.
Jeffers Street, between 100 feet north of Rodeo Road and Sixth Street.
Halligan Drive, between Platte Oasis Parkway and 835 feet south and east of
Platte Oasis Parkway.
Halligan Drive, between 350 feet east of Iron Eagle Lane and Newberry Access
Road.
Walker Road, between US Highway 83 and Willow Street.
Walker Road, between 3,300 feet westerly of Newberry Access Road and Newberry
Access Road.
 
   (C)   Thirty-five miles per hour.
Front Street, between Grant Avenue and Elm Street.
Dewey Street, between C Street and 600 feet south of Leota Street.
Halligan Drive, between 835 feet south and east of Platte Oasis Parkway and
1,900 feet east of NPPD Tailrace Canal.
Jeffers Street, between C Street and 600 feet south of Leota Street.
Jeffers Street, between 100 feet north of Rodeo Road and Sixteenth Street.
Philip Avenue, between Tabor Avenue and Bicentennial Avenue.
Rodeo Road, between Willow Street and 500 feet west of Buffalo Bill Avenue.
Walker Road, between Willow Street and Oak Street.
Walker Road, between US Highway 83 and Victoria Lane.
 
   (D)   Forty miles per hour.
 
Fourth Street, between Belmont Avenue and Bicentennial Avenue.
Front Street, between Grant Avenue and the west corporate limits.
Halligan Drive, between 1,900 feet east of the NPPD Tailrace Canal and 350 feet
east of Iron Eagle Lane.
Jeffers Street, between 600 feet south of Leota Street and 1,000 feet south of
Walker Road.
 
   (E)   Forty-five miles per hour.
 
Jeffers Street, between Sixteenth Street and the north corporate limits.
Rodeo Road, between 500 feet west of Buffalo Bill Avenue and the west corporate
limits.
Walker Road, between Oak Street and the west corporate limits.
Walker Road, between Victoria Lane and 3,300 feet westerly of Newberry Access
Road.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-312) (Am. Res. passed 3-19-2013)
SCHEDULE III. DECREASED SPEED LIMITS.
   In accordance with this title, and when properly signposted and when no
special hazard exists, the following maximum speeds are permitted.
   (A)   Fifteen miles per hour.
 
All school zones, as posted.
All city parks.
 
   (B)   Thirty-five miles per hour.
 
Philip Avenue, between Bicentennial Avenue east to Newberry Access Road.
State Farm Road, from Willow Street east 3,950 feet to the corporate limits.
 
   (C)   Forty miles per hour.
 
Fourth Street, from Bicentennial Avenue east to Newberry Access Road.
Newberry Access Road, from 200 feet north of Halligan Drive to State Farm Road.
 
   (D)   Forty-five miles per hour.
 
Newberry Access Road, from Fourth Street to 700 feet north of Philip Avenue.
US Highway 30, from Newberry Access Road east 740 feet.
State Farm Road, from Newberry Access Road west approximately 4,100 feet to the
corporate limits.
 
   (D)   Fifty-five miles per hour.
 
Jeffers Street, from 1,000 feet south of Walker Road to State Farm Road.
Newberry Access road, from 700 feet north of Philip Avenue to 200 feet north of
Halligan Drive.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-313) (Res. passed 9-3-2002; Am. Res. passed 5-6-2003; Am.
Res. passed 2-3-2004; Am. Res. passed 4-6-2004; Am. Res. passed 3-19-2013)
SCHEDULE IV. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   In accordance with this title and when properly posted, traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated upon the follow streets and alleys.
   (A)   Streets.
 
Bailey Avenue, one-way south between Sixth Street and B Street.
Burlington Boulevard, one-way east and one-way west between Welch Avenue and
Bicentennial Avenue.
Dewey Street, one-way north between the South Platte River and Sixth Street.
Jeffers Street, one-way south between A Street to the South Platte River.
 
   (B)   Alleys.
 
Between Fifth and Sixth Streets, one-way west between Bailey Street and
Chestnut Street.
Between Jeffers and Dewey Streets, one-way north between First and Second
Streets.
 
   (C)   Intersections.
 
The east leg fo the "Y" intersection of Holiday Frontage Road at Eugene Avenue,
one-way north.
The southwest leg of the "Y" intersection of Holiday Frontage Road at Eugene
Avenue, one-way south.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-314) (Res. passed 11-19-1996; Am. Res. passed 3-19-2013)
SCHEDULE V. STOPS AT ARTERIAL STREETS.
   (A)   Stop signs shall be installed in accordance with the major street plan
of the city’s comprehensive plan. When signs are erected to give notice
thereof, drivers of vehicles shall either stop or obey traffic control signals
at every intersection.
   (B)   Stop signs shall be installed as follows.
Third Street at Ash Street.
Fourth Street from Buffalo to County Road.
Fifth Street at Ash Street.
Eighth Street from Jeffers Street to Bryan Avenue.
Ninth Street from Jeffers Street to Buffalo.
12th Street from Poplar Street to Buffalo.
14th Street from Adams Street to Buffalo.
A Street from Dixie to Jefferson.
Adams Street from 12th Street to 14th Street.
Ash Street at Second Street.
B Street from Carr Avenue to County Road.
Bryan Avenue from Fourth Street to Philip Avenue.
Buffalo Bill Avenue from 12th Street to Phillip Avenue.
Carr Avenue from A Street to B Street. Dewey Street.
E Street from Bare Avenue to Bryant.
Eastman Avenue at Second Street.
Front Street from Buffalo to Poplar Street.
Jeffers Street.
Jefferson from A Street to Front Street.
Philip Avenue from Buffalo to Welch Street.
Poplar Street from Fourth Street to 12th Street.
Sheridan from 12th Street to 19th Street.
Silber Avenue at Sixth Street.
Silber Avenue at Tenth Street.
 
Stop Southbound Holiday Frontage Road at Eugene Avenue.
Walnut Street at Second Street.
Willow Street from 12th Street to Leota Street.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-317) (Res. passed 11-19-1996)
SCHEDULE VI. WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
any motor vehicle with a carrying capacity in excess of 8 tons upon any streets
and alleys within the city except the following designated streets.
 
Fourth Street, between Jeffers Street and the east city limits.
Dewey Street, between First Street and the south city limits.
Front Street, between Poplar Street and the west city limits.
Jeffers Street, between the north city limits and the south city limits.
Rodeo Road, between Jeffers Street and the west city limits.
State Link L-56G and East Twelfth Street from State Link L-56G to Jeffers
Street.
 
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the motor vehicles with
destinations or terminals within the city from proceeding to or returning from
the destinations or terminals.
(Prior Code, § 50-318) (Am. Res. passed 12-2-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VII. TRUCK ROUTES.
   In accordance with this title, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the following truck routes are established.
 
Through truck traffic shall follow Highways 30 and 83 through the city.
State Link L-56G and East Fourth Street from State Link L-56G to Jeffers
Street.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-319) (Am. Res. passed 12-2-2014)
SCHEDULE VIII. ROUTES FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL VEHICLES AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES.
   In accordance with this title, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the following routes for hazardous materials vehicles and oversized
vehicles (combines, mobile homes and modular homes) are established.
 
Highways 30 and 83 through the city.
Hazardous materials are defined in 49 C.F.R. parts 100—177.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-320)
SCHEDULE IX. OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   The following list designates official traffic signals on the state highway
system and city system. Any additional traffic signals may be designated by
resolution passed by the Council. The official stop sign map also designates
all official traffic signals, and is kept updated in the City Engineer’s office
of City Hall.
US Highway 83 and State Farm Road.
US Highway 83 and Walker Road.
US Highway 83 and Eugene Avenue.
US Highway 83 and Halligan Drive.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and Leota Street.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and Francis Street.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and William Avenue.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and Philip Avenue.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and E Street.
US Highway 83 (South Dewey Street) and B Street.
US Highway 83 (South Jeffers Street) and B Street.
US Highway 83 (South Jeffers Street) and E Street.
US Highway 83 (South Jeffers Street) and Philip Avenue.
US Highway 83 (South Jeffers Street) and Francis Street.
US Highway 83 (South Jeffers Street) and Leota Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Second Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Third Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Fourth Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Fifth Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Ninth Street.
US Highway 83 (North Jeffers Street) and Highway 30 (Twelfth Street).
US Highway 30 (Rodeo Road) and Willow Street.
US Highway 30 (Rodeo Road) and Adams Avenue.
US Highway 30 (Rodeo Road) and Buffalo Bill Avenue.
 
Fourth Street and Dewey Street.
Fourth Street and Bailey Street.
Fourth Street and Chestnut Street.
Fourth Street and Poplar Street.
Philip Avenue and Cottonwood Street.
Willow Street and Fourth Street.
Willow Street and Ninth Street.
Willow Street and B Street.
Willow Street and Philip Avenue.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-321) (Am. Ord. 3661, § 1, 7-18-2006; Am. Res, passed 3-19-
2013)
SCHEDULE X. NO LEFT TURN SIGNS.
 
Northbound Jeffers Street at First Street
Jeffers Street and Sixth Street, all directions
Jeffers Street and Seventh Street, all directions
Poplar Street and Sixth Street, all directions
Poplar Street and Seventh Street, all directions
Willow Street and Fifth Street, all directions
Willow Street and Eighth Street, all directions
 
(Prior Code, § 50-322) (Am. Res. passed 3-19-2013)
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
General Provisions
   
78.01   Regulation of parking
Parking Schedules
   
I.   Prohibited parking zones
   
II.   Limited parking zones
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 78.01 REGULATION OF PARKING.
   The governing body may, by resolution of the governing body, regulate
parking in the city. Persons shall obey the parking regulations adopted by the
governing body of the city, by resolution, unless otherwise directed by traffic
or police officer, subject to exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle. The schedules set forth in this chapter shall constitute the
regulation of parking by the governing body of the city.
(Ord. 3759, passed 4-7-2009)
PARKING SCHEDULES
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with this title and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall, at any time, park a vehicle upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Third Street from Welch Avenue 1 block west, north side.
Fourth Street at Jeffers Street intersection, ½ block west and ½ block east,
north side.
Fourth Street from Jeffers Street to Ash Street, south side.
Fourth Street from Willow Street to a ½ block east of Sycamore Street, north
side.
Fourth Street from Chestnut Street to 90 feet east, both sides.
Fourth Street between Cottonwood Street and east city limits, both sides.
Fourth Street from Mills Avenue to Buffalo Bill Avenue, both sides.
Fourth Street from Buffalo Bill Avenue west 180 feet, south side.
Fifth Street from Bailey Avenue west to west side of 217 East Fifth Street,
north side.
Sixth Street, East, north side from the west right-of-way line of Tabor Avenue
thence west 132 feet.
Sixth Street from Jeffers Street east 100 feet, north side.
Sixth Street from Jeffers Street west ½ block and east ½ block, south side.
Twelfth Street from Jeffers Street east to city limits, both sides.
Sixteenth Street from Jeffers Street west to Sycamore Street, both sides. Also;
Gail Wicks Drive from Sycamore Street to Vine Street, both sides.
A Street from Buffalo Bill Avenue west to Lakeview Boulevard, both sides.
A Street from Willow Street east to Vine Street, both sides.
A Street from Willow Street to Ash Street, south side.
Ash Street from 300 feet north of Thirteenth Street to Eighteenth Street, west
side.
B Street from Chestnut Street east 55 feet, south side.
B Street from Cottonwood Street approximately 300 feet east, south side.
B Street from Vine Street to Bailey Avenue, both sides.
B Street at Willow Street intersection, ½ block east and ½ block west, both
sides.
Bailey Avenue between A Street and B Street, both sides.
Bryan Avenue from Philip Avenue to 120 feet south, east side.
Bryan Avenue from Philip Avenue to 150 feet south of Linda Court, west side.
Buffalo Bill Avenue from Scouts Rest Ranch Road to the alley between Third
Street and Fourth Street, both sides.
Business Park Drive from State Farm Road to dead-end north of Iron Trail Drive,
both sides.
C Street between Poplar and Silber 30 feet east and 84 feet west of alley,
south side.
C Street between Jeffers Street and Dewey Street between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., both sides.
Centennial Park from the intersection of Francis Street and Union Avenue for 50
feet south on both sides of Union Avenue, both sides.
Centennial Park Road from Leota Street and Oak Street south and west 150 feet,
north and south sides.
Charlie Evans Drive from the intersection of Scout Rest Ranch Road to the
intersection of Buffalo Bill Avenue, both sides.
Chestnut Street between Second Street and Third Street, west side.
Chestnut Street south of Francis Street for 1 block, both sides.
Cody Park starting at the intersection of Poplar Street extended through Cody
Park and proceeding west on the park road south of the men-women softball
complex 600 feet on both sides of the park road.
Commerce Drive from Newberry Access Road east to end of Commerce Drive, both
sides.
Cottonwood Street between Philip Avenue and Francis Street, both sides.
Custer Avenue between Rodeo Road and Thirteenth Street, both sides.
Dewey Street between A Street and south city limits, both sides.
E Street from Willow Street to Sycamore Street, south side.
Emory Avenue from West Ninth Street north to Rodeo Road, west side.
Eugene Avenue from Willow Street to Highway 83, both sides.
Francis Street from Willow Street to Oak Street, south side.
Francis Street from Ash Street to approximately 540 feet west of Oak Street,
north side.
Francis Street from Jeffers Street to Tabor Avenue, both sides.
Francis Street from McDonald Road to 50 feet east of Union Avenue, both sides.
Front Street from Ash Street to west city limits, both sides.
Grant Avenue between Second Street and Third Street, west side.
Halligan Drive from Platte Oasis Parkway to Newberry Access Road.
Iron Trail Drive from Twin Rivers Road to Business Park Drive, both sides.
Jeffers Street between north city limits and south city limits, both sides.
Jeffers Street from the South Platte River to South River Road.
Jefferson Avenue from the 90 feet south of Alpha Street north to West Second
Street, east side.
Lakeview Boulevard, north and south bound lanes, from Front Street to Philip
Avenue, both sides.
Leota Street from Oak Street to the East 700 block of Leota, both sides.
McDonald Road south of Sunset Drive at crosswalk light, 40 feet north and south
of crosswalk, both sides.
Newberry Access Road from Commerce Drive south to the intersection of State
Farm Road, both sides.
Oak Street at Francis Street intersection 50 feet north and south, both sides.
Pacific Street from Second Street to Front Street, both sides.
Philip Avenue from Vine Street to east city limits, both sides.
Philip Avenue, approximately 130 feet east and west from Willow Street right-
of-way lines on Philip Avenue to enable the intersection to function with left
turn bays.
Platte Oasis Parkway from Highway 83 east.
Poplar Street beneath the viaduct from Front Street thence south approximately
140 feet, both sides.
Poplar Street from Philip Avenue to Francis Street, west side.
Rodeo Road between Jeffers Street and west city limits, both sides.
Sheridan Avenue from A Street to Short Street, west side.
Silber Avenue from C Street to ½ block north, west side.
South Parkway Drive from State Farm Road north to the temporary cul-de-sac,
both sides.
South River Road from Jeffers Street to the west city limits.
State Farm Road at Hwy 83 intersection; east and west to city limits, both
sides.
State Farm Road at Newberry Access Road west to city limits, both sides.
Sycamore Street, from ½ block north of Thirteenth Street to Eighteenth Street,
east side only.
Twin Rivers Road from State Farm Road to dead-end north of Iron Trail Drive,
both sides.
Walker Road from Newberry Access Road west approximately 2,100 feet (to 2743
East Walker Road), both sides.
Welch Avenue from Second Street to Fourth Street, east side.
Willow Street from Rodeo Road Avenue to 50 feet south of Leota Street, both
sides.
Willow Street Loop just south of Front Street under the Willow Viaduct, both
sides.
Willow Street Loop just south of West Seventh Street under the Willow Viaduct,
both sides.
On the hammerhead alleys north of Fifth Street and Seventh Street beneath the
Willow Street Viaduct.
College Drive between Willow Street and South Parkway, both sides.
Pioneer Drive from Lakeview Boulevard to West A Street, both sides.
NO PARKING – TRUCKS ONLY
Bryan Avenue; truck parking prohibited from 120 feet south of Philip Avenue to
150 feet south of Linda Court, east side.
Poplar Street; truck parking prohibited from Philip Avenue to Francis Street,
east side.
NO PARKING AT THE FOLLOWING LOCATIONS FOR BUS PARKING
On northbound Ash Street beginning 15 feet south of the south right-of-way line
of Fourth Street, thence south 72 feet.
On northbound McDonald Road beginning 15 feet north of the centerline of
Cornhusker Circle Drive extended eastward, thence north 75 feet.
On southbound South Chestnut Street beginning 93 feet north of the north right-
of-way line of East B Street, thence north 79 feet.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-316) (Res. passed 10-17-1995; Am. Res. passed 7-16-1996; Am.
Res. passed 6-19-2001; Am. Res. passed 9-18-2001; Am. Res. passed 11-6-2001;
Am. Res. passed 2-5-2002; Am. Res. passed 5-7-2002; Am. Res. passed 7-2-2002;
Am. Res. passed 7-1-2003; Am. Res. passed 9-2-2003; Am. Res. passed 10-7-2003;
Am. Res. passed 2-3-2004; Am. Res. passed 9-7-2004; Am. Res. passed 4-5-2005;
Am. Res. passed 3-6-2012; Am. Res. passed 7-17-2012; Am. Res. passed 1-15-
2013; Am. Res. passed 3-19-2013; Am. Res. passed 2-18-2014; Am. Res. passed 5-
20-2014; Am. Res. passed 6-2-2015; Am. Res. passed 9-20-2016; Am. Res. passed
11-1-2016; Am. Res. passed 4-18- 2017; Am. Res. passed 12-5-2017; Am. Res.
passed 2-16-2021; Am. Res. passed 5-4-2021; Am. Res. passed 4-19-2022; Am. Res.
passed 3-5-2024; Am. Res. passed 3-19-2024)
SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with this title, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle longer than the posted time limit, on
any day except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of
the streets or parts of streets as follows:
   (A)   Thirty-minute parking zones: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
Third Street from Dewey Street west ½ block, both sides.
Vine Street from Third Street to Fourth Street, west side and from alley north
to Fourth Street, east side.
 
   (B)   Two-hour parking zones: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
East C Street from east right-of-way of Dewey Street to the west right-of-way
of Bailey Avenue, both sides.
First Street from Dewey Street east ½ block, both sides and west 1 block (cul-
de-sac).
Second Street from Jeffers Street to Bailey Avenue, south side.
Second Street from Vine Street to ½ block east of Dewey Street, north side.
Second Street from Vine Street to ½ block east, south side.
Third Street from Jeffers Street to Chestnut Street, both sides; excluding the
30 minute parking zones from Dewey Street west ½ block on both sides.
Third Street from Vine Street to Sycamore Street, north side.
Fourth Street from Jeffers Street starting from the east side of the first
parking stall to Chestnut Street, south side.
Fourth Street from ½ block east of Jeffers Street to Chestnut Street, north
side.
Fourth Street at Vine Street ½ block east and west, north side.
Fifth Street from Sycamore Street to Chestnut Street, both sides.
Sixth Street from ½ block west of Vine Street to Dewey Street on north side
(excluding the ½ block east of Jeffers Street) and from Vine Street to Bailey
Street on south side (excluding the ½ block west and ½ block east of Jeffers).
B Street from Silber Avenue west, 2 stalls only, north side.
Bailey Street from First Street to Sixth Street, both sides.
C Street east of Jeffers Street intersection, south side full block and north
side west ½ block.
Chestnut Street from B Street ½ block north, east side.
Chestnut Street from Fifth Street to Sixth Street, west side.
Dewey Street from First Street to Sixth Street, both sides.
Francis Street between Ash Street and Willow Street, north side.
Silber Avenue between Burlington Boulevard and C Street, both sides.
Vine Street between Third Street and alley south, west side.
Vine Street from Fifth Street to ½ block north of Sixth Street, west side.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 3, located south of Sixth Street and west
of Bailey Street. (Excluding the east 2 rows.)
Public parking lot designated as Lot 4, located north of Sixth Street between
Chestnut Street and Jeffers Street Viaduct; excluding the 8 hour parking along
Sixth Street.
 
   (C)   Four-hour parking zones: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
Sixth Street from Chestnut Street to Bailey Avenue, south side.
Sixth Street from Chestnut Street to Dewey Street, north side.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 1, located north of Fifth Street and west
of Jeffers Street.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 2, located north side of Fourth Street and
east of Jeffers Street.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 3, located south of Sixth Street and west
of Bailey Street; the east 2 rows only.
 
   (D)   Eight-hour parking zones: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
Public parking lot designated as Lot 4, located north of Sixth Street between
Chestnut Street and Jeffers Street Viaduct; the south row of parking lot (north
of Sixth Street).
 
   (E)   Twenty-four hour parking zones.
 
Public parking lot designated as Lot 5, located between Dewey Street and
Chestnut Street, north of Front Street.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 6, located between Second Street and A
Street, and Bailey Avenue and Chestnut Street. South Row Only.
 
   (F)   Loading zones.
 
Public parking lot designated as Lot 2, located north side of Fourth Street and
east of Jeffers Street; the first parking stall south of the handicapped stall
in the northeast corner of the lot.
Fifth Street between 20 feet and 40 feet west of Bailey Avenue, north side.
Sixth Street between Jeffers Street and Vine Street, north side (111 West
Sixth).
Chestnut Street between Fifth Street and Sixth Street, west side from alley
south ¼ block.
Chestnut Street from Fifth Street south ¼ block, east side.
 
   (G)   Fifteen minute loading zones: 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Buffalo School: Cody Avenue between Seventeenth Street and ½ block south of
Sixteenth Street, west side.
Cody School: Carr Avenue south of Second Street, west side. First Street west
of Carr Avenue, north side. Also; Second Street west of Carr Avenue, south
side.
Jefferson School: Third Street between Poplar Street and Silber Avenue, south
side.
Lincoln School: Vine Street from 121 feet to 162 feet south of Tenth Street,
west side. Ninth Street from Sycamore Street east 126 feet, north side.
Madison Middle School: Fourteenth Street east of Madison Avenue, north side.
McDonald School: McDonald Road between Birchwood Road and Grande Avenue, east
side.
Our Redeemer Lutheran School: E Street between 235 feet and 358 feet west of
McCabe Avenue, north side.
Washington School: Third Street between Maple and Elm, south side. Also: Second
Street between Maple and Elm, north side.
 
   (H)   No parking: 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
First Street from Jeffers Street (cul-de-sac) to Dewey Street, both sides;
excluding parking south of 102 North Dewey.
Second Street from Vine Street to Chestnut Street, both sides.
Third Street from Jeffers Street to Chestnut Street, both sides.
Fourth Street from Sycamore Street to Chestnut Street, both sides
Fifth Street from Vine Street to Chestnut Street, both sides
Sixth Street from Vine Street to Chestnut Street, both sides
A Street between Dewey Street and Chestnut Street, both sides.
Bailey Avenue from Sixth Street to A Street, both sides.
Chestnut Street between Sixth Street to A Street, both sides
Dewey Street from Sixth Street to First Street, both sides.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 1, located north of Fifth Street and west
of Jeffers Street; except north single row parking.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 2, located north side of Fourth Street and
east of Jeffers Street; except center double row parking.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 3, located south of Sixth Street and west
of Bailey Avenue.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 4, located north of Sixth Street between
Chestnut Street and Jeffers Street Viaduct.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 6, located between Second Street and A
Street, and Bailey Avenue and Chestnut Street.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 7, located between Jeffers Street and Vine
Street on the south side of Fifth Street.
Public parking lot designated as Lot 8, located south of Sixth Street and east
of Jeffers Street.
Vine Street between Sixth Street and First Street, both sides.
 
   (I)   No parking: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., for Sheriff's use only (loading
and unloading of inmates).
 
Fourth Street from Jeffers Street east first parking stall, south side.
 
   (J)   No parking: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., for law officers' use only.
 
Vine Street from Third Street south to alley, east side.
 
   (K)   No parking: 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days.
 
B Street from Maple Street ½ block east and west, both sides.
 
(Prior Code, § 50-317) (Res. passed 1-31-1994; Am. Res. passed 7-6-1999; Am.
Res. passed 9-2-2003; Am. Res. passed 9-2-2003; Am. Res. passed 5-3-2005; Am.
Res. passed 8-2-2005; Am. Res. passed 4-18-2006; Am. Res. passed 2-16-2010; Am.
Res. passed 9-21-2010; Am. Res. passed 3-19- 2013; Am. Res. passed 5-20-2014;
Am. Res. passed 11-15-2016; Am. Res. passed 6-5-2018; Am. Res. passed 2-16-
2021; Am. Res. passed 5-4-2021; Am. Res. passed 4-19-2022)
CHAPTER 79: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES
Section
   
79.01   Definitions
   
79.02   Operation of all-terrain vehicles prohibited
   
79.03   Operation of utility-type vehicles on streets and highways
   
79.04   Utility-type vehicle; equipment required
   
79.05   Modification of utility-type vehicle prohibited
   
79.06   Registration
   
79.07   Operation of utility-type vehicle on state highway prohibited; limited
crossing permitted
   
79.08   Utility-type vehicle; accident; report required
   
79.09   Operation of all-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles in parades
 
   
79.99   Penalty
§ 79.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which is (a) 50
inches or less in width; (b) has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less; (c)
travels on 3 or more non-highway tires; (d) is designed for operator use only
with no passengers or is specifically designed by the original manufacturer for
the operator and 1 passenger.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A road or street, including the entire area within the right-
of-way, which has been designated a part of the state highway system.
   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which (a) is 74
inches in width or less; (b) is not more than 180 inches, including the bumper,
in length; (c) has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and (d) travels on 4
or more non-highway tires. UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE does not include all-terrain
vehicles, golf car vehicles, or low-speed vehicles.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,355
§ 79.02 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle upon
any street, highway, or state highway within the corporate limits of the city
or upon any publicly owned parking lot or other publicly owned property within
the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
§ 79.03 OPERATION OF UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   A utility-type vehicle may be operated on streets and highways (excluding
state highways) within the corporate limits of the city, in accordance with the
following operating requirements:
   (A)   Operation occurs only between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
   (B)   The headlight and taillight of the vehicle shall be on.
   (C)   The vehicle shall be equipped with brake and turn signals in good
working order.
   (D)   The vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety flag which extends
not less than 5 feet above the ground attached to the rear of the vehicle, said
bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than
30 square inches and shall be day-glow in color.
   (E)   The total number of persons on the utility-type vehicle, including the
operator and all passengers, shall not exceed the seating capacity as designed
by the manufacturer of the utility-type vehicle.
   (F)   The utility-type vehicle shall have a registration plate with
validation decal issued by the police division as set forth in § 79.06.
   (G)   Any person operating a utility-type vehicle as authorized in this
section:
      (1)   Shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of 30 miles per
hour and shall observe posted speed limits if lower than 30 miles per hour;
      (2)   Shall have a valid Class O operator's license or a farm permit as
provided for in Neb. RS 60-4,126;
      (3)   Shall be 18 years of age or older;
      (4)   Shall obey all applicable state and local traffic laws, ordinances,
and regulations;
      (5)   Shall properly utilize seatbelts and all provided safety equipment
in the utility type vehicle;
      (6)   Shall have liability insurance coverage for the utility-type
vehicle while operating the utility-type vehicle on a street or highway in
accordance with the State of Nebraska's Financial Responsibility Law; and
      (7)   Shall provide proof of insurance coverage to any peace officer
requesting such proof within 5 days of such request.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
§ 79.04 UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE; EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   Every utility-type vehicle shall be equipped with:
   (A)   A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
   (B)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition;
   (C)   A United States Forest Service-qualified spark arrester; and
   (D)   A rearview mirror.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,358
§ 79.05 MODIFICATION OF UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Equip the exhaust system of a utility-type vehicle with a cutout,
bypass or similar device;
   (B)   Operate a utility-type vehicle with an exhaust system so modified; and
   (C)   Operate a utility-type vehicle with the spark arrester removed or
modified, except for use in a closed-course competition event.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,359
§ 79.06 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It shall be an offense for any person to operate any utility-type
vehicle within the city unless;
      (1)   The utility-type vehicle has passed an inspection by the police
division;
      (2)   The owner has demonstrated proof of insurance to the police
division; and
      (3)   The owner has obtained from the police division a registration
plate with validation decal for the current year affixed to the plate. The
registration plate with validation decal for the current year must be affixed
to the rear of the utility-type vehicle in a conspicuous place. Any person
obtaining a registration plate and/or current year validation decal to operate
a utility-type vehicle within the city shall pay a fee to the city as set forth
in the City of North Platte's Fee Schedule. No registration plate or validation
decal fee shall be assessed for registration of any city-owned utility-type
vehicle.
   (B)   All registrations issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
effective from January 1 to December 31, and all registrations shall expire
December 31 of the year in which they were issued unless the registration is
issued after December 1 in which case the registration will expire on the
second December 31 following the date of issue.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to suspend or revoke the registration or a
utility-type vehicle within the city for violation of any provision of this
chapter.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
§ 79.07 OPERATION OF UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE ON STATE HIGHWAY PROHIBITED; LIMITED
CROSSING PERMITTED.
   A utility-type vehicle shall not be operated on any state highway, and the
crossing of any state highway shall only be permitted if:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the state highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
   (B)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or the roadway of the state highway;
   (C)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
   (D)   The crossing is made only at an intersection of such state highway
with another street or highway; and
   (E)   Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when crossing
is made.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
§ 79.08 UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE; ACCIDENT; REPORT REQUIRED.
   If an accident results in the death of any person, the injury of any person
which requires treatment of the person by a physician, or property damage in
the amount of $1,500 or more, the operator of each utility-type vehicle
involved in the accident shall give notice of the accident in the same manner
as provided by Neb. RS 60-699.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,361
§ 79.09 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES IN PARADES.
   All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles may be operated on streets
and highways without complying with this chapter while in parades which have
been authorized by the State of Nebraska, any department, board, commission or
political subdivision of the State of Nebraska.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
§ 79.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense. A subsequent violation of any
aforementioned provision shall be punished by a fine of $250 to $500. In
addition to any penalties for violation hereof, the Police Department may
impound any all-terrain or utility-type vehicle when operated in violation of
Nebraska law or this Code.
(Ord. 4080, § 2, 2-1-2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
      
92.   LIBRARY
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
96.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Interfering with enforcement; obstructing enforcement officer
   
90.03   Enforcement of animal control ordinances
   
90.04   Care of animals
   
90.05   Dogs and cats running at large
   
90.06   Excessive animal noise
   
90.07   Limitation on number of dogs and cats
   
90.08   Dangerous animals; prohibited animals in residential areas
   
90.09   Control of animals in public parks
   
90.10   Horses and other large domestic animals in public parks
   
90.11   Animal abuse
   
90.12   Animal fighting
   
90.13   Restrictions on sale of fowl
   
90.14   Killing, injuring or poisoning domestic animals
   
90.15   Authority to rescue animals confined in vehicle
   
90.16   Abandonment, neglect and mistreatment
   
90.17   (Reserved)
   
90.18   Disposition of impounded animals
   
90.19   Animal bites and disease control
   
90.20   Permit for elimination of pests
   
90.21   Allowing animal to run at large; tethering animal on public way;
distance of animals from residences
   
90.22   Commercial animal establishments
   
90.23   Rabies vaccination for dogs and cats
   
90.24   Adoption fee and procedure; impoundment or euthanasia fees; disposition
of fees
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation, see
Chapter 93 of this code
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate animals, see Neb. RS 16-206, 16-23516-237
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE CARE. Normal and prudent attention to the needs of an animal,
including that care which is normally necessary to maintain good health in a
specific species of animal.
   ADEQUATE CONTROL. That control necessary to restrain or govern an animal so
that the animal does not injure or pose a threat to itself, any person, any
other animal or property.
   ADEQUATE FOOD. Wholesome foodstuffs suitable for the species provided at
suitable intervals in a sanitary manner in quantities sufficient to maintain
good health in an animal considering its age and condition.
   ADEQUATE HEALTH CARE. The provision to each healthy animal of all
immunizations and preventive care required to maintain good health and space
adequate to allow the animal rest and exercise sufficient to maintain good
health, and the provision to each sick, diseased or injured animal of necessary
veterinary care or humane death.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER. A structurally sound, properly ventilated, sanitary and
weatherproof shelter for the species, condition and age of the animal which
provides access to shade from direct sunlight and regress from exposure to
inclement weather conditions.
   ADEQUATE WATER. A constant access to or access at suitable intervals to a
supply of clean, fresh, potable water provided in a sanitary manner suitable
for the species, condition and age of the animal in sufficient amounts to
maintain good health in the animal.
   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than a human,
including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal which is tame or domesticated or adapted
to live in intimate association with humans, such as a pet.
      (2)   FARM ANIMAL. An animal raised on a farm or ranch and used or
intended for use in farm or ranch production or as food or fiber.
      (3)   FOWL. Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female,
singular or plural.
      (4)   LARGE ANIMAL. Any swine, bovine, goat, sheep or beast of burden, or
any other domestic or wild animal of similar or larger size.
      (5)   SMALL ANIMAL. Any animal not within the definition of large animal,
but including all dogs without reference to size.
      (6)   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which is predominantly free-roaming as
opposed to domesticated.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. The facilities operated by the city or its authorized agents
for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of
this chapter or state law.
   CAT. Any domestic feline animal (Felis domesticus), male or female, sexed or
neutered.
   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, grooming shop, animal
exhibit, rodeo, auction, riding school, stable, carriage horse service,
cattery, kennel, patrol, sentry or guard dog service, animal trainer or
business keeping animals in stock for retail or wholesale trade or any
establishment performing 1 or more of the principal activities of the
establishments.
   DOG. Any domestic canine animal (Canis familiaris), male or female, sexed or
neutered. Any cross or hybrid which is part dog and part wild animal shall be
considered a wild animal for the purposes of this chapter.
   HARBOR. To feed or shelter an animal at the same location for 3 or more
consecutive days.
   HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association’s Committee on
Euthanasia.
   OFFICER. Any duly appointed police officer, Humane Officer or Animal Control
Officer of the city.
   OWNER. In addition to its ordinary meaning, also means any person who keeps
or harbors an animal or professes to be owning, keeping or harboring an animal.
   PESTS. Birds, rabbits or rodents which damage property or have an adverse
effect on the public health.
   PRIMARY ENCLOSURE. Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a
limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment, pool or
hutch.
   PRIVATE ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility which is used to house or contain dogs
or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated or maintained by an incorporated
humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty
to animals or other non-profit organization devoted to the welfare, protection
and humane treatment of the animals.
   SANITARY. Clean and free from infectious or deleterious influences.
   VETERINARIAN. A person licensed by the state to engage in the practice of
veterinary medicine.
   VETERINARY MEDICAL CARE FACILITY. A facility which has the primary function
of providing medical care for animals and is operated by a currently licensed
veterinarian.
(Prior Code, § 8-1)
§ 90.02 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT; OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere
with any police officer or Animal Control Officer who is performing any duty
enjoined upon him or her by the provisions of this chapter, or to break open or
in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel or advise the breaking open
of the animal shelter, any ambulance wagon or other vehicle used for the
collecting or conveying of dogs to the shelter. Any person who violates this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for
in §
90.99(A)(3).
(Prior Code, § 8-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 ENFORCEMENT OF ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officers to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the duty of the police of the city to assist the
animal control officers with their enforcement efforts.
   (B)   An officer may seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, any animals found in violation of the provisions of this chapter
within this city, whether such animal shall be in the immediate presence of its
owner or custodian or otherwise. If an owner or keeper is present and able to
take control of the animal in lieu of impoundment, a summons and complaint may
be issued to that person and the person may retain possession of the animal.
   (C)   Any animals seized or impounded, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, or his designee, be
examined and/or treated by a licensed veterinarian. If it is determined by a
veterinarian acting for the authority that such animal is diseased or disabled
beyond any useful purpose, the animal shall immediately become the property of
the city to be humanely disposed of as the Chief of Police, or his designee,
deems appropriate. Costs of examination, treatment, euthanasia, and/or other
care shall be the responsibility of the person who was the owner at the time of
seizure or impoundment.
   (D)   If an officer reasonably believes that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the officer is hereby authorized and empowered to seek a search
warrant from the appropriate court to enable the officer to enter private
property in order to inspect, care for, or impound animals found to be in
violation of this chapter.
   (E)   Whenever any animal is impounded or otherwise confined by authority of
this chapter, the Police Department may require that all fees, costs and
expenses incurred by the city in impounding or otherwise confining the animal
be paid prior to release of the animal to its owner or keeper. No animal shall
be released until it is shown that the animal is currently vaccinated against
rabies.
   (F)   The officer, within 24 hours of taking custody of an animal under this
chapter, shall take reasonable steps to provide written notice of the
impoundment to the owner of the animal by either posting a notice of the
impoundment at the location where the animal was seized or by delivering a copy
of such notice to a person of suitable age on the owner's property. If the
owner's identity is not known, then the officer is not required to take any
other steps except post notice in the location of the impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 8-3) (Am. Ord. 3768, passed 8-4-2009; Am. Ord. 4168, passed 6-4-
2024)
§ 90.04 CARE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping,
harboring or otherwise in possession or control of any animal to fail to
provide any or all of the following to the animal:
      (1)   Adequate care;
      (2)   Adequate control;
      (3)   Adequate food;
      (4)   Adequate health care;
      (5)   Adequate shelter; or
      (6)   Adequate water.
   (B)   Responsibility of parents for animals owned by minors. Any parent,
guardian or other person having custody of a minor child is deemed legally and
criminally responsible for the adequate care of any animal owned by, in the
control of or harbored by that minor child.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(3).
(Prior Code, § 8-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring
any dog to permit, suffer or allow the dog to run at large within the city.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, any dog shall be deemed to have
been permitted, suffered or allowed by its owner, keeper or harborer to run at
large when outside of the property of the owner, keeper or harborer and not
effectively physically restrained on a chain or leash or behind a suitable
fence or other proper method of physical restraint from which it cannot escape,
provided, however, that the governing body of the city may, by resolution,
designate from time-to-time, areas within the city within which dogs may be
allowed to run outside of the property of its owner, keeper or harborer and not
physically restrained on a chain or leash or behind a suitable fence or other
proper method of physical restraint.
   (B)   A legally blind person using a seeing eye dog or a deaf person using a
hearing dog in the customary manner shall be deemed to be in compliance with
this section.
   (C)   Official use of dogs by any governmental unit shall be deemed in
compliance with this section.
   (D)   If an officer finds a dog running at large in violation of this
section, the officer has the authority to pick up the animal and transport it
to the animal shelter or other city-designated place of impoundment. The owner
or person claiming the animal shall pay an impoundment fee to the city through
the Police Department in addition to the fees as provided for in §
90.18(E).
   (E)   Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog found to be running at
large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished, in addition to the
impoundment fees, as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
   (F)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the owner,
keeper or person harboring any female dog or cat shall, during the period that
the animal is in heat or in state of estrus, keep it securely confined within
an area secure from access by male dogs and cats running at large, except when
out upon the person’s premises briefly for toilet purposes while on a leash or
otherwise effectively physically restrained and under supervision. Any person
found in violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
   (G)   (1)   In the case of cats, it shall be unlawful for any person owning,
keeping or harboring any cat to permit, suffer or allow the cat to run at large
within the city so that the cat poses a nuisance to the neighbors or the public
welfare. A cat which poses a nuisance is one which interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of
property of others, or one which falls within the definitions as set forth in §
95.01.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (G), the term NEIGHBOR shall be
defined as set forth in §
90.06(A)(2).
      (3)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be punished as
provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
      (4)   If a cat is impounded at the animal shelter pursuant to §
90.17(A), the owner or person claiming the animal shall pay an impoundment fee
to the city through the Police Department, in addition to other fees as
provided for in §
90.18(E).
   (H)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring
any dog or cat to allow the animal to injure or destroy any personal or real
property of any description belonging to another person.
      (2)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be punished as
provided for in §
90.99(A)(1). The owner, keeper or person harboring any such dog or cat, in
addition to the person’s usual judgment upon conviction, may be made to be
liable to the person so injured in an amount equal to the value of the damage
so sustained.
(Prior Code, § 8-5) (Am. Ord. 3693, § 1, 6-5-2007) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 EXCESSIVE ANIMAL NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any animal which,
by making excessive noise, disturbs a neighborhood. The following definitions
and conditions shall be applicable to enforcement of this section:
      (1)   The phrase EXCESSIVE NOISE shall mean and include any noise
produced by an animal  which is so loud and continuous as to disturb the peace
and quiet of a neighbor.
      (2)   The term NEIGHBOR shall mean an individual residing in a residence
structure which is within 100 yards of the property on which the animal is kept
or harbored and who does in writing state that he or she will testify under
oath to the animal making excessive noise. Nothing in this division shall be
construed to prohibit an officer from filing a complaint for excessive noise
based on his or her own observations and personal knowledge.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 8-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Maximum number; exceptions. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance
for any person in charge of a residence to keep or allow to be kept more than 4
dogs or cats, or any combination of animals exceeding 4 in number, over the age
of 90 days at the residence, unless the residence or the owner of the dogs and
cats kept there is within 1 or more of the following exceptions:
      (1)   The residence is licensed as a commercial animal establishment; or
      (2)   The owner of the dogs and cats over 90 days of age has applied for
and received a permit to keep dogs and cats in excess of 4 as provided for
under this section and, upon request of any officer, presents for inspection
the permit.
   (B)   Application for permit.
      (1)   Application for a permit as provided for under this section shall
be made in writing to the Animal Control Commission on a form furnished by the
Commission. The application shall state:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner of the dogs or cats;
         (b)   The breed, color, age and sex of the dogs or cats;
         (c)   Whether the dogs or cats are licensed under this chapter;
         (d)   Whether the dogs or cats are neutered, spayed or intact;
         (e)   Such other information as may identify the dogs or cats; and
         (f)   Such other information as the Animal Control Commission may
require.
      (2)   The application shall certify to the information contained in the
application under penalty of law for the willful making of any untrue
statement. The application shall further state, by making and signing the
application, that the applicant consents to an inspection of premises where the
animals are kept. Failure to allow the inspection of premises shall result in
denial of the application.
   (C)   Issuance of permit; revocation; expiration. Upon receipt of an
application for a permit provided for under this section, the Animal Control
Commission or a duly authorized representative shall investigate the premises
and the manner in which the dogs or cats are kept. A permit shall be issued
only if the locating and the keeping of the dogs and cats is, in the opinion of
the Animal Control Commission, such as not to be a health hazard or nuisance to
the surrounding neighborhood. An attempt shall be made as a part of the
application investigation to contact the neighbors, as defined in §
90.06(A)(2), in order to determine if they have any objection to the issuance
of the permit. A permit issued under the provisions of this section may be
revoked by the Animal Control Commission for the violation by the holder of the
permit of any provision of this section or any other applicable provision of
this chapter. All permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be
valid for a period of 2 years of their issuance.
   (D)   Animal Control Commission. An animal control commission is hereby
created, which shall consist of the Chief of Police and 4 members nominated by
the Mayor and approved by a majority vote of all members of the Council. Each
member of the Commission except the Chief of Police shall serve a term of 4
years unless re-appointed, and shall be removable only for good and sufficient
cause by the City Council. The members of the Commission except the Chief of
Police shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion
of the City Council, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the City
Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. One
member of the Commission shall be the Chief of Police, who shall act as
Director of the Commission. The Commission shall further consist of a licensed
veterinarian and 3 other members. The Commission shall organize at the first
meeting in June of each year. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the minutes
and records with the City Clerk, where they shall be available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The Commission shall meet at such times as
the City Council may designate, and special meetings may be held upon the call
of the Director or any 3 members of the Commission, to consider the issuance or
revocation of permits. An affirmative vote of 3 members shall be necessary to
grant or approve a permit.
   (E)   Violations. When animals in excess of the limit established in this
section are found at a residence, the owner of the animals shall have 72 hours
to comply with this section. Failure to comply within 72 hours shall constitute
a violation of this section and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1). Any combination of dogs or cats in excess of 4 in number shall be
considered 1 violation of this section, but each day in violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   Review of issuance or revocation of permit. The issuance or revocation
of a permit shall be reviewable by the City Council, upon request of any
interested party. The request for the City Council to review the issuance or
revocation of a permit shall be in writing to the City Clerk, requesting that
it be included on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council. In reviewing the Commission’s action, the City Council may
approve, disapprove or take no action at all, which in the latter case shall
mean that the Commission’s action shall stand. As part of this review process,
the Council shall have the power to grant or revoke a permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-107) (Ord. 3246, § 1, 7-20-1999) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 DANGEROUS ANIMALS; PROHIBITED ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Definitions. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
definitions in this division apply throughout this section.
      ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION. The entity provided for in §
90.07.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any officer as defined in §
90.01.
      DANGEROUS DOG OR OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any dog or animal that,
according to the records of the appropriate authority, has:
         (a)   Inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on
public or private property;
         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off of the
owner’s property; or
         (c)   Been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner
having received notice of the finding, and the dog or other animal again
aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
      OWNER. Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in
or having control or custody of an animal, as defined in §
90.01.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that, when unprovoked inflicts bites
on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private property, or chases
or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a
menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or any dog with a known
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to
otherwise threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. That, while on owner’s
property, a potentially dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in
a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry
of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. The pen or
structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, shall be securely embedded
into the ground and shall also provide protection from the elements for the
dog.
      SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   (B)   Determination that dog is potentially dangerous dog. If it is
determined by the Animal Control Officer, after investigation, that a dog is a
potentially dangerous dog, the Animal Control Officer shall notify in writing
the owner of the dog that it has been declared a potentially dangerous dog. If
the owner of the dog disagrees with the Animal Control Officer’s determination,
the owner may appeal in writing to the Animal Control Commission within 10 days
of receiving the notice. Upon receiving the appeal, the Commission shall hold a
hearing within 10 days to examine the evidence concerning the determination
previously made. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the rules of
evidence shall not apply, but the Commission shall consider only credible and
relevant evidence. The owner and Animal Control Officer shall have the
opportunity to present evidence and be heard on this matter. After the
Commission makes a determination and notifies the owner in writing, the owner
shall have the right to further appeal the matter to the City Council. The
appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
written notification, and the Council shall hold its hearing within 30 days of
the filing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor, or his or her
designated agent, in the same manner as previously mentioned in this division,
and the same procedure shall apply. The determination that a dog is a
potentially dangerous dog shall be made by the concurrence of a majority of all
members elected to the Council. During the procedure described in this
division, a dog declared as potentially dangerous may be impounded pursuant to
§
90.03 at the owner’s expense or, if the officer is assured by the owner’s
signed agreement of proper confinement and safeguards, and that the dog has a
current rabies vaccination, the dog may be released to its owner pending a
final determination.
   (C)   Potentially dangerous dog ownership limit. No person shall own, keep
or harbor more than 1 potentially dangerous dog per residence.
   (D)   Registration of potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   The owner of a dog which has been declared as a potentially
dangerous dog shall immediately apply for a certificate of registration from
the Animal Control Officer. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog must be
21 years of age and show proof of rabies vaccination at time of registration.
The owner of any potentially dangerous dog shall register the animal with the
North Platte Animal Control Division immediately. The registration shall
include the fee as set by City Council and shall be accompanied by the
following information:
         (a)   The name of the current owner of the dog;
         (b)   The address where the animal is harbored;
         (c)   A description of the animal, including name, breed, sex and
coloring;
         (d)   The current rabies tag number for the dog;
         (e)   Microchip manufacturer and microchip number;
         (f)   Tattoo number;
         (g)   Sufficient evidence of proper enclosure to confine a potentially
dangerous dog; and
         (h)   Posting of the premises with a sign conspicuously displaying a
warning symbol and language informing children of the presence of a dangerous
dog.
      (2)   A decision by the Animal Control Officer not to issue the
certificate of registration may be reviewed as provided for in division (B) of
this section.
   (E)   Potentially dangerous dogs; spaying and neutering required. Any animal
determined to be potentially dangerous shall be spayed or neutered by a
licensed veterinarian at the owner’s expense no less than 30 days after the
determination is entered by the Animal Control Commission with written proof of
spaying or neutering being provided to the North Platte Police Department,
Animal Control Division, within 72 hours of the procedure being completed.
   (F)   Microchip identification or tattoo required. Any dog deemed
potentially dangerous shall be implanted with microchip identification or a
permanent tattoo on the dog’s inner right ear by a licensed veterinarian at the
owner’s expense no less than 30 days after the determination is entered by the
Animal Control Commission with the microchip identification number provided to
the North Platte Police Department, Animal Control Division, within 72 hours of
procedure being completed. A number will be provided by Animal Control if the
owner chooses to have the dog’s inner right ear permanently tattooed.
   (G)   Sale and /or ownership transfer of potentially dangerous dog; change
of owner residence. Any owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog shall
have a continuing obligation to provide updated registration information to the
North Platte Police Department, Animal Control Division, within 30 days of the
owner changing residence or the sale or transfer of the dog. The information
provided to the North Platte Animal Control Division must include the name of
the new owner of the dog if sold or transferred and the address where the dog
will be harbored.
   (H)   Annual registration fees. The owner of any potentially dangerous dog
shall pay an annual registration fee as set by City Council.
   (I)   Annual publication of potentially dangerous dogs. At least once per
calendar year, the North Platte Animal Control Division shall publish in the
local newspaper a list of dogs deemed potentially dangerous, providing the name
of the owner, the address where the dog is harbored and a description of the
dog including the name and breed.
   (J)   Restraint of potentially dangerous dogs. It is unlawful for an owner
of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside the proper
enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash and under physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be
made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
   (K)   Dangerous animals prohibited. The owning, allowing, keeping or
harboring of a dangerous dog or other dangerous animal within the corporate
limits of the city is hereby prohibited and unlawful.
   (L)   Certain animals prohibited in residential areas.
      (1)   Within any residential area (for purposes of this subsection
defined as any area not zoned for commercial agricultural or industrial
purposes), the keeping, harboring or selling of any poisonous or venomous
animal or any warm-blooded carnivorous or omnivorous animal, including but not
limited to nonhuman primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers,
tigers and lions, but excluding fowl, dogs, house cats, ferrets and small
rodents of varieties commonly kept as household pets such as rats, mice,
gerbils, guinea pigs and hamsters, is hereby prohibited.
      (2)   Non-poisonous snakes shall be kept in locked escape-proof cages
except when being handled. No snake shall be permitted by the owner, keeper or
handler to escape from a cage or while being handled.
   (M)   Exceptions. Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury
or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or
was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or has in the past been observed
or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime.
   (N)   Impoundment of dangerous animals or potentially dangerous dogs. Any
potentially dangerous dog which is the following, or any dangerous dog or any
dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by an Animal Control Officer
and placed in quarantine, at the owner’s cost, until ordered by the court to
either return the dog to the owner or humanely kill it. The option of releasing
the animal to the owner in lieu of impoundment, as provided in §§
90.03 and
90.19(A), shall not be available when the dog or animal is being confiscated
and impounded pursuant to this section.
      (1)   Not validly registered under this section;
      (2)   Not maintained in the proper enclosure;
      (3)   Outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the proper
enclosure and not under physical restraint of the responsible person; or
      (4)   Not covered by liability insurance coverage or a surety bond as
required by this section.
   (O)   Violations; penalty; destruction of dangerous animals or potentially
dangerous dogs.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this section, and
such violation shall be punished as provided for in Classification II in §
90.99(A)(2).
      (2)   If the court finds that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog as
defined in this section, the court may, in addition to the usual judgment of
conviction, order that the dog be humanely killed.
      (3)   Upon a finding by the court that a dog is a dangerous dog, as
defined in this section, or other dangerous animal, the court shall, in
addition to the usual judgment of conviction, order that the dog or other
animal be humanely killed.
(Prior Code, § 8-8) (Ord. 2987, § 1, 1-3-1995; Am. Ord. 3625, § 1, 10-4-2005;
Am. Ord. 3768, passed 8-4-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Dangerous dogs, see Neb. R.S. 54-617—54-624
§ 90.09 CONTROL OF ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal to be brought into any public park
except when the animal is confined on a leash, or if the animal is within a
designated dog park and in compliance with any applicable dog park rules and
regulations. Any exception to this section shall require a special permit to be
issued by the city’s Park Department. Any person having violated this section
shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 8-9) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 HORSES AND OTHER LARGE DOMESTIC ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   Horses and other large domestic animals, as defined in §
90.01, shall not be allowed in the public parks and recreation areas and are
hereby prohibited from such areas, except for special events as designated by
the Public Service Director.
(Prior Code, § 8-10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 ANIMAL ABUSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, ill-treat, torment,
overload, cruelly tether, overwork or cause injury or unnecessary pain to any
animal.
   (B)   Any person found to have violated this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(3).
   (C)   Any duly authorized law enforcement official or animal control officer
may seek a warrant from the appropriate court to enable him or her to enter
private property in order to inspect, care for or impound animals which show
signs of animal neglect or animal abuse. All requests for such warrants shall
be accompanied by an affidavit stating the probable cause to believe a
violation of this chapter has occurred. Each affidavit shall be accompanied by
a sworn statement from any person filing a complaint of improper care with the
appropriate agency. All animals impounded pursuant to such warrant or any other
order of the court shall be:
      (1)   Placed in the care or custody of a veterinarian, or animal control;
or
      (2)   If it is determined by a veterinarian acting for the animal control
that such animal is diseased or disabled beyond any useful purpose, the animal
shall immediately become the property of the city to be humanely disposed of as
the chief of police, or his designee, deems appropriate.
   (D)   The owner or custodian of an animal impounded pursuant to this section
shall be liable for the reasonable cost of the care and maintenance of the
animal during the period of impoundment. Such costs shall be a lien upon the
animal and the city may refuse to release such animal at the end of the legal
proceedings until such costs have been paid.
   (E)   If a person is adjudicated guilty of the crime of animal neglect,
animal abuse or animal fighting and the court having jurisdiction is satisfied
that an animal owned or controlled by such person would in the future be
subject to such neglect or abuse, its disposition shall be determined by the
court.
   (F)   Any animal found abandoned, neglected, cruelly treated or in such a
condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or
health may be impounded immediately by an (F)   Any animal found abandoned,
neglected, cruelly treated, cruelly tethered or in such a condition as to
constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health may be
impounded immediately by an officer for a period of 72 hours. If it is
determined by a veterinarian acting for the city that such animal is diseased
or disabled beyond any useful purpose, the animal shall immediately become the
property of the city to be humanely disposed of as the Chief of Police, or his
designee, deems appropriate. The court may order the impoundment of such animal
beyond such 72-hour period if the animal is in such a condition as to
constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health or as
the court otherwise deems appropriate for the health and safety of the public.
Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, maintains, or controls any animal involved
in such impoundment shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary
expenses, boarding, or other expenses, necessitated by the impoundment of the
animal for the protection of the public and other expenses as may be required.
The Chief of Police, or his designee, may require such person to pay, prior to
the expiration of 10 days after the date of impoundment, an amount sufficient
to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for the animal,
including estimated medical care, for 30 days, inclusive of the date on which
the animal was impounded. If such payment is not made prior to expiration of
this 10-day period, the animal shall become the property of the city to be
disposed of as the city deems appropriate. Such payment will be required for
each succeeding 30-day period. If any such payment is not made prior to the end
of each succeeding 30-day period, the animal shall become the property of the
city to be disposed of as the city deems appropriate. The amount of the payment
shall be determined by the city based on the current rate for board at the
animal shelter and the condition of the animal after examination of the animal
by a veterinarian acting for the city. Any such payment received by the city in
excess of the amount determined by the city to be due for the board and care of
the animal shall be refunded by the city upon expiration of the order of
impoundment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the owner or custodian is found
not guilty of animal neglect or cruelty, the owner or custodian shall only be
required to pay the veterinary expenses and one-half of the board and care fees
determined by the city to be due.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it is determined by a veterinarian
acting for the city that such animal is diseased or disabled beyond any useful
purpose, the animal shall immediately become the property of the city to be
humanely disposed of as the city deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 8-11) (Am. Ord. 3768, 8-4-2009; Am. Ord. 3941, § 2, 5-17-2016)
Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty, see Neb. R.S. 28-1008
§ 90.12 ANIMAL FIGHTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate, stage, train
or torment any animal for or permit any fight between any animal and another
animal or human. Any person found to have violated this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(3).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attend or solicit attendance at
or be an umpire, judge or other official at a fight staged between any animal
and another animal or human. Any person found to have violated this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(3).
(Prior Code, § 8-12) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF FOWL.
   Fowl younger than 8 weeks of age may not be sold or offered for sale in
quantities of less than 25 birds to an individual purchaser. Vendors of fowl
shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices as may be necessary
to maintain the fowl in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water
available to the fowl. Fowl shall not be dyed or colored or otherwise treated
so as to impart to them an artificial color. It shall be unlawful to violate
this section, and any person violating this section shall be punished as
provided for in §
90.99(A)(3).
(Prior Code, § 8-13) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 KILLING, INJURING OR POISONING DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to kill or to administer or cause to
be administered poison of any sort to a domestic animal, or in any manner to
injure, maim or destroy or in any manner attempt to injure, maim or destroy any
domestic animal that is the property of another person, or to place any poison
or poisoned food where the poison or poisoned food is accessible to a domestic
animal; provided that this section shall not apply to an officer, including
authorized personnel of the Health Department, acting within his or her power
and duty.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person found to have violated this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by §
90.99(A)(3).
(Prior Code, § 8-14) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 AUTHORITY TO RESCUE ANIMALS CONFINED IN VEHICLE.
   Whenever any animal is found confined in a motor vehicle in a public place
under weather conditions that endanger its life as determined by the Supervisor
of the Animal Control Division, the Supervisor of the Animal Control Division
is hereby authorized, with assistance from the police, to enter the vehicle and
rescue the animal and impound it in accordance with §
90.03, at the city’s animal shelter. A prominent written notice shall be placed
in the vehicle advising that the animal has been removed under the authority of
this section and impounded in accordance with §
90.03 at the city’s animal shelter.
(Prior Code, § 8-11) (Am. Ord. 3768, 8-4-2009; Am. Ord. 3941, § 2, 5-17-2016)
§ 90.16 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND MISTREATMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ABANDON. To leave any animal in one's care, whether as owner or custodian,
for any length of time without making effective provision for its food, water,
shelter or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not include
an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this section.
   BOVINE. A cow, an ox, or a bison.
   CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm upon any
animal.
   CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water, shelter, or other care as is reasonably
necessary for the animal's health.
   CRUELLY TETHER. To tether an animal to a fixed object in such a way that the
animal's movement is limited to a distance of less than 10 feet from the fixed
object to which the animal is tethered, or, to tether an animal using a choke,
pinch or prong type collar.
   HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the Nebraska State Patrol, any county
or deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of any city or village, or
any other public official authorized by any city or village to enforce state or
local animal control laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances.
   LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds, or poultry.
   POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city, or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1008)
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an
animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected, cruelly tethered or
cruelly mistreated may seek a warrant authorizing entry upon private property
to inspect, care for, or impound the animal.
      (2)   Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an
animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected, cruelly tethered or
cruelly mistreated may issue a citation to the owner as prescribed in Neb. RS
29-422 to 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer's
negligence.
(Neb. RS 28-1012)
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects, cruelly tethers or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of
an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate, or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1009)
(Prior Code, § 8-16) (Am. Ord. 3941, § 1, 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 (RESERVED).
§ 90.18 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Holding period. Impounded animals which are not claimed by their owner
shall be kept for a minimum of 3 days, except:
      (1)   When given to be disposed of by an owner, keeper or harborer, in
which case the animal shall be held until the next calendar day before making a
disposition. The owner, keeper or harborer of the animal shall execute a waiver
or release granting the Animal Control Officer or his or her agent exclusive
and total authority to dispose of the animal in any humane fashion, including
but not limited to killing, and shall execute a release from liability
associated therewith.
      (2)   When an animal arrives at the shelter in so sick or injured
condition that, in the judgment of the Animal Control Officer or a licensed
veterinarian, human compassion requires that the suffering be promptly ended.
In such instance the time period shall not apply and the animal will be
humanely killed to prevent needless suffering.
      (3)   When an animal has previously been kept for a minimum of 3 days by
the political subdivision surrendering the animal and it is certified that the
animal has been held for the required length of time.
   (B)   Disposition of animal after expiration of holding period. Whenever any
animal shall remain in the animal shelter or other place of impoundment for a
period longer than 3 days from the impounding of the animal (except those
animals impounded for disease control observation, in which case the period
shall begin upon the expiration of the applicable observation period), the
animal shall be disposed of in a humane manner by the Animal Control Division.
   (C)   Unlawful disposal. No Animal Control Officer shall dispose of any
captured or impounded animal except through the procedures provided for by this
chapter. No Animal Control Officer shall hold a commercial animal establishment
permit.
   (D)   Adoption. The city may, in lieu of having an unclaimed animal killed
as provided in this section, give the animal into the custody of any adult
requesting adoption of a specific animal as a pet after viewing it, providing
that the person agrees that he or she will humanely care for such animal and
will not permit its use for breeding, guard, laboratory, experimental or
illegal purposes. No animal shall be so adopted until after such time as
arrangements are made, satisfactory to an Animal Control Officer, for the
spaying or neutering of the animal if the animal is of an age and condition
that spaying or neutering can be performed safely on the animal. Failure to
spay or neuter pursuant to the requirements of this division shall constitute a
violation punishable as a Classification I violation of §
90.99, and the Court shall, in addition to the fine, direct that the animal be
spayed or neutered.
   (E)   Impoundment fee and boarding fee. An impoundment fee shall be charged
when any animal is picked up by an officer of the city, or an agent thereof,
and transported to the animal shelter or other city-designated place of
impoundment. The fee for the care of any dog or cat during the period of
impoundment shall be at a rate for each day or portion of a day that the dog or
cat is impounded, provided that the dog or cat is impounded for less than 6
consecutive days or portions thereof. If a dog or cat is impounded for more
than 5 consecutive days or portions thereof, the fee for the care during the
period of impoundment shall be at a rate for each day, or portion thereof, of
impoundment. The fee shall be increased by the actual amount of any unusual
expenses incurred either in the impoundment or the care of the animal. An owner
or keeper must pay these fees in full to obtain custody of his or her animal,
but the payment is not required for animal adoption by a person from another
household.
   (F)   Surrender fee. Animals impounded which come from outside the city
limits shall be paid for by the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal or by
the political entity from which the animal originated. In the case of voluntary
surrender of an animal, as described in divisions (A)(1) or (3) of this
section, the owner, keeper or harborer who resides outside the city limits
shall pay a surrender fee, in an amount as established by resolution of the
Council, for each occurrence of surrender. A resident of the city shall pay no
fee in the case of voluntary surrender as provided for in division (A)(1) of
this section. Except for animals voluntarily surrendered as provided for in
divisions (A)(1) and (3) of this section, for each animal which is impounded
and originates from outside the city limits, if not claimed by the owner, a
per-day fee in an amount set by Council resolution shall be paid by the
political entity from which the animal is brought.
(Prior Code, § 8-18) (Am. Ord. 3768, 8-4-2009)
§ 90.19 ANIMAL BITES AND DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   Dog or cat bites.
      (1)   Any bite or wound exposing an individual to the possibility of
rabies or other zoonotic disease (referred to in this division as an
“incident”) shall be immediately reported to the police by the victim, and by
the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog or cat if the incident is known to him
or her. Any such dog or cat bite which requires medical treatment shall be
reported within 24 hours to the Police Department by the treating physician or
hospital caring for the patient.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of any dog or cat,
upon receiving notice or having knowledge of the involvement of his or her pet
in a human exposure to the possibility of rabies or other zoonotic disease by
biting, to immediately place the animal in a duly licensed veterinary medical
facility, the address of which must be furnished to the city’s animal shelter,
where the animal shall be isolated and confined for observation for 10
consecutive days from and including the date of the incident. It shall be
unlawful for the owner, keeper or person harboring the animal involved in the
incident to release it from his or her custody or to hide or conceal the animal
or to take or allow the animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city,
unless as authorized by the Police Department or court, until the period of
confinement and observation required in this division is completed. The owner
or keeper of the animal involved in an incident shall be liable for the costs
of confinement and observation. The death of the dog or cat or any suspicious
change in the health or behavior of any such dog or cat undergoing observation
shall be reported as soon as possible by the observing authority to the Police
Department or its designate. The Police Department or its designate is hereby
authorized to authorize confinement other than described in this division as it
finds medically appropriate, providing the animal will be controlled and
observed in accordance with the owner’s signed agreement, but only if the dog
or cat has been vaccinated for prevention of rabies and is duly licensed as
provided by this chapter. Unless determined otherwise by the Police Department,
an exception to the confinement required by this division may be granted in the
following case: where a female dog is nursing unweaned puppies or a female cat
is nursing unweaned kittens.
   (B)   Bites by animals other than dogs and cats. Any bite which would, by
other than a dog or cat, expose an individual to the possibility of rabies or
other zoonotic disease (referred to in this division as an “incident”) shall be
immediately reported to the police by the victim, and by the owner, keeper or
harborer of the animal if the incident is known to him or her. Any animal bite
which requires medical treatment shall be reported within 24 hours to the
Police Department by the treating physician or hospital caring for the patient.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person harboring the animal
involved in the incident to release it from his or her custody or to hide or
conceal the animal or to take or allow the animal to be taken beyond the limits
of the city unless so authorized by the Chief of Police until an observation
period stipulated by the Chief of Police for the particular species of animal
is over or the period is ruled unnecessary by the Chief of Police. It shall be
the duty of each owner or keeper, upon receiving notice of an incident, to
immediately place the animal involved in a duly licensed veterinary medical
facility, the address of which must be furnished to the Police Department at
once, or in the city’s animal shelter, where the animal shall be isolated and
confined for observation. The owner or keeper of an animal involved in a biting
incident shall be liable for the cost of confinement and observation. The death
of any such animal or any suspicious change in the health or behavior of any
such animal undergoing observation shall be reported immediately by the
observing authority to the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative. If a proper period of observation is undetermined or
undeterminable for the species of animal involved in an incident, the city is
hereby empowered to order whatever laboratory examination of the animal or
animal’s tissues is required by prudent medical practice for the protection of
the victim, and no liability for damages shall arise from any injury to or
death of the animal occasioned by the laboratory examination. When an animal
involved in an incident is outside the city, the city shall forward information
concerning the incident to the appropriate authority of the jurisdiction of
residence of the owner, keeper or harborer or the appropriate state health
department for coordinated disease prevention.
   (C)   Authority to kill animals that cannot be safely captured; delivery of
remains to Police Department. If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog, cat or
other animal believed involved in an incident (as the term “incident” is used
in divisions (A) and (B) of this section) cannot be safely captured or
prevented from escaping by usual means, the animal may be slain by an officer.
In all cases where the animal may have exposed a person to rabies and is slain
before the completion of the observation period stipulated for the species by
the city, it shall be the duty of the person slaying the animal to forthwith
deliver, or cause to be delivered, all the remains of the animal, including the
undamaged head, to the Police Department. A departure from this procedure must
be requested of an authorized person by the city.
   (D)   Impoundment and observation of animals in transit through city. For
the purpose of disease or injury control, the city is hereby empowered to
impound and observe animals in transit through the city at the request of any
official animal control agency, health officer or law enforcement agency of
another jurisdiction.
   (E)   Declaration of disease control emergency. If Chief of Police
determines that a rabies or other zoonotic disease control emergency exists, he
or she shall so declare, stating the boundaries of the affected area, and he or
she is hereby empowered to issue emergency regulations and take all necessary
steps within the provisions of this chapter and state law to abate the threat.
The emergency steps and regulations shall be in effect only during the period
of the declared emergency.
   (F)   Removal of animal droppings. The owner or keeper of every animal, when
the animal is off the property controlled by the owner or keeper, shall be
responsible for the removal of any fecal material before taking an animal from
the immediate area where the excretion occurred. Failure to remove the fecal
material shall result in a violation of this division. Any person who violates
this division shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
   (G)   Disposal of dead animals.
      (1)   The Police Department or its authorized agent shall be responsible
for the removal of all dead animals found within the city, except as otherwise
provided in this section. As used in this section, the term DEAD ANIMAL shall
mean one not killed for food or no longer fit for food. The actual cost of the
removal shall be paid by the owner.
      (2)   All large dead animals shall be removed and legally disposed of by
the owner or proprietor of the premises within 12 hours after the death of the
animal. If not so removed, the animal shall be removed at actual cost to the
property owner or proprietor.
      (3)   On occupied property, the owner or the tenant thereof shall provide
easy access to the subject animal for purposes of its removal. No person owning
or having in his or her possession the carcass of any animal not to be used for
food shall permit the carcass to remain in or upon any street, sidewalk, park,
public ground, private lot or other place without at once giving notice to the
Chief of Police.
      (4)   Burial of animals shall only be permitted at pet cemeteries and
licensed landfills.
(Prior Code, § 8-19) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 PERMIT FOR ELIMINATION OF PESTS.
   The Police Department is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the
elimination of squirrels, starlings or pigeons to any owner or owner’s
authorized agent, lessee or tenant of real estate in the city frequented by
squirrels, starlings or pigeons in numbers the city believes to be sufficient
to create a public nuisance on the real estate. In cases where the public
nuisance exists in a district of the city, the permit may be issued to a duly
licensed pest control or exterminating company for the district, which shall be
defined on the permit. No permit shall be issued for a longer period than 30
days. Retention of any such permit shall be conditioned upon continued
compliance with advisory instructions issued and regulations adopted by the
city dealing with such activity, which regulations the city is hereby
authorized and directed to promulgate and to adopt by filing the regulations
with the city. The regulations shall govern the elimination and disposal of
squirrels, starlings and pigeons and shall be designed to ensure humane and
sanitary methods for the elimination and disposal and for the protection of
human health.
(Prior Code, § 8-20)
§ 90.21 ALLOWING ANIMAL TO RUN AT LARGE; TETHERING ANIMAL ON PUBLIC WAY;
DISTANCE OF ANIMALS FROM RESIDENCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring a
horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine or fowl or any other animal to allow or to
permit the animal to be herded or to run at large on any of the public ways and
property, or upon the property of another, or to be tethered or staked out in a
manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way, within
the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring any
horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine or other animal to keep or maintain the
animal within 100 feet of any part of any building used by another as a
residence or place of dwelling, which building is located in a residential
district of the city as established by Chapter 156. For purposes of this
division, the term OTHER ANIMALS shall not include rabbits or animals required
by this chapter to be vaccinated against the rabies virus. It shall be unlawful
for any person owning, keeping or harboring any rabbit to keep or maintain the
rabbit within 15 feet of any part of any building used by another as a
residence or place of dwelling, which building is located in a residential
district of the city as established by Chapter 156. It shall be unlawful for
any person owning, keeping or harboring any fowl to keep or maintain the fowl
within 25 feet of any part of any building used by another as a residence or
place of dwelling, which building is located in a residential district of the
city as established by Chapter 156.
(Prior Code, § 8-21) (Ord. 2984, § 1, 11-1-1994) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   License required; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct
or operate a commercial animal establishment within the city without first
having secured a license for the current year from the City Clerk and having
paid the occupation tax assessed against commercial animal establishments. The
license fee shall be established per licensing year. The commercial animal
establishment operator shall not be required to obtain a license for each
individual dog lawfully kept in the establishment after the issuance of the
license. The owner or operator shall operate a licensed commercial animal
establishment only during the continuance of the existence of the license and
subject to all rules and regulations of this code.
   (B)   Inspection; contents of license; minimum square footage of dog
kennels. Upon application to the Animal Control Commission for a commercial
animal establishment license, the Commission or its designated agent shall make
an inspection of the proposed site of the establishment to ensure that the site
is sanitary and can be maintained in a sanitary condition, and that the site
will provide shelter from the elements for the animals. The license shall state
the name of the person licensed to operate the establishment, the maximum
number of animals that may be kept, and the location of the establishment. All
dog kennels shall contain a minimum square footage of 100 square feet per dog.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to have violated this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 8-22) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 RABIES VACCINATION FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Required; payment of costs. All dogs over 4 months of age must be
vaccinated against rabies. Young dogs shall be vaccinated within 30 days after
they have reached 4 months of age. Unvaccinated dogs acquired or moved into the
city must be vaccinated within 30 days after arrival or purchase, unless under
4 months of age as specified in this division. Each dog shall be revaccinated
following a period of not more than 36 months since its last vaccination. All
cats over 4 months of age must be vaccinated for rabies. Each cat shall be
revaccinated following a period of not more than 36 months since its last
vaccination. Rabies vaccines used must meet the requirements of the current
compendium of animal rabies vaccines and Neb. RS 71-4402(2). The cost of the
rabies vaccination shall be borne by the owner of the dog.
   (B)   Issuance of certificate of vaccination and tag.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at the time of
vaccinating any dog or cat, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination,
which shall include but not be limited to the following information:
         (a)   The owner’s name and address;
         (b)   A description of the dog or cat, including the breed, sex,
markings, age and name;
         (c)   The date of vaccination;
         (d)   The rabies vaccination tag number;
         (e)   The type of rabies vaccine administered; and
         (f)   The manufacturer’s serial number of the vaccine.
      (2)   The veterinarian shall issue a tag with the certificate of
vaccination.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of division (A) of this section with
respect to vaccination shall not apply to any non-resident owner or keeper of a
dog or cat while the non-resident is passing through the city, provided that
the dog or cat shall remain on leash or otherwise physically restrained as
provided for elsewhere in this chapter. Dogs and cats of nonresidents need not
be licensed during dog or cat shows or exhibitions; however, proof of rabies
vaccination shall be presented by the owner or keeper upon demand, and failure
to do so shall constitute a violation of this section.
   (D)   Possession of certificate of vaccination; wearing of collar and tag.
The owner or keeper of a dog or cat shall keep in his or her possession the
certificate of rabies vaccination as proof of the vaccination. Further, the tag
of rabies vaccination shall be attached to the harness or collar of the dog or
cat at all times. No person shall remove, or cause to be removed, the collar,
harness or rabies tag from any dog or cat without the consent of the owner or
keeper.
   (E)   Impoundment of animals without proof of vaccination. Any dog or cat
found outside the owner’s or keeper’s premises whose owner does not possess a
valid certificate of rabies vaccination and a valid rabies vaccination tag for
such dog or cat shall be impounded. All impounded dogs and cats shall be given
proper care, treatment and maintenance. Each impounded dog or cat, except as
provided for in §
90.18(A)(1) and (2), shall be kept at the animal shelter for a period of not
less than 5 days unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. Notice of impoundment
of all animals, including any significant marks of identification, shall be
posted at the shelter as public notification of impoundment. Any unvaccinated
dog or cat may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by
payment of the prescribed impoundment fees and by complying with the rabies
vaccination requirements within 72 hours of release. Any vaccinated dog or cat
impounded because its owner has not presented a valid certificate of rabies
vaccination and a valid rabies vaccination tag for such dog may be reclaimed by
its owner by furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all
impoundment fees prior to release.
   (F)   Violations; penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to
have his or her dog or cat vaccinated for rabies as required by this section,
to fail to affix or attach the valid rabies vaccination tag to the animal’s
collar or harness, to fail to possess and present proof of valid and current
rabies vaccination or to violate any of the provisions or requirements of this
section. Failure of a owner of a dog or cat to present to an officer, upon
demand, the valid rabies vaccination certificate and valid rabies vaccination
tag shall constitute prima facie evidence in the appropriate court of law that
the dog or cat is not properly vaccinated and that the requirements and
provisions of this section have been violated. Any person found to have
violated this section shall be punished as provided for in §
90.99(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 8-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 ADOPTION FEE AND PROCEDURE; IMPOUNDMENT OR EUTHANASIA FEES; DISPOSITION
OF FEES.
   (A)   In accordance with §
90.18(D), it is the city’s policy to encourage and promote the adoption of
unclaimed impounded animals. Upon selection of a dog or cat for adoption, but
prior to delivery of custody of the animal, the city shall collect an adoption
fee and issue a receipt for the fee, which shall constitute a temporary permit
to keep the animal without license or tag for 10 days if it is over 4 months
old or for 10 days after the animal becomes 4 months old.
   (B)   The adoption fee for a dog shall be in accordance with the current fee
schedule, of which the person adopting the dog shall receive a partial credit
towards neutering and a partial credit towards rabies vaccination, if done
within 6 months. Upon presentation of the adoption fee receipt to the
veterinarian, the veterinarian shall credit the person’s bill as set forth in
this division. The veterinarian shall than make claim to the city for
reimbursement of the amounts. The procedure shall be the same for the adoption
of cats, except the adoption fee. The neutering credit and the rabies credit
shall be in accordance with the latest approved fee schedule.
   (C)   The owner of any animal which is impounded or destroyed under this
chapter shall be held responsible for payment of the boarding fees, impoundment
fees, the expense incident to the impoundment for observation or the cost of
euthanization. Failure to pay the fee or expense to the city shall constitute
an offense.
   (D)   The owner of the dog or cat or the person responsible for the dog or
cat must sign a statement indicating that, within 72 hours of the release of
the animal, the person shall have obtained the required rabies vaccination
pursuant to this chapter and, within 30 days of release (or 30 days after it
reaches the age of 6 months), shall have the pet spayed or neutered by a
licensed veterinarian. Failure to obtain the required rabies vaccination within
72 hours after release from impoundment shall constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   All shelter, adoption or impoundment fees or any other moneys received
by the Police Department or its designated agents in enforcing the provisions
of this chapter shall be subsequently deposited by the Police Department with
the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 8-24)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, violations are divided into 3
classifications, which are distinguished by the following penalties which are
authorized upon conviction:
      (1)   Classification I.
         (a)   First offense: $50 - $99.
         (b)   Second offense: $100 - $199.
         (c)   Third offense: $200 - $299.
         (d)   Fourth offense and all subsequent offenses: $300 - $499.
      (2)   Classification II.
         (a)   First offense: $50 - $99.
         (b)   Second offense: $100 - $199.
         (c)   Third offense and all subsequent offenses: $300 - $499.
      (3)   Classification III.
         (a)   Maximum: 3 months in jail, $500 fine or both.
         (b)   Minimum: $25 fine.
(Prior Code, § 8-25) (Ord. 3162, § 1, 5-5-1998)
   (B)   Any person having been convicted of violating §
90.10 shall be fined in an amount not less than $25 and not more than $500. In
addition, the person shall be responsible and held liable for any damage caused
by a horse or other large domestic animal to the city’s park and property.
(Prior Code, § 8-10)
(Am. Ord. 4193, § 1, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Maintenance and control generally
   
91.03   Responsibility for enforcement
   
91.04   Maintenance of sidewalk space
   
91.05   Removal of obstructions and encroachments
   
91.06   Obstruction of street or sidewalk during building or construction
operations
   
91.07   License for street and sidewalk construction contractors
Sidewalks
   
91.20   Trimming of overhanging branches
   
91.21   Sidewalks to be kept clean and free from obstructions
   
91.22   Driveway construction
   
91.23   Responsibility for maintenance
   
91.24   Repair by city
   
91.25   Permit for construction; construction standards
   
91.26   Order to construct sidewalk
   
91.27   Order to repair or replace sidewalk
   
91.28   Construction or repair by city
   
91.29   Violations and penalties
Streets
   
91.40   Names and numbers
   
91.41   Construction of crossings
   
91.42   Authority to widen streets or open new streets
   
91.43   Excavations
   
91.44   Driving stakes in pavement
   
91.45   Mixing concrete on pavement
   
91.46   Placing or discharging harmful liquids on pavement
   
91.47   Drainage from eave and gutter spouts
   
91.48   Use of manholes
   
91.49   Heavy equipment; vehicles with wheels having edges or protrusions or
other implements damaging pavement
   
91.50   Pipelines, poles and wires of public service companies
   
91.51   Petition for improvements
   
91.52   Deferral from special assessments for agricultural land
   
91.53   Permit for obstruction by persons engaged in removing or trimming trees
   
91.54   Curbs and gutters; lowering, cutting or removal
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate excavations, see Neb. RS 16-232
   Authority to regulate streets and sidewalks, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210
   Sidewalks generally, see Neb. RS 16-661 et seq.
   Streets generally, see Neb. RS 16-609 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When no definition is specified, the
normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
   SIDEWALK SPACE. That portion of a street between curblines and adjacent
property lines.
(Prior Code, § 46-1)
§ 91.02 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL GENERALLY.
   The governing body shall have the care, supervision and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within
the city, and shall cause the public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public
squares and commons to be kept open and in repair, and free from nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 46-2)
§ 91.03 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director of Development or his or her designee shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter unless otherwise specified.
(Prior Code, § 46-3) (Ord. 3172, § 1, 6-16-1998)
§ 91.04 MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALK SPACE.
   It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any lot abutting upon any
street or avenue in the city to keep the space between the lot and curbline on
the street free and clear of all weeds, rubbish or other obstructions of every
kind and nature, including all vehicles. Every owner may improve the space and
cultivate the space as a lawn, with grass, ornamental shrubbery and flowers,
subject to the limitations of §
91.05. It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, ride or drive any animal or
vehicle upon the space, or in any manner to injure or deface the lawn,
shrubbery or flowers so planted or cultivated thereon.
(Prior Code, § 46-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited obstructions. The following constitute obstructions:
      (1)   Trees, shrubs, vines or flowers growing upon or near public grounds
interfering with the use or construction of any public improvements;
      (2)   Fences, gates, buildings or other structures or objects impeding,
encumbering or encroaching upon any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues, alleys
or other property of the city; and
      (3)   Trees, shrubs, vines or flowers planted, or fences erected, on
public or private property so as to obstruct clear traffic view at
intersections or alley entrances.
   (B)   Clear vision zones. Clear traffic views, commonly referred to as clear
vision zones are defined in the 2 following areas:
      (1)   On corner lots at intersections of all streets, no fence, hedge,
wall, shrub or structure over 36 inches in height above an established top-of-
curb grade shall be located within a triangular area formed by the intersecting
lines at points 25 feet distant from the point of intersection as measured
along the lot property lines. Approved advertising signs, public-use controls
and systems, and trees with a maximum trunk diameter of 1 foot measured 4 feet
above the ground line and trimmed up to 8 feet may be permitted in this above
defined triangular area.
      (2)   On the street side of all lots where an alley enters the street
right-of-way, a triangular clear vision zone shall be maintained. The zone
shall measure ten feet into the lot as measured along alley line or the
property line, and 20 feet parallel to the street measured from the edge of an
alley, away from the alley, along the property line. No fence, wall, hedge or
shrub over 36 inches in height shall be erected or maintained within the above
defined clear-vision zone.
   (C)   Removal by city. Any obstructions or encroachments under this section
may be removed by the city at a property owner’s expense after notice as
provided for in this section.
   (D)   Notice to property owner. For purposes of this section, notice shall
mean written notice sent to the owner of the property on which the obstruction
is located at his or her last known address, giving the owner no less than 30
days from the date of the written notice within which to remove the obstruction
described therein.
   (E)   Payment of costs. Expenses charged to a property owner pursuant to
this section shall be determined as actual cost to the city of removing the
obstruction, plus an administration fee of $25. If the property owner fails to
reimburse the city within 30 days of the date of the billing statement mailed
to the property owner, the cost may be assessed against the real estate as a
special assessment.
(Prior Code, § 46-5) (Ord. 3172, § 2, 6-16-1998)
§ 91.06 OBSTRUCTION OF STREET OR SIDEWALK DURING BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION
OPERATIONS.
   Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking or
repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along
any street, may occupy the public street space with such building material and
equipment as long as is necessary if the person shall make application to and
receive a permit in writing from the Engineering Department to do so; provided
that, no permit for the occupancy of the sidewalk space, and more than 1/3 of
the roadway of the public space adjacent to the real estate on which the
building is to be constructed, erected, reconstructed, wrecked or repaired,
shall be granted; and provided further that a suitable passageway for
pedestrians shall be maintained within the public space included in the permit,
which shall be protected and lighted in the manner required by the department
issuing the permit.
(Prior Code, § 46-6)
§ 91.07 LICENSE FOR STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of constructing sidewalks, approaches, street crossings and curbs in
the city without holding a permit to engage in the work.
   (B)   Bond. The license required by this section shall not be granted or
issued until the applicant shall have filed with the City Clerk a bond in such
sum as has been set by resolution of the governing body and approved by the
Mayor, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the obligor of all work and
contracts made by him or her with property owners, and to save the city
harmless from any damage arising from carelessness or negligence in the
execution of his or her contract or the prosecution of the work, or by reason
of any inadequate or unfaithful work done either to the public as a whole or
particularly to others who may be specially damaged, for a period of 1 year
after the completion of the work and its acceptance by the governing body upon
recommendation of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 46-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
SIDEWALKS
§ 91.20 TRIMMING OF OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting or
adjacent to any sidewalk over which there extends the branches of trees shall,
at all times, keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the height of at
least 8 feet above the surface of the walk. Whenever the limbs or branches of
any tree extend over sidewalks contrary to the provisions in this section so as
to interfere with the lighting of the street from streetlights, or with the
convenience of the public using the sidewalk, the governing body, at a regular
or special meeting, may pass a resolution ordering the owner or occupant to cut
or remove the obstructions within 5 days after having received a copy thereof
from the City Engineer stating that the city will remove the branches and
charge the costs thereof to the owner or occupant as a special assessment for
improvements as provided in this section if the resolution is not complied
with. If the property owner is a non-resident of the county, the city shall,
before levying a special assessment against that property, send a copy of any
notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the non-resident property
owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax
rolls at the time the required notice was first published.
(Prior Code, § 46-31)
§ 91.21 SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND FREE FROM OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Owners and occupants of real estate within the corporate limits
shall keep sidewalks abutting or adjacent to the real estate clean and free
from obstructions and accumulations of snow, ice, mud and slush. Obstruction
shall mean any object, substance or other item or material which may interfere
with the use of any portion of a sidewalk.
      (2)   All sidewalks shall be cleaned within 36 hours after the cessation
of a storm.
      (3)   The snow placed on sidewalks by city snowplows is a natural result
of clearing the streets and is the responsibility of the property owner or
occupant to remove.
   (B)   Snow from sidewalks and driveways may not be placed on city streets
with the following exceptions:
      (1)   By city employees in the performance of work-related duties; or
      (2)   By downtown businesses located in an area from North Dewey Street,
between 4th Street and 6th Street, and East 5th Street, between Jeffers Street
and Bailey Avenue (commonly known as the “Canteen District”) in an effort to
establish a clearance for the conducting of business. Only snow from sidewalks
within the Canteen District may be placed in city streets within 36 hours of
the cessation of snowfall.
   (C)   Notice to remove such substances shall be made upon the owner or
occupant of the premises, or his or her agent, and such notice shall demand the
removal of such substances forthwith. If the person owning or occupying such
premises is unknown or cannot be found, or if any reasonable service cannot be
had upon any such owner, agent or occupant within the city, then such service
shall be made by posting a typewritten copy of such notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises. In case the owner, agent or occupant shall fail to
remove the ice, snow, mud or other substances, then it shall be the duty of the
Public Services Director to remove such substance, and the expense thereof
shall be charged against the property and the owner thereof, and may be
recovered by proper action in the name of the city or may be charged against
the property as a special assessment for improvements.
(Prior Code, § 46-32) (Ord. 2950, § 1, 1-31-1994; Am. Ord. 4199, § 1, 3-18-
2025)
§ 91.22 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Permit and bond. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
cause to be constructed in the city any driveway or apron over the curb and
corner of the streets and avenues of the city without specific permission from
the City Engineer. Before the permit shall be issued, the applicant to whom the
permit is to be issued may be required to furnish good and sufficient bond in
the sum of $1,000, to be approved by the City Engineer, to secure the city
against any damages that may arise or any accident that may be incident to the
apron being constructed.
   (B)   Installation during work on streets. On all streets to be hereafter
curbed and guttered, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to specify
materials and workmanship used per standard specifications for public work
construction. The cost of all such curb cuts and driveways shall be the
property owner’s responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 46-33)
§ 91.23 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   Every owner of any lot or piece of land within the corporate limits shall,
at all times, keep and maintain the sidewalk along and contiguous to the lot or
piece of land in good and proper repair, and in a condition reasonably safe for
travel for all travelers thereon. If the owner of any lot or land abutting on
any street, avenue or part thereof shall fail to construct or repair any
sidewalk in front of his or her lot or land, within the time and in the manner
as directed and required in this subchapter, after having received due notice
to do so, he or she shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned by
reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk, and the
governing body shall have power to cause any such sidewalks to be constructed
or repaired and assess the costs thereof against the property. If the property
owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the city
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy
of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the non-resident
property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time the required notice was first published.
(Prior Code, § 46-34)
§ 91.24 REPAIR BY CITY.
   The city official in charge of sidewalks may require sidewalks of the city
to be repaired. Notice to the owners of property upon which such sidewalks in
disrepair are located shall require the owners to make arrangements to have the
sidewalk repaired within 48 hours from issuance of the notice. The repairs
shall be completed within 30 days after issuance of the notice. No special
assessment shall be levied against the property unless the owner shall neglect
or refuse to repair the sidewalk within the time prescribed. If the owner fails
to repair the sidewalk, the city shall cause the repairs to be made and assess
the property owner the expense of the repairs. If the property owner is a non-
resident of the county, the city shall, before levying any special assessment
against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be
published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address shall
be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time the required notice
was first published.
(Prior Code, § 46-35)
§ 91.25 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION; CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be
constructed, any sidewalk shall do so only as provided in this section. It
shall be unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk without first having
obtained a permit.
   (B)   Application for permit. The owner shall make application in writing
for a permit and file the application in the office of the City Engineer or his
or her authorized representative. The permit shall give a description of the
lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be constructed.
   (C)   Permit required. No person shall construct a sidewalk without first
filing an application for a sidewalk permit with the City Engineer and
obtaining the permit from the City Engineer.
   (D)   Type of sidewalk; curb sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be constructed
in accordance with the city’s specifications, and shall be of the conventional
type located 1 foot, more or less, from the property line; provided, however,
curb sidewalk permits shall be issued by the City Engineer under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   When an existing curb sidewalk is in the same block frontage;
      (2)   When the remaining right-of-way between the edge of the paving or
back of the curb and the property line is less than 7 feet in width;
      (3)   Upon petition signed by owners representing no less than 66-2/3% of
the property owners on the side of the block adjacent to the proposed site of
the curb sidewalk.
   (E)   Sidewalks in new subdivisions. In all new subdivisions, the type of
sidewalk shall be designated prior to final plat approval.
   (F)   Location, grade and elevation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, or cause to be constructed, a sidewalk at any other location, grade
or elevation than so designated by the city. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade or elevation, and, if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the city
official in charge of sidewalks
(Prior Code, § 46-36) (Ord. 2986, § 1, 1-3-1995)
§ 91.26 ORDER TO CONSTRUCT SIDEWALK.
   Whenever the Mayor and Council shall deem it necessary that a sidewalk shall
be constructed in front of any lot or piece of ground in the city in a place
where there is no sidewalk, they shall so order, and the City Engineer shall
thereupon notify in writing the owner of the lot or piece of ground of the work
or improvement to be done, and the owner so notified shall be allowed 30 days
from the service of the notice in which to construct the sidewalk. The notice
shall be given by mail to the owner, or by publication of the notice 1 time in
a legal newspaper published in and of general circulation in the city. The
notice shall notify the owner of the passage of the resolution and that from
the day of publication in the event of notice being given in that manner,
within which to construct the sidewalk so ordered or cause the construction to
be done, and further notify the owner that if he or she fails to construct the
sidewalk or cause the construction to be done within 30 days after notice as
provided in this section the city will cause the sidewalk to be constructed and
the cost will be levied and assessed thereafter by the Mayor and Council as a
special tax against the premises.
(Prior Code, § 46-37)
§ 91.27 ORDER TO REPAIR OR REPLACE SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Whenever the City Engineer shall deem it necessary that any sidewalk
shall be repaired, or it shall be required by the Mayor and Council, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the lot or piece of land along
and contiguous to which the sidewalk is situated to repair the sidewalk within
24 hours from and after the giving of the notice. Oral notice to the owner
shall be deemed sufficient. If the owner is not found by the City Engineer,
then a written notice left in the house situated on the lot or piece of ground,
or posted upon the premises, shall be sufficient, and the 24 hours shall begin
to run from the leaving or posting up of the notice, as the case may be.
   (B)   Whenever the mayor and council shall deem it necessary that an old
sidewalk shall be widened, replaced or reconstructed, it shall order the work
to be done, and the City Engineer shall give notice in the manner and form
provided in division (A) of this section to widen, replace or reconstruct the
sidewalk within 30 days from and after the notice.
(Prior Code, § 46-38)
§ 91.28 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR BY CITY.
   If any owner shall neglect or refuse, or shall have failed, after notice has
been given as provided in this subchapter, to construct, repair, replace or
reconstruct any sidewalk within the time limit in the notice given in such
case, and whose duty it is made by this subchapter to construct, repair or
rebuild and reconstruct the walk, the City Engineer shall proceed at once
without further notice to the owner or other persons to have the sidewalk
constructed, repaired, rebuilt or reconstructed, as the case may be, and the
expense of the work shall be assessed to the lot or piece of land and collected
as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 46-39)
§ 91.29 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Each 24-hour period shall be deemed to be a separate day. Every day or
part thereof that any violation of any provision of this subchapter shall
continue beyond the first day shall constitute a separate offense and may be
charged as a second or subsequent offense.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this subchapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $50 - $99.
      (2)   Second offense: $100 - $199.
      (3)   Third offense and all subsequent offenses: $200 - $300.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this subchapter shall
also, if his or her motor vehicle was removed by or at the request of the city,
pay such charges for removal and storage as are from time to time set by
resolution of the Mayor and Council of the city.
(Ord. 4199, § 2, 3-18-2025)
STREETS
§ 91.40 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   (A)   Assignment. The governing body may at any time, by ordinance, rename
any street or provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence
or business purposes and located along the streets shall retain such numbers as
the governing body may require. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector,
upon the erection of any new building, to assign the proper numbers to the
building and give notice to the owner and occupant of the numbers.
   (B)   Numbering system. All business houses and dwellings situated within
the city shall be numbered in the manner and according to the plan or system
designated in the following.
      (1)   The initial or starting lines shall be Jeffers Street and First
Street, numbering as follows: east and west from Jeffers Street and north and
south from First Street, and allowing 100 numbers to each standard size block
situated on the same street.
      (2)   The even numbers shall be put upon the west and south sides of the
streets, and the odd numbers on the north and east sides of the streets.
   (C)   Failure to place numbers. In case any owner or occupant shall refuse
or neglect to number his or her building as provided in this subchapter, after
having received a notice in writing from the city to do so within 3 days, the
city may place or cause to be placed the proper number thereon and seek
reimbursement for the expense thereof by proper civil action brought in the
name of the city.
(Prior Code, § 46-61)
§ 91.41 CONSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS.
   The governing body may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the City Engineer, the street, avenue and alley crossings as the
governing body shall deem necessary. When a petition for the construction of
any such crossings is filed by an interested resident in the office of the City
Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the city engineer, who
shall investigate and make his or her recommendation to the governing body.
Action by the governing body on the application, whether the application is
approved or rejected, shall be considered final.
(Prior Code, § 46-62)
§ 91.42 AUTHORITY TO WIDEN STREETS OR OPEN NEW STREETS.
   The governing body shall have the power to open or widen any street, alley
or lane within the limits of the city, and to create, open and improve any new
street, alley or lane.
(Prior Code, § 46-63)
§ 91.43 EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street for
any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the City Engineer
authorizing the excavations.
(Prior Code, § 46-64) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.44 DRIVING STAKES IN PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind
into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written
consent of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 46-65) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.45 MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 46-66) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.46 PLACING OR DISCHARGING HARMFUL LIQUIDS ON PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street subsurface water, waste gasoline, kerosene or high lubricating
oils which damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.
(Prior Code, § 46-67) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.47 DRAINAGE FROM EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
dwelling house or business building within the limits of the city where the
dwelling or building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper
guttering and eave spouts to receive the wastewaters that collect on the
sidewalks and streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or
business building shall be constructed to drain into the green areas of the
house or building, or shall be buried beneath the sidewalks and drain into the
streets where it is found to be impossible to drain the eave spouts into the
green areas of the house or building. Draining of storm water onto city streets
shall be done only at the prior approval of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 46-68) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.48 USE OF MANHOLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any manhole for any purpose
whatsoever, including but not limited to use as an anchorage or for the purpose
of ingress to or egress from the sewer system; provided that this section shall
not apply to city employees on official business.
(Prior Code, § 46-69) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.49 HEAVY EQUIPMENT; VEHICLES WITH WHEELS HAVING EDGES OR PROTRUSIONS OR
OTHER IMPLEMENTS DAMAGING PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate heavy equipment
across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing on
any unpaved street without first having protected such curb, gutter, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing with heavy planks sufficient in
strength to warrant against the breaking or damaging of the curb, gutter,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing. It shall be unlawful to run,
drive, move, operate or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle,
machine or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the
pavement; with wheels having cutting edges; or with wheels having lugs, any
protruding parts or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut,
mark, mar, indent or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter or curb.
Where heavy vehicles, structures and machines move along paved or unpaved
streets, the public service department is hereby authorized and empowered to
choose the route over which the moving of the vehicles, structures or machines
will be permitted and allowed. It shall be permissible to use farm machinery
with tires having protuberances which will not injure the streets, and it shall
be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle
when required for safety because of snow, ice or other condition tending to
cause a vehicle to slide or skid.
(Prior Code, § 46-70) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.50 PIPELINES, POLES AND WIRES OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES.
   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines and other appurtenances of public service
companies shall be located or erected over, upon or under the streets, alleys
and common grounds of the city. Application for location of the appurtenances
shall be made to the governing body in writing. Approval by the governing body
shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a right-of-way
for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipelines and
wires shall at all times erect and locate its poles, wires, gas mains,
pipelines and other appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be
designated by the governing body. The poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines and
other appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the governing body. Any such relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the governing body, and the City Clerk shall
notify any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours
after receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipelines or other appurtenances to be removed. The governing body shall
designate another location as closely as possible where the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipelines or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed. All poles,
wires, gas mains, pipelines or other appurtenances shall be reset, placed or
erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the water system,
the sewerage system, the poles, wires and mains of any public utility, or
adjacent buildings, or with travel on the public ways and property. Whenever
possible, all poles, lines, wires, gas mains, pipelines or appurtenances shall
be confined to the alleys of the city.
(Prior Code, § 46-71)
§ 91.51 PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Owners of lots or lands abutting upon any street, avenue or alley within the
city representing 3/4 of the front footage thereon may petition the governing
body to create an improvement district, so that the district when created will
make up 1 continuous or extended thoroughfare or more, without cost to the
city. The governing body shall assess the entire cost of any such improvements
in any such street, avenue or alley, including intersections of streets or
avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within the
improvement district. It shall be the duty of the governing body to create the
proper improvement district or districts, which shall be consecutively
numbered, and to improve the district and to proceed in the same manner and
form as provided for in other paving and improvement districts; provided that
the governing body shall have power to levy the entire cost of the improvements
of any such street, avenue or alley, including intersections of streets and
avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within the
district, and to issue street improvement bonds to pay for the improvements.
The bonds shall be issued to cover the entire cost of so improving the streets
or avenues, intersections of the streets and avenues, and spaces opposite
alleys. If the assessments provided for in this section, or any part thereof,
shall fail, or for any reason shall be invalid, the governing body may make
other and further assessments upon the lots or lands as may be required to
collect from the lots or lands the cost of any improvements properly chargeable
thereto, as provided in this section. The governing body shall have the
discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the area to be
improved has not previously been improved with a water system, sewer system and
grading of streets. If the governing body should deny a requested improvement
district formation, it shall state the grounds for the denial in a written
letter to interested parties.
(Prior Code, § 46-72)
§ 91.52 DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND.
   (A)   Whenever the governing body creates an improvement district which
includes land adjacent to the city which is within an agricultural use zone and
is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record title of the
adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments. For purposes
of this section, the terms “agricultural use” and “agricultural use zone” shall
have the meaning specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.
   (B)   Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by this
section shall, to secure the assessment, make application to the governing body
within 90 days after creation of an improvement district. Any owner of record
title who makes application for the deferral provided by this section shall
notify the county’s Register of Deeds of the application in writing prior to
approval by the governing body.
   (C)   The governing body shall approve the application of any owner of
record title upon determination that:
      (1)   The property is within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use; and
      (2)   The owner has met the requirements of this section.
   (D)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any
of the following events:
      (1)   Notification by the owner of record title to the governing body to
remove the deferral;
      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application
within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided herein above;
      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who
does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;
      (4)   If the land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or
      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
   (E)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this
section becomes disqualified for the deferral, the owner of record title of the
property shall pay to the city an amount equal to:
      (1)   The total amount of special assessments which would have been
assessed against the property, to the extent of special benefits, had the
deferral not been granted; and
      (2)   Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the
rate of 6% from the dates at which the assessments would have been payable if
no deferral had been granted.
   (F)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as
a result of a sale or transfer described herein, the lien for assessments and
interest shall attach as of the day preceding the sale or transfer.
(Prior Code, § 46-73)
§ 91.53 PERMIT FOR OBSTRUCTION BY PERSONS ENGAGED IN REMOVING OR TRIMMING
TREES.
   (A)   Permit required; protection of public safety. Persons engaged in
removing, trimming or other cutting of trees, including property owners and
contractors, may occupy so much of the public roadway and sidewalk with
necessary equipment and with downed trees, limbs or branches as is necessary
for the downing or trimming of trees for a period of time no longer than is
necessary for the cutting, trimming or removal, upon making application and
receiving a permit in writing from the City Engineer or his or her designee to
do so; provided the portion of the public roadway and sidewalk specified in the
permit shall be set off and clearly delineated by barricades approved by the
City Engineer or his or her designee and situated in a fashion approved by the
City Engineer or his or her designee.
   (B)   Bond or insurance. Before a permit is issued by the City Engineer or
his or her designee, the applicant may be required to file with the City Clerk
a bond in the amount of $10,000, conditioned that the applicant shall defend,
save, hold harmless and indemnify the city from all liabilities, claims,
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every nature and description caused
by the willful or negligent conduct of the permit holder while engaged in the
removing, trimming or other cutting of trees. The bond provisions of this
section may be satisfied by the applicant depositing with the City Clerk an
insurance policy providing public liability and property damage insurance to
the city and the general public in the same amount as the bond, executed by an
insurance company authorized to conduct business in the state; provided that an
endorsement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to and
become a part of each and every such liability insurance policy deposited with
the city, and the endorsement shall contain each and every condition of the
bond required by the governing body. The obligee of the bond or the beneficiary
of the insurance policy shall be the city, and action may be maintained thereon
by anyone injured by a breach of the conditions of the bond or of the covenants
contained in the required endorsement on the policy of insurance for a period
of 1 year after the completion of any such work.
(Prior Code, § 46-74)
§ 91.54 CURBS AND GUTTERS; LOWERING, CUTTING OR REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, lower or remove any curb or
curbing, or portion thereof, on a paved street or roadway in the city; provided
that the City Engineer may approve lowering, cutting or removing any curb or
curbing upon the application of the owner of the abutting property for driveway
purposes, if the lowering, cutting or removal will not interfere with proper
drainage. Construction of any driveway shall require and be subject to the
conditions and approval of the City Engineer.
   (A)   Cost of construction.  The owner of the property served by the
driveway approach shall pay all costs for constructing the approach; required
turn lanes; pavement widening, median construction or reconstruction,
alterations of manholes, storm sewer inlets, water valve or fire hydrants;
relocation of power poles or light poles and alterations of any other public
utilities affected by the construction of the driveway approach.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Intersection clearance.  No driveway shall be constructed within 25
feet of any intersection, measured from the property corner to the end of the
return radius or taper.
      (2)   Property line offset. None of the driveway approach, including the
return radius or taper, will be permitted to extend beyond the side property
boundary extended without written permission from the adjacent property owner.
      (3)   Driveway separation. The minimum distance between residential
driveway radius or taper shall be 5 feet and the minimum distance between
commercial driveway radius or taper shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   Driveway approach grades. The driveway approach surface shall meet the
sidewalk at sidewalk grade. The sidewalk grade shall be established by the City
Engineering Department. Normal sidewalk cross-slope through the driveway
approach shall be 2%. Where the walk abuts the curb (curb sidewalk), the cross-
slope shall not exceed 8%.
   (D)   Driveway widths.
      (1)   For residential single frontage lots, curb or curbing shall not be
lowered, cut or removed for a distance greater than 40 feet, measured at the
throat of the driveway.
      (2)   For residential corner lots having frontage along 2 streets, such
curb or curbing may be lowered, cut or removed for a total distance of 40 feet,
measured at the throat of the driveway, on the streets on which the property
abuts. Such total distance to be allocated to the front street and/or to the
side street as the owner and application may elect.
      (3)   For commercial property having frontage of less than 400 feet along
any street, driveway widths, measured at the throat of the driveway, shall not
exceed 15% of the frontage.
      (4)   For commercial property having frontage of less than 200 feet along
any street, driveway widths, measured at the throat of the driveway, shall not
exceed 20% of the frontage.
      (5)   For commercial property having frontage of less than 100 feet along
any street, driveway widths, measured at the throat of the driveway, shall not
exceed 30% of the frontage.
   (E)   Driveway return radius.
      (1)   For residential driveways the return radius or taper shall be from
2.5 feet to 5 feet.
      (2)   For commercial driveways the return radius or taper shall be from
15 feet to 25 feet.
CHAPTER 92: LIBRARY
Section
   
92.01   Operation and funding
   
92.02   Disposal of damaged, obsolete or duplicate books
   
92.03   Establishment of rules and regulations; collection of fees and
penalties
   
92.04   Failure to return books
   
92.05   Unauthorized removal of books
   
92.06   Use of Library
   
92.07   Disposition of money collected
Cross-reference:
   Library Advisory Board, see §
33.09
§ 92.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city owns and manages the City Library. A separate accounting of all
gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests or other valuable income-producing
personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing
the City Library shall be kept and used for the benefit of the Library. The
funds shall, at all times, be in the custody of the City Treasurer. The Mayor
with the consent of a majority of Council shall have the power and authority to
appoint the Librarian. The Librarian shall hire such other employees as the
Mayor and Council may deem necessary. The Mayor and Council may pass such other
rules and regulations for the operation of the Library as may be proper for its
efficient operation.
(Prior Code, § 32-1)
§ 92.02 DISPOSAL OF DAMAGED, OBSOLETE OR DUPLICATE BOOKS.
   The Mayor and Council may authorize the sale, exchange or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete or duplicate books in the Library.
Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete or
duplicate books so disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 32-2)
§ 92.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS; COLLECTION OF FEES AND
PENALTIES.
   The Mayor and Council shall establish rules and regulations for the
governing of the City Library for the preservation and efficient management
thereof. They shall fix and impose, by general rules, penalties and forfeitures
for injury to the Library grounds, rooms, books or other property, or for
failure to return a book. All fees, penalties and forfeitures may be collected
in civil action in the event of failure, neglect or refusal to pay such
assessments.
(Prior Code, § 32-3)
§ 92.04 FAILURE TO RETURN BOOKS.
   Any person who injures or fails to return any books taken from the Library
shall forfeit and pay to the Library not less than the value of the book, in
addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the Mayor and Council may
assess.
(Prior Code, § 32-4)
§ 92.05 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF BOOKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made
by the Mayor and Council to take a book from the Library, without the consent
of the Librarian or an authorized employee of the Library. Any person removing
a book from the Library without properly checking it out shall be deemed to be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 32-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 USE OF LIBRARY.
   The City Library shall be free for the use of the inhabitants of the city.
The Librarian may exclude from the use of the Library and reading rooms any
person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with the rules and
regulations established for the government thereof.
(Prior Code, § 32-6)
§ 92.07 DISPOSITION OF MONEY COLLECTED.
   Any money collected by the Library shall be turned over monthly by the
Librarian to the City Treasurer, along with a report of the sources of the
revenue.
(Prior Code, § 32-7)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Operation and funding; Public Service Director
   
93.02   Injuring vegetation or property; littering
   
93.03   Prohibited conduct generally; propelling, throwing or operating
dangerous object or device
   
93.04   Vehicles
   
93.05   (Reserved)
   
93.06   Camping
Recreational Facilities
   
93.20   Operation and funding
   
93.21   Admission charge
   
93.22   Rentals
   
93.23   Rules and regulations
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish, see Neb. RS 16-695
Cross-reference:
   Smoking regulations, see §§
130.043 -
130.046,
130.999
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING; PUBLIC SERVICE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment and term of Public Service Director; tax levy; Park Fund.
The city owns and operates the city parks and other recreational areas through
the Public Service Director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council. The Public Service Director shall hold office for the
term of the Mayor.
   (B)   Duties of Public Service Director. The duties of the Public Service
Director shall be to lay out, improve and beautify the grounds now owned or
held or hereafter acquired for public park purposes, including park plots and
streets, in a manner as the Public Service Director shall deem for the best
interests of the city; and to employ, by and with the consent and approval of
the Mayor and the Council, such helpers and laborers as may be necessary for
the proper care, maintenance, improvement and beautification of the parks. The
Public Service Director shall prepare such rules and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the management and care of the parks of the city, and to
ensure the orderly use of the parks by the public and the protection thereof
from acts of vandalism or malicious mischief.
   (C)   Adoption of rules by Council; approval of contracts. The rules and
regulations shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval and
adoption and, when approved and adopted by the Mayor and Council, shall be
published in the manner provided for ordinances in book or pamphlet form. At
least 3 copies thereof shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection. When so approved and adopted and published, the regulations shall
be in full force and effect. The Director shall not enter into a contract of
any nature which involves an expenditure of funds, except for ordinary
operating expenses, unless the contract has been approved by resolution of the
majority of the members of the governing body prior to the contractual
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 38-1)
§ 93.02 INJURING VEGETATION OR PROPERTY; LITTERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut
down, injure or destroy any tree, plant or shrub in a city park or recreational
area. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded or
planted area, or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence,
bench, table or other property of the city parks and recreational areas.
   (B)   No person shall commit any waste on or litter the city parks or other
public grounds.
(Prior Code, § 38-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT GENERALLY; PROPELLING, THROWING OR OPERATING
DANGEROUS OBJECT OR DEVICE.
   (A)   Conduct which may reasonably be expected to substantially interfere
with the use and enjoyment of park and recreation areas by the general public
or to be a general nuisance is prohibited.
   (B)   Throwing, striking, propelling or otherwise operating flying or
propelled objects of a potentially dangerous nature such as model airplanes,
horseshoes, arrows, golf balls, baseballs, rocks or miniature automobiles is
prohibited except in special areas provided for the purpose.
(Prior Code, § 38-3)
§ 93.04 VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person other than authorized personnel shall park or drive any
motorized vehicle or snow machine on lawns, fields or any other places other
than upon roadways and parking areas clearly constructed and established for
such purposes within the parks, pathways or other recreation facilities.
   (B)   Enforcement of this section by the city’s Police Department shall be
pursuant to the procedure and penalties set forth in Chapter 71 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 38-4)
§ 93.05 (RESERVED).
§ 93.06 CAMPING.
   No person, other than authorized personnel, shall camp or cause the setting
of tents on park lawns, fields or any other places other than upon camping
areas clearly constructed and established for such purposes within the parks,
pathways or other recreational facilities.
(Prior Code, § 38-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 93.20 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The city owns and manages the city recreational facilities.
   (B)   The Director of Leisure Services shall manage the recreational
facilities. The Director shall have the power and authority to hire and
supervise the Recreational Facilities Manager and such employees as he or she
may deem necessary, and shall pass rules and regulations for the operation of
the recreational facilities as may be proper for its efficient operation.
(Prior Code, § 38-31)
§ 93.21 ADMISSION CHARGE.
   The Director of Leisure Services may, for the purpose of defraying the
expenses involved in maintaining, improving, managing and beautifying the
recreational facilities, make a reasonable admission charge for the use by any
person of the city recreational facilities. The charges shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk and shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at the
city recreational facilities for public inspection. The rates may be structured
for classes of persons in a reasonable manner; provided that, nothing in this
section shall be construed to permit or allow discrimination on the basis of
race, creed, color or national origin in the classification of persons for
admission charges.
(Prior Code, § 38-32)
§ 93.22 RENTALS.
   The Director of Leisure Services shall have the authority to rent the city
swimming pools to such organizations and other persons as he or she may, in his
or her discretion, see fit, subject to the review of the governing body. The
Director shall prescribe rules and regulations for the rentals and shall
require an appropriate number of qualified supervisors to be in attendance
during the rental period. The fees and other costs shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place at the city
recreational facilities.
(Prior Code, § 38-33)
§ 93.23 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Leisure Services shall have the power and authority to enact
bylaws, rules and regulations for the protection of those using the
recreational facilities and for the efficient management thereof. He or she may
provide suitable penalties for the violation of such bylaws, rules and
regulations, subject to the review and supervision of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 38-34)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Preservation of property during fires
   
94.002   Interference with firefighters
   
94.003   Traffic restrictions during fires
   
94.004   False alarms
   
94.005   Driving over fire hose
   
94.006   Injuring fire engine or other fire apparatus
   
94.007   Interference with signal box or wires
Fire Codes
   
94.020   International Fire Code adopted
   
94.021   Life Safety Code; Vehicular Gaseous Fuel Systems Code adopted
   
94.022   Conflicting provisions
   
94.023   Administration and enforcement
Fire Prevention
   
94.040   Open burning
   
94.041   Fire lanes
   
94.042   Open burning; ban; waiver
Explosives, Chemicals and Flammable Liquids
   
94.055   Storage of explosives and blasting agents
   
94.056   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground tanks
   
94.057   New bulk plants for flammable liquids
   
94.058   Bulk storage of liquified petroleum gas
Bureau of Fire Protection
   
94.070   Established
   
94.071   Duties of Chief
   
94.072   Right of entry
   
94.073   Inspection of special hazards and fire protection systems
   
94.074   Regular inspection of buildings
   
94.075   Inspections upon complaint
   
94.076   Service of process
   
94.077   Compliance with orders
   
94.078   Appeals of orders
   
94.079   Investigation of fires
   
94.080   Reports of fires
   
94.081   Assistance by City Attorney
   
94.082   Fire records
   
94.083   Annual report
Fireworks
   
94.095   Permit required for retail sale
   
94.096   Prerequisites and qualifications for issuance of sales permit
   
94.097   Term of sales permit; transfer; days and hours of sale
   
94.098   Public displays
   
94.099   Person in charge of stand
Fire Department
   
94.110   Composition; appointment of members
   
94.111   Duties of firefighters generally; power of arrest
   
94.112   Chief
   
94.113   Departmental rules and regulations
   
94.114   Preservation of property during fires
   
94.115   Roster of members; physical examination of members
   
94.116   Response to fires outside city
   
94.117   Organization of personnel
   
94.118   Volunteer Fire Department
   
94.119   Use fees for city ambulance service
Firefighters’ Retirement
   
94.130   Applicability of subchapter
   
94.131   Definitions
   
94.132   Credit for prior service
   
94.133   Firefighters Retirement System Fund established; transfer of
contributions; funding of system
   
94.134   Contributions by firefighters; amount; pick up firefighters’
contributions by city; voluntary contribution
   
94.135   Contributions by city
   
94.136   Retiring firefighter; annuity options; lump-sum payment
   
94.137   Retirement option; retirement date
   
94.138   Death other than in the line of duty; pension benefit payable
   
94.139   Death in the line of duty; retirement benefits
   
94.140   Disability in the line of duty; disability benefit; return to duty;
conditions
   
94.141   Temporary disability
   
94.142   Termination of employment; benefits; how treated; vesting schedule
   
94.143   Retirement Committee
   
94.144   Membership of Retirement Committee
   
94.145   Investment of system funds
   
94.146   Firefighters Retirement System Fund; schedule of investment costs;
allocation
   
94.147   Retirement Committee; officers; duties
   
94.148   Tax levy authorized
   
94.149   Pension benefits for firefighters serving on August 7, 1965
   
94.150   Contributions and reimbursement for firefighters subject to prior law
   
94.151   Continuation of benefits under prior law
   
94.152   Termination of employment; transfer of benefits; when
 
   
94.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for fire prevention and protection, see Neb. RS 16-222
Cross-reference:
   Smoking regulations, see §§
130.043 -
130.046,
130.999
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY DURING FIRES.
   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall have
the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection
of human life or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The
Fire Chief may direct the city firefighters to remove any building, structure
or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire.
(Prior Code, § 24-1)
§ 94.002 INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the city’s Fire
Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance of their duty.
(Prior Code, § 24-2) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.003 TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS DURING FIRES.
   No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief, or any
officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall follow, approach or park closer
than 300 feet to any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is
connected. Pedestrians shall not remain in or upon any street after a fire
alarm shall have been sounded until the fire engines shall have completely
passed. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to vehicles
carrying doctors or members of the Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 24-3) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.004 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to, intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause, raise any false alarm of fire.
(Prior Code, § 24-4) Penalty, see §
94.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907
§ 94.005 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief
or his or her assistant in command, to drive any vehicle over an unprotected
hose of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.006 INJURING FIRE ENGINE OR OTHER FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, deface or destroy
any engine or fire apparatus belonging to the city.
(Prior Code, § 24-6) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.007 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNAL BOX OR WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open any signal box
except to give an alarm of fire, or to break, cut, injure, deface, derange or
in any manner meddle or interfere with any signal box or fire alarm telegraph
wires.
(Prior Code, § 24-7) Penalty, see §
94.999
FIRE CODES
§ 94.020 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, the 2018 Edition International Fire Code, and the whole thereof,
save and except for the portions as deleted, modified or amended in this
subchapter, of which code 1 copy has been and is now on file with the City
Clerk. The code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at
length in this section, and from the date on which this section shall take
effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
city.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted
by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished in accordance with §
10.99.
(Prior Code, §24-31) (Ord. 3399, §1, 11-6-2001; Am. Ord. 3509, §1, 1-6-2004;
Am. Ord. 3882, passed 10-1-2013; Am. Ord. 4024, §1, 12-17-2019)
§ 94.021 LIFE SAFETY CODE; VEHICULAR GASEOUS FUEL SYSTEMS CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing life safety from fire in buildings and structures,
subject to all amendments now and hereafter adopted by the state’s Fire
Marshal, that certain code known as the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, recommended
by the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the 2012
Edition thereof, and the whole thereof, together with associated pamphlets,
including the FFPA 1 Fire Code, 2012 Edition, save and except the portions as
are deleted, modified or amended in this subchapter, of which code not less
than 3 copies have been and are now on file with the City Clerk. The code is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this
section and, from the date on which this section shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of describing
regulations governing the design, installation, operation, and maintenance of
compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG) engine fuel
systems on vehicles of all types and for fueling vehicle (dispensing) systems
and associated storage, subject to all amendments now and hereafter adopted by
the state’s Fire Marshal, that certain code known as the Vehicular Gaseous Fuel
Systems Code (NFPA 52), recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association, being particularly the 2010 Edition thereof, save and except the
portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this subchapter, of which code
not less than 3 copies have been and are now on file with the City Clerk. The
code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in
this section, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted
by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished in accordance with §
10.99.
(Prior Code, §24-32) (Ord. 3135, §1, 8-19-1997; Am. Ord. 3494, §1, 9-16-2003;
Am. Ord. 3848, § 1, 6-21-2012; Am. Ord. 4003, §1, 5-7-2019)
State law reference:
   Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, see Neb. RS 18-132
§ 94.022 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In construing the subject matter incorporated by reference in this
subchapter, it is the intention of the Mayor and Council that, if any part of
the subject matter shall conflict so that it cannot be reconciled with any
other provision of this code or other ordinance duly enacted by the city, the
provisions of this code or other ordinance which legislate directly and
specifically upon the precise matter in question shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 24-34)
§ 94.023 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall administer and enforce the provisions of
the subject matter incorporated by reference in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24-35)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 94.040 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   No outdoor burning of any kind, character or type shall be allowed
except in the following instances:
      (1)   Where open burning is used at construction sites and railroad
service areas for the purpose of providing heat for workers. Any such fires
shall make use of clean combustible materials or coal;
      (2)   Charcoal braziers or gas fire cooking units used in connection with
picnics;
      (3)   Any burning done by the city’s Fire Department or Volunteer Fire
Department in connection with training courses;
      (4)   Approved incineration for use at construction sites as follows:
         (a)   Application for a permit to use an approved incinerator shall be
made in writing to the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Issuance of a permit shall be
in the form of a metal numbered tag attached to the spark arrester. The number
will be registered in the Bureau files to that construction company to which it
is issued.
         (b)   Burners shall be secured to prevent tipping.
         (c)   Spark arresters shall have holes not larger than 1/4 inch and
conform the following.
            1.   Spark arresters shall be hinged on 1 side.
            2.   Spark arresters shall be weighted or latched on the free side.
         (d)   The burning chamber may be a 50-gallon barrel or a barrel of
like quality. The barrel shall have sufficient 1-inch holes in the burning
chamber to allow complete burning.
         (e)   The burning chamber shall be kept clean of ash after use.
            1.   Ash shall be properly disposed of.
            2.   Deteriorated burning chambers shall be replaced.
         (f)   Fuels that produce irritating or black smoke shall not be
disposed of in the incinerator, for example, tarpaper, shingles, plastic,
flammable liquids and the like.
      (5)   A person may kindle or maintain a fire upon obtaining a permit to
do so from the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief, Battalion Chief or Fire Marshal,
and subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The fire shall be more than 25 feet from any structure, power
lines or overhead obstructions, and adequate provision shall be made to prevent
the fire from spreading to within 25 feet of any structure, power lines or
overhead obstructions.
         (b)   The permits issued pursuant to this section by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention shall be subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the
Bureau and in effect on the date of issuance. The Bureau may, from time to
time, amend such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and proper. Any
rules and regulations in effect on the date of issuance shall be provided to
the permit holder in writing as a part of the permit.
         (c)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Chief, Battalion Chief or Fire Marshal
may ban and prohibit any or all burning when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make the fires hazardous.
   (B)   Burning of waste materials by incinerator, stove or oven is prohibited
unless the stack emissions from the incinerators shall be in conformity with
the state’s Department of Environmental Quality regulations.
(Prior Code, § 24-61)
§ 94.041 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Fire lanes are authorized by § 503 of the International Fire Code 2003
adopted by reference in §
94.020.
   (B)   Fire lanes are established by resolution passed by the Mayor and City
Council as follows:
      (1)   Mid-Plains Community College Voc-Tech Campus: The alleyway between
the north wall of the main building and the south wall of the building directly
north.
      (2)   Mall: 21 feet of clear space perpendicular to the building.
      (3)   Great Plains Regional Medical Center: Roadway parallel and adjacent
to the main entrance to the south side of the building and roadway parallel and
adjacent to the west side of the building.
      (4)   North Platte Care Centre: The entrance and exit traffic lanes.
      (5)   South Platte Terrace: The entrance and exit traffic lanes that
circumvent the apartment buildings.
      (6)   Craft State Office Building: The south side of B Street from the
intersection of B and Silber Streets to the west parking entrance, and 15 feet
on either side of the main entrance on Silber Street.
      (7)   Downtown Parkade Plaza: 21 feet of clear space perpendicular to the
south side of the building and 15 feet of clear space perpendicular to building
on each side of the Fire Department sprinkler connections on the north side of
the building.
      (8)   Platteview Apartments: 12 feet on each side of the fire hydrant and
16 feet west of the entrance to the parking lot.
      (9)   South Oak Manor: The drive beginning at William Street and
proceeding south for a distance of 90 feet, a width of 25 feet beginning at
South Oak Street and proceeding in a westerly direction for the distance of 221
feet in length; and the service drive on the west side of the building 14-1/
2 feet wide and 66 feet long.
      (10)   ShopKo: 20 feet of clear space adjacent to the building.
      (11)   Linden Manor: One parking stall to the west and east of the
driveway on the north side of the building.
      (12)   Walmart: 20 feet of clear space perpendicular to the west side of
the building and 15 feet of clear space perpendicular to the building on either
side of the Fire Department sprinkler connection.
      (13)   U-Save: 20 feet of clear space perpendicular to the south side of
the building.
      (14)   Centennial Park Retirement Village: North sidewalk north of the
building and 15 feet either side and in front of the fire hydrant.
      (15)   Pawnee Retirement Hotel: Starting on the west side of the south
entrance, then east to the street corner.
      (16)   North Platte public schools: As posted.
      (17)   Northwest corner of East Fifth Street and North Bailey Avenue
(north side of East Fifth Street in front of 221 and 225 East Fifth Street.
      (18)   Thirty-two feet west of the end of return on the northwest corner
of 5th Street and Sycamore Street.
(Prior Code, § 24-62) (Res. passed 1-31-1994; Am. Ord. 2955, § 1, 3-15-1994;
Res. passed 10-15-1996)
§ 94.042 OPEN BURNING; BAN; WAIVER.
   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under division (A) of
this section for an area under the municipal Fire Department's jurisdiction by
issuing an open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct
open burning. The permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to
conduct open burning shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Chief, and on a
form provided by the State Fire Marshal.
   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the municipal Fire
Department's jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior to
starting the burn.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions acceptable
for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under division (B) of this
section.
   (E)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for each such
permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the governing body for inclusion
in the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds shall not
reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee shall be
collected from any state or political subdivision to which such a permit is
issued to conduct open burning under division (B) of this section in the course
of that state's or political subdivision's official duties.
(Neb. RS 81-520.01)
EXPLOSIVES, CHEMICALS AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
§ 94.055 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   The limits referred to in § 3304.1 of the 2003 International Fire Code, in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: by conditional use in the I-2 zone.
(Prior Code, § 24-91) (Ord. 2991, § 1, 2-21-1995)
§ 94.056 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN ABOVEGROUND TANKS.
   (A)   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground storage
tanks (AST) may be permitted by conditional use permit in I-2 heavy industrial
districts on a minimum site of 10 acres of land.
   (B)   All other storage of flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground
tanks (AST) is prohibited; provided, however, that aboveground storage tanks
legally existing prior to the effective date of this section shall be allowed
to exist until the time as any such storage tank is moved, removed or
significantly altered; and further provided, that aboveground storage of Class
III B liquids in 1 storage tank with a capacity equal to or less than 2,000
gallons and propane in 1 storage tank with capacity equal to or less than 1,000
gallons may be allowed only in the following zoning districts: B-2 business
districts, I-1 light industrial districts, and 1-2 heavy industrial districts,
by permit issued by the Fire Chief or his or her designee if the aboveground
storage tank for Class III B liquids meets the criteria of the National Fire
Protection Association Standard No. 30, and storage of propane meets the
criteria of National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 58. Health care
facilities which satisfy the definition of the National Fire Protection
Association, Life Safety Code § 101, 2000 Edition, Chapter 18.1.1.2 and
19.1.1.2 shall be permitted to install emergency generators with built-in fuel
tanks, on site, that comply with NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Code; NFPA 37, Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion
Engines and Gas Turbines; NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code; and NFPA 58,
Liquified Petroleum Gas Code; and NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby
Power Systems. STORAGE TANKS shall be defined by the National Fire Protection
Association Standard No. 30.
   (C)   All aboveground storage tanks shall be fire resistant tanks that shall
be tested and listed in accordance with UL (Underwriters Laboratory) 2080,
entitled "Standard for Fire Resistant Tanks for Flammable and Combustible
Liquids" and National Fire Protection Standard No. 30.
   (D)   In no event shall fuel to land density be greater than a maximum of
1,000 gallons per acre.
   (E)   All aboveground storage tank sites shall have the containment cells
required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the
Environmental Protection Act, and any other requirements set forth by state and
federal regulations.
   (F)   All aboveground storage tank sites shall provide a complete list of
contents of such tanks, and a MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheets) to the North
Platte Fire Department, identifying the materials stored on site in the
aboveground storage tanks.
(Prior Code, § 24-92) (Ord. 2991, § 1, 2-21-1995; Am. Ord. 3176, § 1, 6-2-1998;
Am. Ord. 3187, § 1, 10-20-1998; Am. Ord. 3481, § 1, 7-1-2003; Am. Ord. 3846, §
1, 5-15-2012; Am. Ord. 3872, § 1, 5-21-2013; Am. Ord. 3926, § 1, 10-6-2015)
§ 94.057 NEW BULK PLANTS FOR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   The limits referred to in § 3404.2.9.5 of the 2003 International Fire Code,
in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited,
are hereby established as follows: by conditional use in the I-2 zone.
(Prior Code, § 24-93) (Ord. 2991, § 1, 2-21-1995)
§ 94.058 BULK STORAGE OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   The limits referred to in § 3804.2 of the 2003 International Fire Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby
established as follows: by conditional use in an I-2 Zone when the aggregate
capacity of any 1 installation is equal to or less than 2,000 gallon water
capacity; by conditional use in a B-2 Zone when the aggregate capacity of any 1
installation is equal to or less than 1,000 gallon water capacity. Storage of
LP gas other than as permitted herein is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 24-94) (Ord. 2991, § 1, 2-21-1995; Am. Ord. 3135, § 2, 8-19-
1997)
BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION
§ 94.070 ESTABLISHED.
   A bureau of fire prevention in the Fire Department of the city is hereby
established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the
Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby designated as Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(Prior Code, § 24-121)
§ 94.071 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances covering the following:
      (1)   The prevention of fire;
      (2)   The storage and use of explosives and inflammables;
      (3)   The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems, and fire extinguishing equipment;
      (4)   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
      (5)   The means and adequacy of exit, in case of fire, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or
congregate, from time to time, for any purpose; and
      (6)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
   (B)   He or she shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as are set forth in other sections of this subchapter, and as may be conferred
and imposed from time to time by law.
(Prior Code, § 24-122)
§ 94.072 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or any inspector or member of the
Fire Department designated by the Chief may, at all reasonable hours, enter any
building or premises within his or her jurisdiction for the purpose of making
any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, he
or she may deem necessary to be made.
(Prior Code, § 24-123)
§ 94.073 INSPECTION OF SPECIAL HAZARDS AND FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or any inspector or member of
that Department specially designated thereto shall inspect, as often as may be
necessary, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or
installations of gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and flammable materials,
all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems, and such other
hazards or appliances as the chief of the Fire Department shall designate, and
shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and
ordinances governing such hazards or appliances and for safeguarding of life
and property from fire.
(Prior Code, § 24-124)
§ 94.074 REGULAR INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect, or
cause to be inspected by the Bureau of Fire Prevention or by the Fire
Department officers and members, as often as may be necessary, all buildings
and premises except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions likely to cause fire,
or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of the city
affecting fire hazards. Whenever any inspector, as defined in this section,
shall find in any building or upon any premises combustible or explosive matter
or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of
wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials, and which are so
situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire
escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows likely to interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he or
she shall order such materials or condition to be removed or remedied.
(Prior Code, § 24-125)
§ 94.075 INSPECTIONS UPON COMPLAINT.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, as Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
or any inspector, upon the complaint of any person or whenever he or she shall
deem it necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within his or her
jurisdiction. Whenever any officers shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or other
fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire,
and which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants
thereof, and whenever the officer shall find in any building combustible or
explosive matter or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of the
building or the occupants thereof, he or she shall order the dangerous
conditions or materials to be removed or remedied.
(Prior Code, § 24-126)
§ 94.076 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   The service of the orders as mentioned in §§
94.073 through
94.075 may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed,
either by delivering a copy of the order to the occupant personally or by
delivering the order to and leaving it with any person in charge of the
premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the
premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of
any premises, the order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with
the person a copy of the order, or, if the owner is absent from the
jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing the copy to the
owner’s last known post office address.
(Prior Code, § 24-127)
§ 94.077 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   Any order under this subchapter shall be complied with by the owner or
occupant of the premises or building within 15 days from the date of issuance;
provided that, if the inspector determines that the fire hazard poses an
immediate and severe threat to life or property, the owner or occupant shall
comply within a shorter time, or immediately, as determined by the inspector.
An extension beyond the stated maximum time for compliance with any order may
be granted, for cause shown, by the inspector or the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
(Prior Code, § 24-128)
§ 94.078 APPEALS OF ORDERS.
   If an order is made under this subchapter by 1 of the inspectors and not the
Chief of the Fire Department, the owner or occupant may within 24 hours appeal
to the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall, within 5 days, review the order
and file his or her decision thereon; provided that, if the order requires
compliance immediately, the Chief shall, on appeal of the owner or occupant,
make immediate review of the order; and if the order requires compliance within
any other period of time less than 15 days, he or she shall make review so that
at least 24 hours are remaining after his or her determination before
compliance is required. Unless by authority of the Chief the order is revoked,
modified or extended, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within
the time fixed in the order; provided that the owner or occupant may, within 5
days after making or affirming of any such order by the Chief, seek relief in
the court having jurisdiction, during which proceedings the action of the city
shall be stayed.
(Prior Code, § 24-129)
§ 94.079 INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.
   The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been
destroyed or damaged, and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire
is the result of carelessness or design. The investigations shall be begun
immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire by the inspector in whose
district the fire occurs, and if it appears to the officer making such an
investigation that the fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief of the Fire
Department shall be immediately notified of the facts. He or she shall take
charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper
authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and
shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and
in the prosecution of the case.
(Prior Code, § 24-130)
§ 94.080 REPORTS OF FIRES.
   Every fire shall be reported in writing to the Bureau of Fire Prevention
within 2 days after the occurrence of the fire, by the officer in whose
jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. The report shall be in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department, and shall contain a
statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of the
fire, and the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon the
property, and such other information as may be required.
(Prior Code, § 24-131)
§ 94.081 ASSISTANCE BY CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney, upon request of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall
assist the inspectors in the investigation of any fire which, in their opinion,
is of a suspicious origin.
(Prior Code, § 24-132)
§ 94.082 FIRE RECORDS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep, in the office of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the
fires, including statistics as to the extent of the fires and the damage caused
thereby, and whether the losses were covered by insurance, and, if so, in what
amount. The record shall be made daily from the reports made by the inspectors
under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24-133)
§ 94.083 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The annual report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made on or
before the second Tuesday in April in each year and transmitted to the Mayor
and Council. It shall contain all proceedings under this subchapter, with such
statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend therein any amendments to
this subchapter which, in his or her judgment, shall be desirable.
(Prior Code, § 24-134)
FIREWORKS
§ 94.095 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR RETAIL SALE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell at retail
within the city any fireworks, as defined and permitted under the statutes of
the state, without having first secured a permit from the city Fire Marshal’s
Office.
(Prior Code, § 24-161) (Ord. 3581, § 1, 2-15-2005) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.096 PREREQUISITES AND QUALIFICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF SALES PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person making application for a permit required by §
94.095 shall:
      (1)   File satisfactory proof with the Fire Chief that such person has
been a resident of, or doing business in the city at least 6 months prior to
the date of making the application;
      (2)   Pay to the City of North Platte the sum of $250, which sum shall be
retained by the city as an occupation tax;
      (3)   File with the Fire Chief a written statement giving the location of
the retail outlets;
      (4)   File with the Fire Chief all applications for permits by June 20 of
the year for which the applicant wishes the permit to sell in June and July;
and
      (5)   Provide to the Fire Chief the manner of storage for their fireworks
and the location of the storage place.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years shall be granted a permit.
   (C)   A past record of violations may result in the denial of a permit. This
determination is to be made by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (D)   All fireworks stands must be provided with at least 1 fire
extinguisher which is approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 24-162) (Ord. 3046, § 2, 1-3-1996; Am. Ord. 3376, § 2, 8-7-2001;
Am. Ord. 3581, §
§ 94.097 TERM OF SALES PERMIT; TRANSFER; DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   The permit required by §
94.095, when issued by the Fire Chief, shall be valid beginning June 28 at 12:
00 noon and ending July 4 at 10:00 p.m. of the year of issue, and shall not be
transferable.
   (B)   Fireworks may be sold June 28 through July 3 during the hours of 12:00
noon to 10:00 p.m. and July 4 during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 24-163) (Ord. 3046, § 3, 1-3-1996; Am. Ord. 3186, § 1, 9-1-1998)
§ 94.098 PUBLIC DISPLAYS.
   Public exhibitions or displays of discharging fireworks may be conducted
without a sales permit, but shall be conducted according to rules and
regulations prescribed by the state’s Fire Marshal in cooperation with the
city’s Fire Chief. Where supervisors are required, the sponsor of the
exhibition or display shall hire or engage the services of supervisors, who
shall be approved by the city’s Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 24-164)
§ 94.099 PERSON IN CHARGE OF STAND.
   Any licensed fireworks stand or firm engaged in the sale of fireworks shall
have a person age 16 years or older in charge of the sale of fireworks and on
the stand premises at all times.
(Prior Code, § 24-165)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 94.110 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The present personnel of the Fire Department, consisting of the paid
firefighters authorized by the Mayor and Council, together with those
volunteers subject to call as specified in this subchapter, shall constitute
the Fire Department of the city; provided that, additional members of the
Department or persons to fill vacancies in the present personnel shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, upon the recommendations of the Chief of
the Fire Department and the report of the Civil Service Board.
(Prior Code, § 24-191)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish a fire department, see Neb. RS 16-222
§ 94.111 DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS GENERALLY; POWER OF ARREST.
   Members of the Fire Department shall be subject to rules and regulations and
shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed or required of them by the
Chief of the Fire Department, this code or other ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 24-192)
§ 94.112 CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department and/or his or her designee shall be
subject to call at all times.
   (B)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department of the city shall have, under
the direction of the City Administrator, control and command of the Fire
Department of the city and of the property, implements and apparatus used in
his or her Department.
      (2)   He or she also shall perform such duties as are provided by this
code relating to the Fire Department and fire regulations. The Chief of the
Department or his or her designee shall take charge of and direct all
activities of the Fire Department at fires, or in such emergencies as the
Department shall be called to. He or she shall thereat enforce discipline, both
with respect to the members of the Department and also to the persons outside
thereof. He or she shall see that the equipment is maintained in serviceable
shape and ready for instant use and shall so arrange that an adequate force of
humans is available to man all equipment. He or she shall be the official
representative of the Department in its dealings with the Mayor and Council and
shall, from time to time, report conditions and make recommendations with
reference to standardizing and maintaining equipment.
(Prior Code, § 24-193)
§ 94.113 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole and absolute control and
command over all persons connected with the Fire Department of the city, and
shall possess full power and authority over its organization, government and
discipline, and to that end he or she may prescribe and establish, from time to
time, rules and regulations as he or she may deem advisable. Each member of the
Fire Department shall be furnished with a copy of the rules and regulations
established by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 24-194)
§ 94.114 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY DURING FIRES.
   The Chief of the Fire Department or officer in command shall have power to
cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the
preservation of the property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or
to protect adjoining property. The Chief may direct the hook and ladder men to
remove any building, erection or fence for the purpose of checking the progress
of any fire.
(Prior Code, § 24-195)
§ 94.115 ROSTER OF MEMBERS; PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF MEMBERS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall, on or before the second Tuesday in
April in each year, furnish the City Clerk, for the information of the Mayor
and Council, the roster of all members, paid or subject to call, of the Fire
Department in good standing, and as needed throughout the year shall report any
proposed additions or changes in the roster for proper action of the Council,
to the end that all members of the Fire Department shall, at all times, be
covered by insurance or such other lawful protection to firefighters as may be
provided by the Mayor and Council under the worker’s compensation law of the
state or otherwise. All members of the Fire Department shall be required to
pass a physical examination every even-numbered year.
(Prior Code, § 24-196)
§ 94.116 RESPONSE TO FIRES OUTSIDE CITY.
   Certain personnel of the Fire Department may go beyond the corporate limits
of the city to fight fire and thereby to save life or property. Fire and
emergency equipment of the city may go beyond the corporate limits of the city
to fight fire or provide emergency service when directed to do so by the Chief
of the Fire Department or by some person authorized to act for the Chief.
Members of the Fire Department listed on the roster provided for by §
94.115 shall be considered as acting in the performance and within the scope of
their duties in fighting fire or saving life or property outside the city, if
and when directed to do so by the Chief of the Fire Department or by some
person authorized to act for the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 24-197)
§ 94.117 ORGANIZATION OF PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Personnel of the Fire Department shall be organized as follows: Fire
Chief, Assistant Chief, Battalion Chief, Fire Marshal, 6 captains, 3
lieutenants and such other firefighters as the Mayor and Council may direct.
   (B)   There shall be established 3 companies, each company consisting of 1
Battalion Chief, 2 captains, 1 lieutenant and such firefighters as the Mayor
and Council shall direct. The senior officer in charge at the answering station
shall attend all alarm calls.
(Prior Code, § 24-198)
§ 94.118 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The 3 companies of the organized Volunteer Fire Department shall constitute
a part of the Fire Department, and the constitution and bylaws as now adopted
and governing the Volunteer Fire Department are hereby approved.
(Prior Code, § 24-199)
§ 94.119 USE FEES FOR CITY AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   The fees to be levied, assessed and collected from all persons who make use
of city ambulance service shall be set from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 24-200)
FIREFIGHTERS’ RETIREMENT
§ 94.130 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Except as provided in §
94.148, §§
94.130 to
94.147 shall apply to all firefighters of the city.
(Prior Code, § 24-221)
Statutory reference:
   Firefighters’ retirement, see Neb. RS 16-1020 et seq.
§ 94.131 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT. Equality in value of the aggregate amount of benefit
expected to be received under different forms or at different times determined
as of a given date as adopted by the city or the retirement committee for use
by the retirement system. Such ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENCIES shall be specified in
the funding medium established for the retirement system, except that if
benefits under the retirement system are obtained through the purchase of an
annuity contract, the actuarial equivalency of any such form of benefit shall
be the amount of pension benefit which can be purchased or otherwise provided
by such contract. All actuarial and mortality assumptions adopted by the city
or retirement committee shall be on a sex-neutral basis.
   ANNUITY CONTRACT. The contract or contracts issued by 1 or more life
insurance companies or designated trusts and purchased by the retirement system
in order to provide any of the benefits described in the sections. Annuity
conversion rates contained in any such contract shall be specified on a sex-
neutral basis.
   BENEFICIARY. The person designated by a firefighter, pursuant to a written
instrument filed with the Retirement Committee before the firefighter’s death,
to receive death benefits which may be payable under the retirement system.
   FUNDING AGENT. Any bank, trust company, life insurance company, thrift
institution, credit union or investment management firm selected by the
Retirement Committee, subject to the approval of the city, to hold or invest
the funds of the retirement system.
   REGULAR INTEREST. The rate of interest earned each calendar year commencing
January 1, 1984, equal to the rate of net earnings realized for the calendar
year from investments of the Retirement Fund. Net earnings means the amount by
which income or gain realized from investments of the retirement fund exceeds
the amount of any realized losses from such investments during the calendar
year. The Retirement Committee shall annually report the amount of regular
interest earned for such year.
   REGULAR PAY. The salary of a firefighter at the date the firefighter elects
to retire or terminate employment with the city.
   RETIREMENT COMMITTEE. The Retirement Committee created pursuant to §
94.143.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM. A retirement system established in this subchapter.
   RETIREMENT VALUE. The accumulated value of the firefighter’s employee
account and employer account. The retirement value at any time shall consist of
the sum of the contributions made or transferred to such accounts by the
firefighter and by the city on the firefighter’s behalf and the regular
interest credited to the accounts through such date, reduced by any realized
losses which were not taken into account in determining regular interest in any
year, and as further adjusted each year to reflect the accounts pro rata share
of the appreciation or depreciation of the assets of the retirement system as
determined by the Retirement Committee at their fair market values, including
any account under §
94.145(B). The valuation shall be undertaken at least annually as of December
31 of each year and at such other times as may be directed by the Retirement
Committee. The value of each account shall be reduced each year by the
appropriate share of the investment costs as provided in §
94.146. The RETIREMENT VALUE shall be further reduced by the amount of all
distributions made to or on the behalf of the firefighter from the retirement
system.
   SALARY. The base rate of pay, excluding overtime, callback pay, clothing
allowances and other such benefits as reported on the participant’s federal
income tax withholding statement including the firefighters’ contributions
picked up by the city as provided in §
94.134(B) and any salary reduction contributions which are excludable from
income for federal income tax purposes pursuant to §§ 125 or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
   STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY. An ordinary annuity payable for the life of the
primary annuitant only, and terminating at his or her death without refund or
death benefit of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 24-222)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1021
§ 94.132 CREDIT FOR PRIOR SERVICE.
   A firefighter shall be credited with all years of his or her service after
August 7, 1965, for the purpose of determining vested retirement benefits under
§§
94.130 through
94.147.
(Prior Code, § 24-223)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1022
§ 94.133 FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUND ESTABLISHED; TRANSFER OF
CONTRIBUTIONS; FUNDING OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   Commencing on January 1, 1984, each city of the first class having a
paid Fire Department shall keep and maintain a firefighters retirement system
fund for the purpose of investing payroll deductions and city contributions to
the retirement system. The Fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all
city money and funds. The Fund shall be administered exclusively for the
purposes of the retirement system and for the benefit of participating
firefighters and their beneficiaries and so as to establish the fund as a trust
under the law of this state for all purposes of § 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code. Upon the passage of §§
94.130 through
94.148 all of the contributions made by a firefighter under Neb. RS 35-203.1,
as it formerly existed and interest accrued at 5% per annum on such
contributions prior to January 1, 1984, shall be transferred to the
firefighter’s employee account. Regular interest shall begin to accrue on the
contributions transferred into the Fund. The funds shall be invested in the
manner prescribed in §
94.145.
   (B)   The city shall establish a medium for funding the retirement system
which, with the approval of the Retirement Committee, may be a pension trust
fund, custodial account, group annuity contract, or combination thereof, for
the purpose of investing money for the retirement system in the manner
prescribed by §
94.145 and to provide the retirement, death and disability benefits for
firefighters granted by this subchapter. The trustee or custodian of any trust
fund shall be a designated funding agent which is qualified to act as a
fiduciary or custodian in this state, the City Treasurer, an appropriate city
officer authorized to administer funds of the city, or a combination thereof.
(Prior Code, § 24-224)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1023
§ 94.134 CONTRIBUTIONS BY FIREFIGHTERS; AMOUNT; PICK UP FIREFIGHTERS'
CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY; VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Each firefighter participating in the retirement system shall
contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to 6-1/2% of his or her salary.
The payment shall be made by regular payroll deductions from his periodic
salary and shall be credited to his or her employee account on a monthly basis.
Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest.
   (B)   Each city of the first class with firefighters participating in a
retirement system shall pick up the firefighters’ contributions required by
this division (B) for all compensation paid on or after January 1, 1984, and
the contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in
determining federal income tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code,
except that the city shall continue to withhold federal income taxes based upon
such contributions until the Internal Revenue Service or the federal courts
rule that, pursuant to § 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, the contributions
shall not be included as gross income of the employee until such time as they
are distributed from the retirement system. The city shall pay the employee
contributions from the same source of funds which is used in paying
compensation to the employee. The city shall pick up the employee contributions
by a salary deduction either through a reduction in the cash salary of the
employee or a combination of a reduction in salary and offset against a future
salary increase. In no event shall a firefighter be given an option to choose
to receive the amount of the required contribution in lieu of having the
contribution paid directly to the retirement system.
   (C)   Each firefighter participating in the retirement system shall be
entitled to make voluntary cash contributions to the retirement system in an
amount not to exceed the contribution limitations established by the Internal
Revenue Code. Voluntary contributions shall be credited to the employee account
and shall thereafter be credited with regular interest. A voluntary
contribution shall become a part of the firefighters retirement system fund
shall be held, administered, invested and distributed in the same manner as any
other employee contribution to the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 24-225)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1024
§ 94.135 CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 1984, each city of the first class with
firefighters participating in a retirement system shall contribute to the
retirement system a sum equal to 13% of each such participating firefighter’s
periodic salary. The payment shall be credited to his or her employer account
on a monthly basis. Each such account shall also be credited with regular
interest. The city shall also contribute to the employer account of any
firefighter employed by the city on January 1, 1984, an amount equal to the
employee’s contributions, without interest, that were made to the city prior to
January 1, 1984, with the contribution to be made at the time the firefighter
retires or terminates employment with the city. The city may contribute the
amount before the firefighter’s retirement or termination of employment or
credit interest on the contribution.
   (B)   Each such city shall contribute any additional amounts necessary to
fund retirement or other retirement plan benefits not provided by employee
contributions or city contributions to the employer account required by
division (A) above. Additional contributions shall be accumulated in an
unallocated employer account of the Firefighters Retirement System Fund and
used to provide the benefits, if any, specified in §§
94.136 and
94.138 to
94.140 which are not otherwise funded by the firefighter’s retirement value.
Funds needed to provide for a firefighter’s benefits shall be transferred from
the unallocated employer account when and as such funds are needed. All funds
committed by the city to the funding of a firefighter pension system on January
1, 1984, that are not transferred to the firefighters employee accounts shall
be transferred to the unallocated employer account.
(Prior Code, § 24-226)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1025
§ 94.136 RETIRING FIREFIGHTER; ANNUITY OPTIONS; LUMP-SUM PAYMENT.
   (A)   At any time before the retirement date, the retiring firefighter may
elect to receive his or her pension benefit at retirement either in the form of
a straight life annuity or any optional form of annuity benefit established by
the Retirement Committee and provided under a purchased annuity contract. The
optional annuity benefit shall be specified in the funding medium for the
retirement system and shall include a straight life annuity with a guarantee of
at least 60 monthly payments or an annuity payable for the life of the retiring
firefighter and, after the death of the retiree, monthly payments, as elected
by the retiring firefighter, of 100%, 75% or 50% of the amount of annuity
payable to the retiring firefighter during his or her life, to the beneficiary
selected by the retiring firefighter at the time of the original application
for an annuity. For any firefighter whose retirement date is on or after
January 1, 1997, the optional benefit forms for the retirement system shall
include a single lump-sum payment of the firefighter’s retirement value. For
firefighters whose retirement date is prior to January 1, 1997, a single lump-
sum payment shall be available only if the city has adopted the distribution
option in the funding medium established for the retirement system. The
retiring firefighter may further elect to defer the date of the first payment
or lump-sum distribution to the first day of any specified month prior to age
70. In the event the retiring firefighter elects to receive his or her pension
benefit in the form of an annuity, the amount of such annuity benefit shall be
the amount provided by the annuity contract purchased or otherwise provided by
the firefighter’s retirement value as of the date of the first payment. Any
such annuity contract purchased by the retirement system may be distributed to
the retiring firefighter. Upon the payment of a lump-sum or the distribution of
a paid-up annuity contract, all obligations of the retirement system to pay
retirement benefits to the firefighter and his or her beneficiaries shall
terminate, without exception.
   (B)   (1)   For all firefighters employed on January 1, 1984, the amount of
the pension benefit at the retirement date shall not be less than the following
amounts:
         (a)   If retirement from the city occurs following age 55 with 21
years of service with the city, 50% of regular pay;
         (b)   If retirement from the city occurs following age 50 but before
age 55 with at least 21 years of service with the city, the firefighter shall
receive the actuarial equivalent of the benefit which would otherwise be
provided at age 55;
         (c)   If retirement from the city occurs on or after age 55 with less
than 21 years of service with the city, the firefighter shall receive a pension
of at least 50% of the salary he or she was receiving at the time of retirement
multiplied by the ratio of the years of service to 21;
         (d)   For terminations of employment from the city on or after
September 9, 1993, if the termination of employment as a firefighter occurs
before age 55 but after completion of 21 years of service with the city, the
firefighter shall receive upon the attainment of age 55 a pension benefit of
50% of regular pay;
         (e)   Unless an optional annuity benefit is selected by the retired
firefighter, at the death of any retired firefighter the same rate of pension
as is provided for in this section shall be paid to the surviving spouse of the
deceased firefighter during such time as the surviving spouse remains unmarried
and, in case there is no surviving spouse, then the minor children, if any, of
the deceased firefighter shall equally share the pension benefit during their
minority, except that as soon as a child of the deceased firefighter ceases to
be a minor, the pension as to the child shall cease; or
         (f)   In the event a retired firefighter or his or her surviving
beneficiaries die before the aggregate amount of pension payments received by
the firefighter and his or her survivor beneficiaries, if any, equals the total
amount in the firefighter’s employee account, at the time of the first benefit
payment the difference between the total amount in the employee’s account and
the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the retired firefighter
and his or her surviving beneficiaries, if any, shall be paid in a single sum
to the firefighter’s estate.
      (2)   A firefighter entitled to a minimum pension benefit under this
division may elect to receive the pension benefit in any form permitted by
division (A) of this section, including a single lump-sum payment if the
firefighter retires on or after January 1, 1997, or if the city has adopted a
lump-sum distribution option for firefighters retiring before January 1, 1997,
in the funding medium for the retirement system. If the minimum pension benefit
is paid in the form of an optional annuity benefit or a single lump-sum
payment, the benefit or payment shall be the actuarial equivalent of the
annuity that would otherwise be paid to the firefighter pursuant to this
division.
      (3)   If the firefighter chooses the single lump-sum payment option, the
firefighter may request that the actuarial equivalent be equal to the average
of the cost of 2 annuity contracts purchased on the open market, if the
difference between the cost of the 2 annuity contracts does not exceed 5%. Of
the 2 annuity contracts used for comparison, 1 shall be chosen by the
firefighter and 1 shall be chosen by the city. If the difference between the 2
annuity contracts exceeds 5%, the Retirement Committee shall review the costs
of the 2 annuity contracts and make a recommendation to the City Council as to
the amount of the lump-sum payment to be made to the firefighter. The City
Council shall, after a hearing, determine the amount of the single lump-sum
payment due the firefighter.
   (C)   If the retirement value of a firefighter entitled to a minimum pension
benefit under division (B) of this section is not sufficient at the time of the
first payment to purchase or provide the required pension benefit, the city
shall utilize the funds as may be necessary from the unallocated employer
account of the retirement system to purchase or provide for the required
pension benefit.
   (D)   Any retiring firefighter whose pension benefit is less than $25 per
month on the straight life annuity option shall be paid a lump-sum settlement
equal to the retirement value in lieu of annuity and shall not be entitled to
elect to receive annuity benefits.
(Prior Code, § 24-228)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1027
§ 94.137 RETIREMENT OPTION; RETIREMENT DATE.
   (A)   A firefighter of a city of the first class may:
      (1)   Retire or be retired and receive the applicable retirement pension
benefit upon the attainment of age 55 while employed by the city as a
firefighter;
      (2)   Elect to retire after he or she has attained the age of 50 and has
completed at least 21 years of service with the city and receive the actuarial
equivalent of the pension benefit he or she would otherwise receive upon the
attainment of age 55;
      (3)   After 21 years of service with the city, terminate employment with
the city and, upon the attainment of age 55, receive the applicable retirement
pension benefit; or
      (4)   Retire or be retired as a result of disability while in the line of
duty, as determined under §
94.140, at any age and receive the applicable pension benefit provided in the
section.
   (B)   A firefighter who is eligible to retire pursuant to division (A)(1) of
this section, but does not, shall continue to contribute to his or her employee
account and the city shall continue to contribute to its employer account.
(Prior Code, § 24-229)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1028
§ 94.138 DEATH OTHER THAN IN THE LINE OF DUTY; PENSION BENEFIT PAYABLE.
   (A)   When prior to the commencement of retirement benefits any firefighter
participating in the retirement system dies other than in the line of duty, and
except as provided in division (B) of this section, the entire retirement value
shall be payable to the beneficiary or beneficiaries specified by the deceased
firefighter prior to his or her death or to the deceased firefighter’s estate
in the event that no beneficiary was specified. The retirement value or portion
thereof may be received by the beneficiary in the form of a single lump-sum
payment, a straight life annuity, or any other optional form of benefit
specified in the retirement system’s funding medium. In the event benefits are
paid in the form of an annuity, the annuity shall be the amount provided by the
annuity contract purchased or otherwise provided by the amount of retirement
value to be paid to the beneficiary as of the date of the first payment. Upon
the payment of a lump-sum distribution or the purchase and distribution of the
annuity contract to the beneficiary, all obligations of the retirement system
to the beneficiary shall terminate, without exception.
   (B)   If any firefighter employed by such city as a member of its paid Fire
Department on January 1, 1984, and any firefighter reemployed thereafter who,
while employed in such Department entered military service and is still in
military service, dies while employed by the city as a firefighter other than
in the line of duty after becoming 50 years of age and before electing to
retire, and after serving in the paid Fire Department of the city for at least
21 years, then a pension of at least 25% of his or her regular pay, as defined
in §
94.131, in the form of a straight life annuity, shall be paid to the surviving
spouse or minor children of the deceased firefighter. If the deceased
firefighter is not survived by a spouse or in the event the surviving spouse
dies before the minor children of the firefighter attain the age of majority,
the pension benefit shall be paid to the firefighter’s minor children until
they have attained the age of majority. Each such child shall share equally in
the total pension benefit to the age of majority, except that as soon as a
child attains the age of majority, the pension benefit to the child shall cease
and be reallocated among the remaining minor children until the last remaining
child dies or reaches the age of majority.
   (C)   In the event that the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefit
payable under this division exceeds the retirement value at the time of the
first payment, the city shall utilize such funds as may be necessary from the
unallocated employer account of the retirement system to purchase or provide
for the required pension benefit. In the event a deceased firefighter described
in this division is not survived by a spouse or minor children, his or her
death benefits shall be provided under the provisions of division (A) of this
section as if the firefighter were not employed by the city on January 1, 1984.
   (D)   In the event the surviving spouse or minor children of the deceased
firefighter die before the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the
firefighter and his or her survivor beneficiaries, if any, equals the total
amount in the firefighter’s employee account at the time of the first benefit
payment, the difference between such total amount in the employee’s account and
the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the retired firefighter
and his or her surviving beneficiaries, if any, shall be paid in a single sum
to the firefighter’s beneficiary, or in the absence of a surviving beneficiary,
his or her estate.
   (E)   To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds
the amount required to purchase or provide the specified pension under division
(B) of this section, the excess shall be paid in the manner provided in
division (A) of this section.
   (F)   Any payments for the benefit of a minor child shall be made on behalf
of the child to the surviving spouse or, if there is none, to the legal
guardian of the child.
(Prior Code, § 24-230)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1029
§ 94.139 DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY; RETIREMENT BENEFITS.
   (A)   When prior to commencement of retirement benefits any firefighter
participating in the retirement system dies in the line of duty or in case
death is caused by or is the result of injuries received while in the line of
duty and such firefighter is not survived by a spouse or minor children, the
entire retirement value shall be payable to the beneficiary or beneficiaries
specified by the deceased firefighter prior to his or her death or to the
deceased firefighter’s estate in the event that no beneficiary was specified.
The retirement value or portion thereof may be paid in the form of a single
lump-sum payment, a straight life annuity or any other optional form of benefit
specified in the retirement system’s funding medium. For a firefighter who is
survived by a spouse or minor children, a retirement pension of 50% of regular
pay shall be paid to the surviving spouse or, upon his or her remarriage or
death, to the minor child or children during the child’s or children’s minority
subject to deduction of the amounts paid as workers’ compensation benefits on
account of death as provided in §
94.141. Each such child shall share equally in the total pension benefit to the
age of majority, except that as soon as a child attains the age of majority,
the pension benefit to the child shall cease and be reallocated among the
remaining minor children until the last remaining child dies or reaches the age
of majority.
   (B)   Any payments for the benefit of a minor child shall be made on behalf
of the child to the surviving spouse or, if there is none, to the legal
guardian of the child.
   (C)   In the event the surviving spouse or minor children of the deceased
firefighter die before the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the
firefighter and his or her survivor beneficiaries, if any, equals the total
amount in the firefighter’s employee account at the time of the first benefit
payment, the difference between the total amount in the employee account and
the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the retired firefighter
and his or her surviving beneficiaries, if any, shall be paid in a single sum
to the firefighter’s beneficiary or, in the absence of a surviving beneficiary,
his or her estate.
   (D)   To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds
the amount required to purchase the specified retirement pension, reduced by
any amounts paid as workers’ compensation benefits, the excess shall be paid in
the manner provided in §
94.138(A).
(Prior Code, § 24-231)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1030
§ 94.140 DISABILITY IN THE LINE OF DUTY; DISABILITY BENEFIT; RETURN TO DUTY;
CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section for temporary
disability, if any firefighter becomes disabled, the firefighter shall be
placed upon the roll of pensioned firefighters at the regular retirement
pension of 50% of regular pay for the period of the disability. For purposes of
this section, DISABILITY shall mean the complete inability of the firefighter,
for reasons of accident or other cause while in the line of duty, to perform
the duties of a firefighter, as defined by Fire Department job descriptions or
ordinance.
   (B)   No disability benefit payment shall be made except upon adequate proof
furnished to the city, consisting of a medical examination conducted by a
competent, disinterested physician who is duly licensed to practice medicine
and surgery in this state and who certifies to the city that the firefighter is
unable to perform the duties of a firefighter. The city, during the first 3
years of the payment of the benefits, shall have the right, at reasonable
times, to require the disabled firefighter to undergo a medical examination at
the city’s expense to determine the continuance of the disability claimed.
After the 3-year period, the city may request the district court to order the
firefighter to submit proof of the continuance of the disability claimed if the
city has reasonable grounds to believe the firefighter is fraudulently
receiving disability payments. The city shall have the right to demand a
physical examination of the firefighter by a competent disinterested physician
who is duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery in this state and who is
chosen by the city. The expense of the examination shall be borne by the city.
   (C)   In case of temporary disability of a firefighter received while in the
line of duty, he or she shall receive his or her salary during the continuance
of the disability for a period not to exceed 12 months, except that if it is
ascertained by the city within 12 months that such temporary disability has
become a disability as defined in this section, then the salary shall cease and
he shall be entitled to the benefits for pensions in case of disability as
provided in this section.
   (D)   (1)   All payments of pension or salary provided by this section shall
be subject to deduction of amounts paid under the state’s Workers’ Compensation
Act. Total payments to a disabled firefighter, in excess of amounts paid as
workers’ compensation benefits, shall not be less than the retirement value at
the date of disability.
      (2)   If the actuarial equivalent of the disability pension payable under
this section exceeds the firefighter’s retirement value at the time of the
first payment, the city shall contribute additional amounts as may be
necessary, from time to time, to provide for the required disability pension.
   (E)   If a firefighter who was receiving a pension under this section is
later determined to be no longer disabled, the pension provided for under this
section shall terminate and the firefighter’s vested retirement value, as
reduced by any disability payments made from the retirement system, shall
thereafter be held and administered in the same manner as for any non-disabled
firefighter or former firefighter.
   (F)   If a firefighter who was receiving a pension under this section is
later determined to be no longer disabled during the first 3 years when
disability benefit payments are being paid, the firefighter may return to duty
with the Fire Department under the following conditions:
      (1)   If a vacancy exists on the Fire Department for which the
firefighter is qualified and the firefighter wishes to return to the Fire
Department, the city shall hire the firefighter to fill the vacancy at a pay
grade of not less than his or her previous pay grade; or
      (2)   If no vacancy exists in the Fire Department and the firefighter
wishes to return to the Fire Department, the city shall place the firefighter
on a waiting list and rehire the firefighter at a pay grade of not less than
his or her previous pay grade when a vacancy occurs for which the firefighter
is qualified.
   (G)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to a firefighter whose
disability benefit payments are terminated because of fraud on the part of the
firefighter.
(Prior Code, § 24-232)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1031
§ 94.141 TEMPORARY DISABILITY.
   No firefighter shall be entitled during any period of temporary disability
to receive in full both his or her salary and his or her benefits under Neb. RS
Ch. 48, Art. 1. All state worker’s compensation benefits shall be payable in
full to such firefighter as provided in Neb. RS Ch. 48, Art. 1, but all amounts
paid by the city or its insurer under §§
94.130 to
94.147 to any disabled firefighter entitled to receive a salary during the
disability shall be considered as payments on account of the salary and shall
be credited thereon. The remaining balance of the salary, if any, shall be
payable as otherwise provided in §§
94.130 to
94.147.
(Prior Code, § 24-233)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1032
§ 94.142 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; BENEFITS; HOW TREATED; VESTING SCHEDULE.
   (A)   In the event a firefighter quits or is discharged before his or her
retirement date as defined in §
94.137(C), the firefighter may request and receive, as a lump-sum payment, an
amount equal to the value of his or her employee account as determined at the
valuation date preceding his or her termination of employment. The firefighter,
if vested, may, in lieu thereof, receive a deferred pension benefit or lump-sum
benefit in an amount purchased or provided by the vested retirement value at
the date of retirement. The retirement value at such retirement date shall
consist of the then accumulated value of the firefighter’s employee account at
the date of the retirement as reduced by any lump-sum distributions received
prior to retirement, together with a vested percentage of the accumulated value
of the firefighter’s employer account at the date of retirement. The vesting
schedule shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the terminating firefighter has been a member of the system for
less than 4 years, the vesting percentage shall be 0; and
      (2)   If the terminating firefighter has been a member of the paid
Department of the city for at least 4 years, the vesting percentage shall be
40%. The vesting percentage shall be 60% after 5 years, 80% after 6 years and
100% after 7 years.
   (B)   The deferred pension benefit shall be payable on the first of the
month immediately following the terminating firefighter’s 55 birthday. At the
option of the firefighter, the pension benefit may be paid
as of the first of the month after he or she attains the age of 50. The
election may be made by the firefighter any time prior to the payment of the
pension benefits.
   (C)   The deferred pension benefit shall be paid in the optional benefit
forms specified at §
94.136(A) as elected by the firefighter. Notwithstanding anything in this
subchapter to the contrary, if the firefighter’s vested retirement value at the
date of his or her termination of employment is less than $3,500, the
firefighter shall, upon request within 1 year of the termination, be paid his
or her vested retirement value in the form of a single lump-sum payment.
   (D)   Effective January 1, 1997, a firefighter may elect, upon his or her
termination of employment, to receive his or her vested retirement value in the
form of a single lump-sum payment. For a firefighter whose termination of
employment is prior to January 1, 1997, this election shall be available only
if the city has adopted a lump-sum distribution option for terminating
firefighters in the funding medium established for the retirement system.
   (E)   Upon any lump-sum payment of a terminating firefighter’s retirement
value under this section, the firefighter will not be entitled to any deferred
pension benefit and the city and the retirement system shall have no further
obligation to pay such firefighter or his or her beneficiaries any benefits
under this subchapter.
   (F)   In the event that the terminating firefighter is not credited with
100% of his or her employer account, the remaining non-vested portion of the
account shall be forfeited and shall be deposited in the unallocated employer
account. If the actuarial evaluation required by §
94.136 shows that the assets of the unallocated employer account are sufficient
to provide for the projected plan liabilities, the forfeitures shall instead be
used to meet the expenses incurred by the city in connection with administering
the retirement system, and the remainder shall then be used to reduce the city
contribution which would otherwise be required to fund pension benefits.
(Prior Code, § 24-234)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1033
§ 94.143 RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A retirement committee shall be established to supervise the general
operation of the retirement system. The governing body of the city shall be
responsible for the general administration of the retirement system unless
specific functions or all functions with regard to the administration of the
retirement system are delegated, by ordinance, to the Retirement Committee. All
costs incurred with regard to the administration of the retirement system shall
be paid by the city from the unallocated employer account as provided in §
94.146.
   (B)   The city and Retirement Committee shall have all powers which are
necessary for or appropriate to establishing, maintaining, managing and
administering the retirement system. Whenever this subchapter fails to address
the allocation of duties or powers in the administration of the retirement
system, the powers or duties shall be vested in the city unless the powers or
duties have been delegated by ordinance to the Retirement Committee.
(Prior Code, § 24-235)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1034
§ 94.144 MEMBERSHIP OF RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   Each Retirement Committee established pursuant to §
94.143 shall consist of 6 members of which 4 members shall be selected by the
active paid firefighters excluding firefighters identified in §
94.149. Two members shall be designated by the City Council. The members who
are not participants in the retirement system shall have a general knowledge of
retirement plans. Members of the governing body of the city, active members of
the Fire Department, and members of the general public may serve on the
Retirement Committee. The Committee members shall be appointed to 4-year terms.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a person with the
same representation as his or her predecessor. Members of the Retirement
Committee shall, subject to approval by the City Council, be reimbursed for
their actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties.
(Prior Code, § 24-236)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1035
§ 94.145 INVESTMENT OF SYSTEM FUNDS.
   (A)   The funds in the Firefighters Retirement System Fund shall be invested
by the Retirement Committee. The city, subject to the approval of the
Retirement Committee, shall contract with a funding agent or agents to hold or
invest the assets of the retirement system and to provide for the benefits
provided by this subchapter. The Retirement Committee, subject to the approval
of the city, may also select an investment manager. The city, subject to
approval of the Retirement Committee, may contract with investment managers
registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to invest, reinvest and
otherwise manage the portion of the assets of the retirement system as may be
assigned by the city or Retirement Committee.
   (B)   The Retirement Committee shall establish an investment plan which
allows each member of the retirement system to allocate all contributions to
his or her employee account to the various investment options or combinations
of investment options described in the plan. Each firefighter shall have the
option of investing his or her employee account in any proportion, including
full allocation, in any investment option offered by the plan. Each firefighter
shall be given a summary of the investment plan and a detailed current
description of each investment option prior to making or revising his or her
allocation.
   (C)   The funds in the Firefighters Retirement System Fund shall be invested
pursuant to the policies established by the state’s Investment Council.
(Prior Code, § 24-237)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1036
§ 94.146 FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUND; SCHEDULE OF INVESTMENT COSTS;
ALLOCATION.
   The city and the Retirement Committee shall develop a schedule of investment
costs relating to the investment of the funds in each of the accounts in the
Firefighters Retirement System Fund, which costs shall be paid out of the funds
in such accounts or assessed to the firefighters as provided in the schedule.
The schedule of investment costs shall provide for the allocation of the
administrative or record-keeping costs of the various investment options
available to the members of the retirement system and shall assess the costs so
that each member pays a fair proportion of the costs based upon his or her
choice of options and number of transfers among options. All other costs
related to the general operation of the retirement system established pursuant
to §§
94.130 to 94.147 and not allocated or assessed pursuant to the schedule of
investment costs shall be considered administrative costs and shall be paid by
the city from the unallocated employer account.
(Prior Code, § 24-238)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1036.01
§ 94.147 RETIREMENT COMMITTEE; OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to:
   (A)   Elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and such other officers as the
Committee deems appropriate;
   (B)   Hold regular quarterly meetings and special meetings upon the call of
the Chairperson;
   (C)   Conduct meetings pursuant to Neb. RS 84-1408 to 84-1414;
   (D)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements,
benefit provisions and investment options available to the employee;
   (E)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a participant, a
statement describing the amount of benefits the participant is eligible to
receive;
   (F)   Make available for review an annual report of the system’s operations
describing both the amount of contributions to the system from both employee
and employer sources and an identification of the total assets of the
retirement system; and
   (G)   Have an analysis made of the investment return that has been achieved
on the funds of the Firefighters Retirement System Fund invested by the
Committee. The analysis shall be prepared as of January 1, 1989, and at least
once every 5 years thereafter. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent
private organization or public entity which has demonstrated expertise to
perform this type of analysis and which is unrelated to any organization
offering investment advice or which provides investment management services to
the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 24-239)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1037
§ 94.148 TAX LEVY AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The right to any benefits under the retirement system and the assets
of any fund of the retirement system shall not be assignable or subject to
execution, garnishment, attachment or the operation of any bankruptcy or
insolvency laws, except that the retirement system may comply with the
directions set forth in a qualified domestic relations order meeting the
requirements of § 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. The city or Retirement
Committee may require appropriate releases from any person as a condition to
complying with any such order. The retirement system shall not recognize any
domestic relations order which alters or changes benefits, provides for a form
of benefit not otherwise provided for by the retirement system, increases
benefits not otherwise provided by the retirement system or accelerates or
defers the time of payment of benefits. No participant or beneficiary shall
have any right to any specific portion of the assets of the retirement system.
   (B)   The retirement system shall be administered in a manner necessary to
comply with the tax-qualification requirements applicable to government
retirement plans under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, including § 401
(a)(9) relating to the time and manner in which benefits are required to be
distributed, § 401(a)(16) relating to compliance with the maximum limitation on
the plan benefits or contributions under § 415, § 401(a)(17) which limits the
amount of compensation which can be taken into account under a retirement plan,
§ 401(a)(25) relating to the specification of actuarial assumptions, and § 401
(a)(31) relating to direct rollover distribution from qualified retirement
plans. Any requirements for compliance with § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code may be set forth in any trust or funding medium for the retirement system.
This division shall be in full force and effect only so long as conformity with
§ 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code is required for public retirement systems
in order to secure the favorable income tax treatment extended to sponsors and
beneficiaries of tax-qualified retirement plans.
   (C)   (1)   If the Retirement Committee determines that the retirement
system has previously overpaid or underpaid a benefit payable under this
subchapter, it shall have the power to correct the error.
      (2)   In the event of an overpayment, the retirement system may, in
addition to any other remedy that the retirement system may possess, offset
future benefit payments by the amount of the prior overpayment, together with
regular interest thereon.
   (D)   A firefighter whose benefit payment is adjusted by the Retirement
Committee pursuant to division (C) of this section may request a review by the
City Council of the adjustment made by the Retirement Committee.
   (E)   In order to provide the necessary amounts to pay for or fund a pension
plan established under this subchapter, the Mayor and Council may make a levy
in addition to the multiple levies or the all-purpose and exclusive levy which
such city is authorized by law to make.
(Prior Code, § 24-240)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1038
§ 94.149 PENSION BENEFITS FOR FIREFIGHTERS SERVING ON AUGUST 7, 1965.
   (A)   The city shall pension all firefighters of the paid Fire Department
who were serving as such on August 7, 1965, and who did not elect coverage
under the provisions of Neb. RS 35-204—35-215, as they existed prior to January
1, 1984, whenever the firefighters shall have first served in such Fire
Department for the period of 21 years and shall elect to retire from active
service and go upon the retired list.
   (B)   The pension shall be paid by the city in the same manner as
firefighters upon the active list are paid. The pension shall be at least 50%
of the amount of salary the retiring firefighter is receiving at the time he or
she goes upon the pension list.
   (C)   Any such firefighter who retires on or after age 55 with less than 21
years of service shall receive a pension of at least 50% of the salary he or
she was receiving at the time of his or her retirement multiplied by the ratio
of the years of service to 21.
   (D)   At the death of any such retired firefighter, the same rate of
pension, as provided for in this section, shall be paid to the surviving spouse
of the deceased firefighter during such time as the surviving spouse shall
remain unmarried, and, if there is no surviving spouse, then the minor
children, if any, of the deceased firefighter shall be paid the pension during
their minority to the age of 18 years, except that, as soon as a child of the
deceased firefighter shall become 18 years of age, the pension as to the child
shall cease.
   (E)   Firefighters subject to division (A) of this section shall be subject
to §§
94.138 to 94.141, but shall be exempt from §§
94.134, 94.135, 94.136, 94.137 and 94.142.
(Prior Code, § 24-241)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1039
§ 94.150 CONTRIBUTIONS AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR FIREFIGHTERS SUBJECT TO PRIOR LAW.
   After August 7, 1965, every firefighter subject to the provisions of Neb. RS
35-201—35-203, as they existed prior to January 1, 1984, shall contribute to
the city an amount equal to 5% of his or her salary until he or she shall be
entitled to retire or otherwise become eligible for a pension. No such
firefighter continuing in the employment of the city as a member of the
Department after becoming eligible to retire shall be required to make any
further contribution. Any such firefighter whose employment shall terminate,
whether by discharge or otherwise, prior to the time he or she shall become
entitled to a pension, and who shall have made contributions from his or her
salary as provided in this section, shall, upon demand, be reimbursed by the
city for the amount of the contributions, plus interest at 5% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 24-242)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1040
§ 94.151 CONTINUATION OF BENEFITS UNDER PRIOR LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any manner affect the right of any
person now receiving or entitled to receive, now or in the future, pension or
other benefits provided for in Neb. RS 35-201—35-216, as they existed
immediately prior to January 1, 1984, to receive such pension or other benefits
in all respects the same as if such sections remained in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 24-243)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1041
§ 94.152 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; TRANSFER OF BENEFITS; WHEN.
   (A)   In the event that after 4 or more years of employment a firefighter
terminates his or her employment for the purpose of becoming a firefighter
employed by another city of the first class in the state and such new
employment commences within 90 days of the termination, the firefighter shall
be entitled to transfer to the firefighters retirement system fund of the city
by which he or she is newly employed the full amount of his or her contribution
and his or her vested portion of the value of his or her employer account at
the time of termination. The transferred funds shall be administered by the
Retirement Committee of the city to which transferred. Upon the transfer, the
city and the retirement system from which the firefighter transferred shall
have no further obligation to such firefighter or his beneficiary. Following
the commencement of new employment, the transferring firefighter shall be
deemed a new employee for all purposes of the retirement system of the city to
which he or she transferred.
   (B)   Beginning January 1, 1993, a firefighter who is to receive an eligible
rollover distribution, within the meaning of § 401(a)(31) of the Internal
Revenue Code, from the retirement system may choose to have the distribution
made in the form of a direct transfer to the trustee or custodian of a
retirement plan eligible to receive the transfer under the code if the election
is made in the form and within the time period required by the Retirement
Committee and the plan to which the transfer is to be made will accept the
transfer.
(Prior Code, § 24-244)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-1042
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person in violation of any provision of §§
94.095 et seq. is guilty of a misdemeanor. A violation is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500, and the city’s Fire Chief, the city’s Police Chief or their
designee may order the stand closed.
(Prior Code, § 24-166)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Weeds, littering prohibited
   
95.03   Duties of owner or occupant
   
95.04   Duty to remove weeds
   
95.05   Agricultural exception request
   
95.06   Notice to abate and remove
   
95.07   Notice to public to destroy
   
95.08   Legal action
Abandoned or Junk Vehicles
   
95.20   Definitions
   
95.21   Junk motor vehicles and abandoned vehicles prohibited; exceptions
   
95.22   Abandoned and junk motor vehicles; impounding
   
95.23   Enforcement
Protection of Public Water Supply System
   
95.40   Purpose
   
95.41   Registration of wells
   
95.42   Well permits required
   
95.43   Prohibited facilities
   
95.44   Procedure to obtain permit
   
95.45   State minimum standards adopted
   
95.46   Distance of facilities from municipal water sources
   
95.47   Standard of review by city
   
95.48   Cross connections prohibited
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to define and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DEVELOPED PARCEL. Any parcel of land that has been used or is being used for
commercial or residential use with a principal structure.
   LITTER. Includes, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags and ashes;
      (2)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building rubble;
      (3)   Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation;
      (4)   Offal and dead animals; and
      (5)   Any machine or vehicle, or parts of a machine or vehicle which have
lost their identity, character, utility or serviceability as such through
deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of time, or inoperative or unable to
perform their intended functions or are cast-off, discarded or thrown away or
left as waste, wreckage or junk.
   NON-OFFENDING VEGETATION. Vegetation which does not violate the sections of
this subchapter. This vegetation is commonly grown and/or produced for
agricultural uses and not within the definition of weeds.
   OFFENDING VEGETATION. Vegetation which violates the sections of this
subchapter. Owner and/or occupant means any person who alone, jointly or
severally with others:
      (1)   Has a legal or equitable interest in a dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof;
      (2)   Acts as the agent of a person having a legal or equitable interest
in a dwelling or dwelling unit thereof; or
      (3)   Is the general representative or fiduciary of an estate through
which a legal or equitable interest in a dwelling unit is administered.
   OWNERSHIP. Ownership of land which shall be deemed to exist from the center
line of any abutting alley, to and including the curb and gutter area of any
abutting street of such lot or tract of land.
   UNDEVELOPED PARCEL OF LAND. Any parcel of land zoned for but not currently
being used for commercial or residential use.
   WEEDS. Includes, but is not limited to, bindweed (convolvulus arvensis),
puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canadian
thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian
knapweed (centaura picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding or musk
thistle, quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus
arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthorn (rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa) and
ragweed (ambrosiaceae).
(Prior Code, § 22-31) (Ord. 3419, § 1, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.02 WEEDS, LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be a nuisance to permit, allow or maintain on any lot or
piece of ground any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses or
worthless vegetation or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon except
in proper receptacles and in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-32) (Ord. 3419, § 2, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.03 DUTIES OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the municipality
shall:
   (A)   Drain or fill the lot or piece of ground so as to prevent stagnant
water or any other nuisance from accumulating thereon;
   (B)   Keep the developed or undeveloped parcel/lot and the adjoining streets
and alleys to the center thereof free of any growth of 12 inches or more in
height of weeds, grasses or worthless vegetation in accordance with §
95.04; and
   (C)   Prevent the throwing, depositing or accumulation of litter on any lot
or piece of ground within the municipality; provided that, grass, leaves and
worthless vegetation may be used as a ground mulch or in a compost pile.
(Prior Code, § 22-33) (Ord. 3419, § 3, 6-4-2002) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 DUTY TO REMOVE WEEDS.
   The existence of weeds or offensive vegetation in violation of this section
constitutes a public nuisance.
   (A)   Developed parcel. It shall be the duty of every owner (occupant) of a
developed parcel to cut, destroy or remove, or cause to be cut, destroyed or
removed, all weeds in excess of 12 inches in height growing thereon and upon ½
of any road, street or alley abutting this property.
   (B)   Undeveloped parcel. It shall be the duty of every owner (occupant) of
an undeveloped parcel to cut, destroy or remove, or cause to be cut, destroyed
or removed, all weeds in excess of 12 inches in height growing thereon and upon
½ of any road, street or alley abutting this property within 150 feet of any
developed parcel.
   (C)   Traffic hazards; clear vision zones. All weeds and offensive
vegetation in developed and undeveloped areas shall also comply with and be
subject to all requirements imposed under §
91.05 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 22-34) (Ord. 3419, § 4, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.05 AGRICULTURAL EXCEPTION REQUEST.
   In cases where a property owner is using a developed or undeveloped parcel
for the purposes of growing/producing agricultural products, hay, grain, wheat,
alfalfa or other agricultural grown products, the owner may file a written
exception request with the city development department for a waiver of §
95.04(B) requesting reducing the cutting, destroying and removal of all
agriculturally grown vegetation of 12 inches in height growing thereon and upon
½ of any road, street or alley abutting the property from within 150 feet to 30
feet of any developed parcel. Additionally, the agricultural products/
vegetation shall also comply with and be subject to all requirements imposed
under §
91.05 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 22-35) (Ord. 3419, § 5, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.06 NOTICE TO ABATE AND REMOVE.
   (A)   Before the city may act to abate and remove the nuisance, notice to
abate and remove the nuisance shall be given to each owner or owner’s duly
authorized owner agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or
certified mail. Within 5 days of receipt of the notice, if the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the
municipality, or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the
nuisance, the city may have the work done. The costs and expenses of any such
work shall be paid by the owner.
   (B)   If unpaid for 2 months after the work is done, the city may either:
      (1)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or
piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for
improvements are levied and assessed; or
      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon
the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 22-36) (Ord. 3419, § 6, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.07 NOTICE TO PUBLIC TO DESTROY.
   (A)   The city’s Development Director shall give notice to destroy offending
weeds within the city limits by publishing notice to the public at least once
each week for 2 consecutive weeks in a newspaper of wide circulation within the
city. The last publication shall not be less than 7 days prior to April 1.
   (B)   The notice shall at a minimum advise the public as follows: that all
owners of real property or owner/agents having control thereof are responsible
for destroying all weeds in prohibited areas by extermination, removal or
cutting not later than April 1 of each year and to keep the areas free of weeds
through October 30 of that year.
(Prior Code, § 22-37) (Ord. 3419, § 7, 6-4-2002)
§ 95.08 LEGAL ACTION.
   (A)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this subchapter, the city may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the nuisance, in the manner
provided by law.
   (B)   Whenever in any action it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Prior Code, § 22-38) (Ord. 3419, § 8, 6-4-2002)
ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES
§ 95.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. 
      (1)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
         (a)   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid In Transit
stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed thereto,
for more than 6 hours on any public property;
         (b)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
         (c)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking of
the vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of a public property on
which parking is legally permitted;
         (d)   If left unattended for more than 7 days of private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner shall be terminated;
         (e)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner under Neb. RS 60-1901; or
         (f)   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a city
ordinance or this code.
      (2)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
         (a)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
         (b)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking of
such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property on
which parking is legally permitted;
         (c)   If left unattended for more than 7 days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner is terminated;
         (d)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner under Neb. RS 60-1901; or
         (e)   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a city
ordinance or this code.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle on which the engine, wheels or other
parts have been removed, altered, damaged or otherwise so treated or allowed to
deteriorate that the motor vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own
motor power.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. All vehicles propelled by a power other than muscular power,
except mopeds, farm tractors and other implements of husbandry designed for and
used primarily for tilling the soil and harvesting crops, vehicles which run
only on rails or tracks, off-road designed vehicles, including but not limited
to golf carts, go-carts, riding lawnmowers, garden tractors, all-terrain
vehicles, snowmobiles and minibikes, and road and general purpose construction
and maintenance machinery not designed or used primarily for the transportation
of persons or property, including but not limited to ditch-digging apparatus,
well-boring apparatus, asphalt spreaders, bucket loaders, leveling graders,
earthmoving carry-alls, power shovels, earthmoving equipment and crawler
tractors and self-propelled invalid chairs.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any which is not included in public property, as defined
in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street or highway, alley, park or
other state, county or municipally owned property.
(Prior Code, § 22-61) (Ord. 3442, § 1, 9-17-2002)
§ 95.21 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES AND ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any junk motor vehicle upon any private property within the city.
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle upon private property which
is enclosed within a building. This section shall not apply to any motor
vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the
city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to law.
   (B)   No person shall leave any abandoned vehicle on any street or highway
within the city or on public property within the corporate limits, provided,
abandoned or junk motor vehicles may be left at a place operated by the city
for impounded vehicles in accordance with the rules and regulations governing
the properties.
(Prior Code, § 22-62) (Ord. 3139, § 1, 9-2-1997)
§ 95.22 ABANDONED AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   The city, by its agents, is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed any vehicle left within the city corporate limits which reasonably
appears to be in violation of §
95.21 or is lost, stolen or unclaimed. The vehicle shall be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the laws of the state.
Provided, however, that any vehicle left at any place other than on public
property shall not be removed and impounded as provided in this section until
notice shall have been given that the city shall remove the vehicle from the
property after 5 days from the date of notice. The notice shall be given by any
of the following methods:
      (1)   Affixing written notice on the vehicles;
      (2)   Sending notice by mail to the owner of the vehicle at his or her
last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable;
      (3)   By sending notice by mail to the person owning or occupying the
property on which the vehicle is located; or
      (4)   By notifying the owner of the vehicle or owner or occupant of the
property in person.
   (B)   Any city police officer or city public safety employee may enter upon
private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the
vehicle, posting notice thereon, and removing and impounding the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 22-63)
§ 95.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent any police officer or public
safety employee from entering upon private property for purposes of carrying
out his or her duties hereunder or to interfere with him or her in the lawful
performance of his or her duties under the provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-64) Penalty, see §
95.99
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
§ 95.40 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the water system of the city
by regulating the surface and subsurface areas surrounding a water well or well
field, supplying a public water system, through which contaminates are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water well or well field.
(Prior Code, § 22-81) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.41 REGISTRATION OF WELLS.
   All private water wells located within the service area of the city water
system shall be registered with the city water department on forms provided by
the Water Department within 1 year of the effective date of the ordinance from
which this subchapter is derived.
(Prior Code, § 22-82) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.42 WELL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to dig, drill, construct or modify a well within the
service area of the city water system, without first having obtained a permit
from the city’s Water Department. The application for a permit for private
wells shall be made on forms provided by the city’s Water Department.
(Prior Code, § 22-83) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.43 PROHIBITED FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to drill a well or operate any of the following
facilities within the corporate limits of the City of North Platte without
first having obtained the proper permit from the city’s Water Department:
   (A)   Sewage lagoon;
   (B)   Absorption or disposal field for water;
   (C)   Cesspool;
   (D)   Livestock feedlot;
   (E)   Livestock pasture or corral;
   (F)   Chemical product storage facility;
   (G)   Petroleum product storage facility;
   (H)   Sanitary landfill;
   (I)   Septic tank;
   (J)   Sewage treatment plant;
   (K)   Sewage wet well;
   (L)   Potable water well; and
   (M)   Any other well.
(Prior Code, § 22-84) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.44 PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT.
   To obtain a permit to drill a well or operate any of the facilities listed
in §
95.43, the owner of the property on which the facility is to be located must
make application on the proper form provided by the city’s Water Department.
The application must be presented to the city’s Water Department. The Water
Department shall approve or deny the permit.
(Prior Code, § 22-85) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.45 STATE MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   The standards promulgated by the state’s Health Department relative to
private wells are hereby adopted and such standards, supplements or appendices
thereto are made a part of this section as if fully set forth at length at this
point.
(Prior Code, § 22-86) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.46 DISTANCE OF FACILITIES FROM MUNICIPAL WATER SOURCES.
   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this subchapter,
a permit to drill or operate any of the following-described facilities within
the indicated number of feet from city municipal water well shall not be
granted:
   (A)   Portable water well: 1,000 feet;
   (B)   Other well: 1,000 feet;
   (C)   Sewage lagoon: 1,000 feet;
   (D)   Absorption or disposal field for water: 500 feet;
   (E)   Cesspool: 500 feet;
   (F)   Dumping grounds: 500 feet;
   (G)   Feedlot or feedlot runoff: 500 feet;
   (H)   Livestock pasture or corral: 500 feet;
   (I)   Chemical product storage facility: 500 feet;
   (J)   Petroleum product storage facility: 500 feet;
   (K)   Pit toilet: 500 feet;
   (L)   Septic tank: 500 feet;
   (M)   Sewage treatment plant: 500 feet; and
   (N)   Sewage wet well: 500 feet.
(Prior Code, § 22-87) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.47 STANDARD OF REVIEW BY CITY.
   The city’s Water Department shall have the power and authority to refuse to
issue well drilling permits in the event it appears to the city’s Water
Department that the plan of drilling or construction is not sound or the
applicant does have the equipment necessary to properly drill or construct, or
it appears to the city’s Water Department that the well may endanger, impair or
in any way interfere with the city’s water system.
(Prior Code, § 22-88) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.48 CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No cross-connections shall be allowed from a private well or city water
system. The city’s Water Department may inspect premises when necessary to
determine that no such cross-connections exist. If the city’s Water Department
finds that cross-connection does exist, the Department shall order the use of
the private well to be permanently discontinued immediately. The owner, tenant
and/or lessee shall be liable severally and jointly for any and all damages to
the city water system and to the users of the system, caused by any such cross-
connection.
(Prior Code, § 22-89) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon
conviction of violating this §
95.03, be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor and fined in an amount not to exceed
$500. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 22-33) (Ord. 3419, § 3, 6-4-2002)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
95.21 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined in the sum of no less than $100 and no more than $500 for a first
offense. Fines for second and subsequent offense shall be no less than $200 and
no more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 22-65) (Ord. 3139, § 2, 9-2-1997)
   (D)   In the event any of the facilities described in §§
95.40 et seq. are installed or operated without first having obtained a permit
from the city and/or within a designated number of feet from the municipal
water supply, then the facilities shall be deemed a nuisance and the city may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the nuisance, in the manner
provided by law, or, whenever in any action it is established that such a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case. In addition
thereto, any person violating any of the terms of §§
95.40 et seq. is hereby determined to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor as
the same is defined by state statute. The penalty for the violation shall be
that as defined by state law for the violation of a Class III misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 22-90) (Ord. 3449, § 1, 11-5-2002)
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Title of chapter
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Location and spacing of trees on public property
   
96.04   Planting, maintenance and removal of trees on public property
   
96.05   Topping trees on public property
   
96.06   Pruning of trees overhanging street or sidewalk or obstructing
streetlight or traffic control device
   
96.07   Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property
   
96.08   Removal of stumps of street trees and park trees
Tree Board
   
96.20   Tree Board established; membership
   
96.21   Term of office of members of Tree Board
   
96.22   Compensation of members of Tree Board
   
96.23   Duties of Tree Board; city tree plan
   
96.24   Organization and meetings of Tree Board
   
96.25   Review of decisions of Tree Board
 
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 TITLE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Tree Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 54-31)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 54-32)
§ 96.03 LOCATION AND SPACING OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Spacing. No trees may be planted on public property closer together
than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large
trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings described or approved by the Public
Service Director or his or her designee.
   (B)   Distance from curb or sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted from
curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the 3 species size
classes. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, 2 feet; medium trees, 3 feet; and large trees, 4 feet.
   (C)   Distance from street intersections.
      (1)   No street trees or park trees shall be planted within the clear
vision zones established by §
91.05(B).
      (2)   If no such curb or curbline exists, no tree shall be planted within
10 feet from the point of intersection of the property lines.
   (D)   Distance from utility wires, utility lines and fireplugs. No street
tree or park tree other than those species indicated as small trees may be
planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over
or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
transmission line or other utility line, wire or main. No street tree shall be
planted within 10 feet of any fireplug.
   (E)   Arrangement of trees in sidewalk spaces. All trees permitted to be
planted in sidewalk spaces shall conform in line with the majority of trees
already planted in the blocks. If no trees are planted therein, the trees as
are permitted to be planted under this chapter shall be an equal distance from
the sidewalk and from the curb. Not more than 2 trees shall be planted in 1 lot
in the sidewalk space.
(Prior Code, § 54-38)
§ 96.04 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Authority of Public Service Director. The Public Service Director or
his or her designee shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all street rights-of-way, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public grounds.
   (B)   Removal of dead street trees. It is hereby declared a nuisance for any
property owner to permit, allow or maintain any dead or diseased trees within
the right-of-way of streets, within the corporate limits of the city and
adjacent to the property owner’s property. Notice to abate and remove such
nuisance and notice of the right to a hearing and the manner in which it may be
requested shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to
the occupant, if any. If notice is given by first-class mail, such mail shall
be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Within 5 days after receipt of
such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a
hearing with the city to appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by
filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the
appeal shall be held within 14 days after the filing of the appeal and shall be
conducted by the City Administrator. The hearing officer shall render a
decision on the appeal within 5 business days after the conclusion of the
hearing. If the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and
remove the dead or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece
of ground does not request a hearing with the city within 5 days after receipt
of such notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the
nuisance, the city may have such work done. The city may levy and assess all or
any portion of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of
ground so benefited as a special assessment.
   (C)   Planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. This section
does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners
providing that the selection and location of trees is in accordance with §
96.03.
(Prior Code, § 54-39) (Ord. 2974, § 1, 9-20-1994; Ord. 3953, § 1, 8-2-2016)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 TOPPING TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street tree, park tree or
other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs to stubs larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such
a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the trees. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may
be exempted from this section at the determination of the city Tree Board.
(Prior Code, § 54-40) (Am. Ord. 3756, passed 4-7-2009) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 PRUNING OF TREES OVERHANGING STREET OR SIDEWALK OR OBSTRUCTING
STREETLIGHT OR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light
from any streetlamp or obstruct the light of any street intersection and so
that there shall be a clear space of 16 feet above the surface of the street or
8 feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The owner shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The Public Service Director or his or her
designee shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property
when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a
streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign.
(Prior Code, § 54-41)
§ 96.07 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Public Service Director or his or her designee shall have the right to
cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
city when the trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects
or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city.
The Public Service Director shall notify, in writing, the owners of the trees.
Removal shall be done by the owners, at their own expense, within 60 days after
the date of service of the notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply
with the provisions of the notice, the Public Service Director or his or her
designee shall have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of
removal as a special assessment on the owner’s property.
(Prior Code, § 54-42)
§ 96.08 REMOVAL OF STUMPS OF STREET TREES AND PARK TREES.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 54-43)
TREE BOARD
§ 96.20 TREE BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city,
which shall consist of 7 members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 54-33) (Ord. 3049, § 1, 2-20-1996)
§ 96.21 TERM OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS OF TREE BOARD.
   The terms of the 7 persons appointed to the city’s Tree Board shall be 3
years, except that the term of 2 of the members appointed to the first Board
shall be for only 1 year and the terms of 2 members of the first Board shall be
for 2 years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Prior Code, § 54-34) (Ord. 3049, § 2, 2-20-1996)
§ 96.22 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF TREE BOARD.
   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 54-35)
§ 96.23 DUTIES OF TREE BOARD; CITY TREE PLAN.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and update annually and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
the trees and shrubs in parks, along streets or in other public areas. The plan
will be presented annually to the City Council, and upon the Council’s
acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree
plan. The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work.
(Prior Code, § 54-36)
§ 96.24 ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF TREE BOARD.
   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 54-37)
§ 96.25 REVIEW OF DECISIONS OF TREE BOARD.
   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the city’s Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the city’s Tree Board to the City Council, which may hear the matter
and make final decision.
(Prior Code, § 54-44)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or
a plea of guilty, be subject to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than
$100.
(Prior Code, § 54-45)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
      
112.   PLUMBERS
      
113.   GASFITTERS
      
114.   AVIATION
      
115.   AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
      
116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
117.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
118.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
119.   GAMES
      
120.   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Occupation Taxes
   
110.01   Amounts; schedule
   
110.02   Disposition of revenue from tax on fire insurance companies
   
110.03   Due date
   
110.04   Receipt
   
110.05   Lodging facility tax
   
110.06   Retail business occupation tax
   
110.07   Annual report
   
110.08   Delinquency
   
110.09   Gas service companies and telephone companies
Lodging Facility Occupation Tax
   
110.10   Levy of lodging facility occupation tax
   
110.11   Lodging facility, defined
   
110.12   Occupied room, defined; exceptions
   
110.13   Total lodging consideration charged for occupancy, defined
   
110.14   Collection
   
110.15   Due date
   
110.16   Return
   
110.17   Tax cumulative
   
110.18   Failure to file return; delinquency; assessment by City Administrator
   
110.19   Administration; miscellaneous provisions
   
110.20   Right of city to sue
Retail Business Occupation Tax
   
110.21   Levy of retail business occupation tax
   
110.22   Findings and determinations
   
110.23   Definitions
   
110.24   Agreement to impose tax
   
110.25   Tax imposed; collection of tax
   
110.26   Business classifications
   
110.27   Return
   
110.28   Tax cumulative
   
110.29   Use of revenue
   
110.30   Failure to file return; delinquency; assessment by the City
Administrator
   
110.31   Administration; miscellaneous provisions
   
110.32   Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law
   
110.33   Suspension or revocation of licenses for failure to pay tax; hearing
   
110.34   Sunset provision
   
110.35   Enhanced Employment Area description
   
110.36   Tax certificate
   
110.37   Levies authorized
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy a business occupation tax, see Neb. RS 16-205
OCCUPATION TAXES
§ 110.01 AMOUNTS; SCHEDULE.
   With the exception of fraternal and non-profit organizations for the purpose
of raising revenue, an occupation tax is hereby levied on the following
businesses.
(Prior Code, § 14-31) (Am. Ord. 4028, § 1, 4-7-2020; Am. Ord. 4067, § 1, 6-1-
2021; Am. Ord. 4148, § 1, 12-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4192, § 1, 1-21-2025)
Alcoholic liquors
Alcoholic liquors
--Class A: Retailer of beer only except
for craft breweries, for consumption on $200
the premises, per license year
--Class B: Retailer of beer only except
for craft breweries, for consumption    $200
off the premises (sales in original
packages only), per license year
--Class C: Retailer of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on and off the premises
(sales in original packages only,       $600
except for farm winery or craft brewery
sales outlets), per license year
--Class D: Retailer of alcoholic
liquor, including beer, for consumption
off the premises (sales in original
package only, except as provided in     $400
Neb. RS 53-123.04(2), except for farm
winery or craft brewery sales outlets),
per license year
--Class I: Retailer of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises (except $500
for farm winery or craft brewery sales
outlets), per license year
--Class L: Craft brewery (brew pub),    $500
per license year
--Catering licensees doing business     $200
within the city, per license per year
--Special designated permit, per event  $25
--Bowling alleys
--First lane, per year                  $10
--Each additional lane, per year        $5
--Circus and carnivals, per day         $100
--Commercial animal establishments, per $10
year
--Dance floors, per year                $100
--Dog kennels, per year                 $10
--Fire insurance companies, per year    $5
--Flea markets, per year (hawkers and
peddlers who sell at the flea market
location are exempt from the fee        $5
payment but must register at the Police
Department)
--Gas service companies, per year       Amount equal to 3% of gross receipts as
                                        determined by franchise agreement
--Gasfitter, master
--Resident, per year                    $50
--Non-resident, per year                $100
                                        Each person engaged in operating a
                                        hotel in the city shall pay an
--Hotel accommodations                  occupation tax in the amount of 2% of
                                        the basic rental rates charged per
                                        occupied room per night
--Itinerant sales, per day              $200
--Peddlers and hawkers, per day         $10
--Petroleum dealers
--Retail, each service station, per     $15
year
--Wholesale distributors, per year      $30
--Plumber, master
--Resident, per year                    $50
--Non-resident, per year                $100
                                        The businesses and users of space
                                        within the Enhanced Employment Area
                                        (EEA), for the purpose of paying all or
                                        any part of the costs and expenses of
--Retail business occupation tax        the Enhanced Employment Project within
                                        the Enhanced Employment Area of the
                                        city shall pay an occupation tax in the
                                        amount of 1.95% of all general retail
                                        business transactions.
--Skating rinks, per year               $25
                                        Amount equal to 3% of the gross
                                        receipts from the legally established
                                        basic monthly charges collected for
                                        local exchange telephone service to
                                        subscribers within the city, intrastate
--Telephone companies and mobile        message toll telephone service,
telecommunications services, per year   intrastate telephone communication
                                        service and telegraph service, wireless
                                        paging service, and mobile
                                        telecommunications services for revenue
                                        in the city. This includes those
                                        services which are sold by mutual
                                        companies.
--Tobacco, cigarette or cigar sales
--Retail, per year                      $15
--Wholesale, per year                   $100
 
(Prior Code, 14-31) (Am. Ord. 4028, 1, 4-7-2020; Am. Ord. 4067, 1, 6-1-2021;
Am. Ord. 4148, 1, 12-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4192, 1, 1-21-2025)
§ 110.02 DISPOSITION OF REVENUE FROM TAX ON FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   For the use, support and maintenance of the city’s Fire Department, all
revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies shall be
appropriated to the Fire Department Fund.
(Prior Code, § 14-32)
Statutory reference:
   Occupation tax for fire insurance companies, see Neb. RS 35-106
§ 110.03 DUE DATE.
   All occupation taxes, except those relating to retail business in the
Enhanced Employment Area (EEA), lodging facilities, alcoholic liquors, gas
service companies or telephone companies, and those where the taxes are levied
daily, shall be due and payable on December 1 of each year. Occupation taxes
relating to alcoholic liquors shall be due on the same date the liquor license
fee is due to the state each year, and no state liquor license shall be
delivered to the licensee until the city occupation tax is paid.
(Prior Code, § 14-33) (Ord. 3257, § 1, 10-19-1999; Am. Ord. 3320, § 1, 8-15-
2000; Am. Ord. 3383, § 1, 8-21-2001; Am. Ord. 3446, § 1, 9-17-2002; Am. Ord.
4067, § 2, 6-1-2021; Am. Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 RECEIPT.
   Upon the payment of the tax by any person to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall
give a receipt which is properly dated and specifies the person paying the tax
and the amount paid. The revenue collected shall then be immediately deposited
into the General Fund by the City Treasurer, except as otherwise set forth
hereafter.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.05 LODGING FACILITY TAX.
   Revenue collected from lodging facilities shall be used by the city to
assist the city in constructing and operating a visitors center promoting the
city’s railroad heritage until 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on February 17, 2029,
after which time the same shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.06 RETAIL BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX.
   The retail business occupation tax in the Enhanced Employment Area (EEA)
shall terminate and collection of the tax shall cease upon the earlier of: (1)
payment in full of all indebtedness issued by the North Platte Community
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS 18-2142.04 of the
Act, for which such occupation tax receipts have been pledged being the
Enhanced Employment Area Occupation Tax Revenue Bond and any subsequently
issued bonds for the North Platte Mall Rehabilitation Project as described in
the Redevelopment Contract and any amendments thereto; or, (2) December 31,
2041.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.07 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over
to him or her. All forms and receipts mentioned in this section shall be issued
in duplicate and an annual report be given by the recipients of the fund to the
City Council at the last Council meeting of February of each year. One copy
shall be kept by each party in the transaction.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.08 DELINQUENCY.
   If any occupation tax is not paid within 30 days after the tax shall become
due, it shall be considered delinquent and a penalty shall be added to the tax
in an amount equal to 10% of the tax. This increased amount is to be collected
in the same manner as the original tax. If the tax and assessed penalty are not
paid within 60 days after they shall become due, the city may proceed to
recover both the tax and penalty through civil action.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.09 GAS SERVICE COMPANIES AND TELEPHONE COMPANIES.
   Occupation taxes paid by the gas service companies and telephone companies
shall be paid quarterly within 1 month after the end of each calendar quarter.
Each occupation tax payment shall include a summary of revenues for the period
classified.
(Ord. 4187, § 1, 12-17-2024)
LODGING FACILITY OCCUPATION TAX
§ 110.10 LEVY OF LODGING FACILITY OCCUPATION TAX.
   Each person, partnership, firm, corporation, or any other form of business
engaged in the business of operating a lodging facility, as defined herein,
providing lodging in the city, shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of 2%
of the total lodging consideration charged for occupancy per occupied room per
night, as set forth in §
110.01.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.11 LODGING FACILITY, DEFINED.
   Lodging facility shall mean any facility in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for
accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist hotels,
campgrounds, courts, lodging houses (such as Airbnb and VRBO rentals), inns,
bed and breakfasts, and non-profit hotels; but lodging facility shall not be
defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care
centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution
and regularly used to house students.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.12 OCCUPIED ROOM, DEFINED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Occupied room shall mean any space ordinarily used for sleeping
accommodations and for which any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the
use or possession, or the right to use or possess, for a period not to exceed
30 continuous days. The term shall include camping space, trailer space, or
recreational vehicle space. The term does not include a function room such as a
ballroom, banquet room, reception room, or meeting room, provided it is not
used as temporary sleeping accommodations.
   (B)   The term “occupied room” shall not mean, and no occupation tax imposed
by this subchapter shall be measured or collected for:
      (1)   Complimentary or other sleeping accommodations for which no
consideration is charged; or
      (2)   Sleeping accommodations for which the consideration is paid by a
person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act
of 1967, as it is amended from time to time.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.13 TOTAL LODGING CONSIDERATION CHARGED FOR OCCUPANCY, DEFINED.
   Total lodging consideration charged for occupancy shall mean any and all
charges that are subject to the lodging tax under the Nebraska Visitors
Development Act, Neb. RS 81-3701 et seq., excluding the city’s lodging facility
occupation tax.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.14 COLLECTION.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected by the lodging
facility operator from the occupant of each room to which the tax applies. The
tax may be shown as an “add-on” to the charge for occupancy of the room(s) and
shall be collectible at the time the lodging is furnished, regardless of when
the charge for the occupancy is paid. The operator shall remain responsible for
payment of all taxes imposed, whether or not the taxes are actually collected
from the guests.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.15 DUE DATE.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be due and payable on the first day
of each calendar month next succeeding the month during which the room was
occupied. All taxes not paid by the 25th day of the month in which they are due
and payable shall be deemed to be delinquent. The lodging facility operator
shall be assessed a penalty of 10% on all delinquent amounts as well as
interest of 1% per month or fraction thereof from the first of the month in
which such tax becomes due and payable until the date of payment.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.16 RETURN.
   Each and every person engaged in the business of operating a lodging
facility within the city for the calendar month beginning January, 2025, and
for each and every month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the
25th day of the following month, on a form prescribed and furnished by the
city, a return for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time to pay to
the city the tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified and sworn to by
an owner or officer of the business. The return shall be considered filed on
time if mailed with payment enclosed in an envelope properly addressed to the
city’s Finance Department, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of
the 25th of the appropriate month. If the city offers online filing, the return
will also be considered filed on time if filed online and electronic payment
submitted to the city by midnight of the 25th of the appropriate month.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.17 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The levy of tax under this subchapter is in addition to all other fees,
taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any other
provisions of this code or ordinances of the city, in addition to any fee, tax,
excise or license imposed by the State of Nebraska. Payment of the tax imposed
by this subchapter shall not relieve the person paying the same from payment of
any other tax now or hereafter imposed by contract or ordinance or by this code
of ordinances, including those imposed for any business or occupation he or she
may carry on, unless so provided therein. The occupational taxes imposed by
this code of ordinances shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically
provided.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.18 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; DELINQUENCY; ASSESSMENT BY CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make a payment
of the taxes as required by this subchapter, the City Administrator shall make
an estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the
amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is
delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in
addition thereto a penalty equal to 10% on all delinquent amounts, together
with interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of 1% per month or fraction
thereof from the date when due.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall give the delinquent taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, which notice must be
served personally upon the taxpayer or its registered agent or delivered by
certified mail to the taxpayer.
   (C)   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such
assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the city 10
days from the date of service, if served personally, or 10 days from the date
of the notice of mailing by certified mail; however, within such 10-day period
the delinquent taxpayer may petition the City Administrator for a revision or
modification of such assessment and shall, within such 10-day period, furnish
the City Administrator the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount
of such taxes.
   (D)   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath by the taxpayer.
   (E)   The City Administrator may then modify such assessment in accordance
with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be
made in writing and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within 10
days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of 30 days
from the date of mailing, unless proceedings are commenced within that time for
appeal in the District Court of Lincoln County, Nebraska.
   (F)   It shall be an offense for any person to fail to file a return or make
payment of the taxes as required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.19 ADMINISTRATION; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The administration of the provisions of this subchapter are hereby
vested in the City Administrator, or his or her designee, who shall prescribe
forms in conformity with this subchapter for the making of returns, for the
ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for
the proper administration and enforcement hereof.
   (B)   All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered
or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer
at his or her last known address.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which he or she is liable hereunder, including, but not limited to,
records which accurately and completely evidence the number of rooms occupied
each month, the dates such rooms were occupied, and the basic rental rates
collected per occupied room.
      (1)   Records of the gross revenue by which the tax is measured shall be
kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to
facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection
of the tax.
      (2)   (a)   It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and
preserve for a period of 3 years all such books, invoices and other records,
which shall be open for examination at any time by the City Administrator or
his or her duly designated persons.
         (b)   If such taxpayer keeps or maintains the books, invoices,
accounts or other records, or any part thereof, outside of the state, upon
demand of the City Administrator such taxpayer shall make the same available at
a suitable place within the city, to be designated by the City Administrator,
for examination, inspection and audit by the City Administrator or his or her
duly authorized persons.
         (c)   The taxpayer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs
of the examination, inspection and audit if the City Administrator determines
that the taxpayer paid 90% or less of the tax owing for the period of the
examination.
      (3)   The City Administrator, in his or her discretion, may make, permit
or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices,
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such taxpayer outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such taxpayer shall be
required to enter into a binding agreement with the city to reimburse it for
all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination,
inspection or audit made it such place.
   (D)   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for
the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any taxpayer, the City
Administrator or his or her duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations
concerning any matters covered by this subchapter; and may examine any relevant
books, papers, records or memoranda of any such taxpayer.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.20 RIGHT OF CITY TO SUE.
   In case any lodging facility shall fail to make payment of the occupation
tax provided for by this subchapter at the time specified for such payment, the
city shall have the right to sue any such person or company in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable
under the terms and provisions of this subchapter and may recover judgment
against any such company for such amount so due, together with interest and
penalties, and may have execution thereon.
(Ord. 4188, § 1, 12-17-2024)
RETAIL BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX
§ 110.21 LEVY OF RETAIL BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX.
   The businesses and users of space within the Enhanced Employment Area (EEA),
for the purpose of paying all or any part of the costs and expenses of the
Enhanced Employment Project within the Enhanced Employment Area of the city,
shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of 1.95% of all general retail
business transactions, as set forth in §
110.01.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.22 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   The Mayor and Council of the City of North Platte, Nebraska (the “city”)
hereby find and determine as follows:
   (A)   Pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2142.02 and the Community Development Law, as
amended (the “Act”), the City of North Platte will enter into an Enhanced
Employment Area Redevelopment Contract and any amendments thereto (collectively
the “Redevelopment Contract”) with North Platte Mall, L.L.C., a Nebraska
limited liability company and the North Platte Community Redevelopment
Authority, which in part: (1) provides for the improvement of a commercial
shopping center (the “Redevelopment Project”) in the Enhanced Employment Area
as shown in §
110.35; and (2) designates such area as an “enhanced employment area” as
defined in Neb. RS 18-2103(11) of the Act (the “Enhanced Employment Area”).
   (B)   Pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2142.02 of the Act, the city is authorized to
agree to and to levy and collect a general business occupation tax upon the
businesses and users of space within the Enhanced Employment Area for the
purpose of paying all or any part of the costs and expenses of the Enhanced
Employment Project within the Enhanced Employment Area.
   (C)   It is necessary, desirable, advisable and in the best interests of the
city that a general business occupation tax be imposed within the Enhanced
Employment Area as provided by the Act for the purpose set forth in division
(B) of this section.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.23 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS. Any activity engaged in by any person or caused to
be engaged in by such person in which products or services are sold, leased or
rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or sub rent, except that
GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS shall not mean any transaction which is subject to tax
under Neb. RS 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-4,146, 77-2602
or 77-4008 or which is exempt from tax under Neb. RS 77-2704.24.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, partnership, association,
organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the business
of operating a general retail business.
   TAXPAYER. Any person engaged in the business of operating a general retail
business as herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.24 AGREEMENT TO IMPOSE TAX.
   The city hereby agrees to impose an occupation tax upon every person
operating a general retail business within the Enhanced Employment Area, and
the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute such
documents and take such actions as are necessary to carry out this section,
including, but not limited to, entering into an Enhanced Employment Area
Redevelopment Contract and any amendments thereto with North Platte Mall,
L.L.C., a Nebraska limited liability company, and the North Platte Community
Redevelopment Authority.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.25 TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   On or after January 1, 2022, and in each calendar month thereafter,
there is hereby imposed a retail business occupation tax upon each and every
person operating a general retail business within the Enhanced Employment Area
for any period of time during a calendar month. The amount of such tax shall be
1.95% of all general retail business transactions, upon which the State of
Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as allowed by the Nebraska Local Option
Revenue Act for each calendar month derived from the general retail business
subject to this tax. Such tax shall be imposed on transactions upon which the
State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax as allowed by the Nebraska
Local Option Revenue Act resulting from the sales of products or services
within the limits of the Enhanced Employment Area which are subject to the
sales and use tax imposed by the State of Nebraska, except that no occupation
tax shall be imposed on any transaction which is subject to tax under Neb. RS
53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-4,146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 or
which is exempt from tax under Neb. RS 77-2704.24.
   (B)   The person engaged in operating a general retail business may itemize
the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each
person engaged in such business shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this
section.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.26 BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2142.04 of the Act, the city hereby makes the
following classifications of businesses, users of space, or kinds of
transactions for purposes of imposing the occupation tax:
   (A)   General retail business. Any activity engaged in by any person or
caused to be engaged in by such person in which products or services are sold,
leased or rented for any purpose other than for resale, sublease or sub rent,
except that general retail business shall not mean any transaction which is
subject to tax under Neb. RS 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-
4,146, 77-2602 or 77-4008, as amended, or which is exempt from tax under Neb.
RS 77-2704.24, as amended.
   (B)   Non-occupation tax retail. Users of space, or kinds of transactions
where an occupations tax cannot be imposed pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2142.02 of
the Act, which includes, but is not limited to: (1) manufacturers or
wholesalers of alcoholic liquor; (2) producers, suppliers, distributors,
wholesalers, or importers of motor fuel and/or gasoline; (3) stamping agents
engaged in distributing or selling cigarettes at wholesale; (4) the first owner
of tobacco products in the State of Nebraska; and (5) the gross receipts from
the sale, lease, or rental of and the storage use, or other consumption of food
or food ingredients except for prepared food and food sold through vending
machines.
   (C)   Other. Businesses that are not either general retail or non-occupation
tax retail.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.27 RETURN.
   Each and every person engaged in the operation of a general retail business
within the Enhanced Employment Area for the calendar month beginning January 1,
2022, and for each and every month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or
before the 25th day of the following month thereafter on a form prescribed and
furnished by the City Administrator, a return for such month, and at the same
time pay to the city the tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified and
sworn to by the officer in charge of the business. The return shall be
considered filed on time if mailed in an envelope properly addressed to the
City Administrator, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the 25th
day of the appropriate month.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.28 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   (A)   The levy of the tax under this subchapter is in addition to all other
fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any
other ordinances of the city, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license
imposed by the State of Nebraska.
   (B)   Payment of the tax imposed by this subchapter shall not relieve the
person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed
by contract or ordinance or by this subchapter, including those imposed for any
business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The
occupation tax imposed by this subchapter shall be cumulative except where
otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.29 USE OF REVENUE.
   The 1.95% occupation tax imposed by this subchapter, less any administrative
expenses, shall be transferred to the North Platte Community Redevelopment
Authority for payment of principal and interest on the Enhanced Employment Area
Occupation Tax Revenue Bond, any subsequently issued bonds for the North Platte
Mall Redevelopment Project and to fund any expenditures that the city is
lawfully authorized to make in connection with the Enhanced Employment Area
Project as permitted by the Act.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.30 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; DELINQUENCY; ASSESSMENT BY THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of
the taxes as required by this subchapter, the City Administrator shall make an
estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the
amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is
delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in
addition thereto a penalty equal to 1% thereof, together with interest on such
delinquent taxes, at the rate of 10% per month, or fraction thereof from the
date when due. Any such interest due may be compounded quarterly.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall give the delinquent taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be
served personally or by certified mail.
   (C)   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment and such assessment
shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the City Administrator
10 days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by
certified mail; however, within such 10-day period the delinquent taxpayer may
petition the City Administrator for a revision or modification of such
assessment and shall, within such 10-day period, furnish the City Administrator
the facts and correct figures showing the correct amounts of such taxes.
   (D)   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.
   (E)   The City Administrator may then modify such assessment in accordance
with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be
made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within 10
days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of 30 days
from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced within that time for
appeal in the District Court.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.31 ADMINISTRATION; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The administration of the provisions of this subchapter are hereby
vested in the City Administrator, or his or her designee, who shall prescribe
forms in conformity with this subchapter for the making of returns, for the
ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for
the proper administration and enforcement hereof.
   (B)   All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered
or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer
at his or her last known address.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which he or she is liable hereunder.
      (1)   Records of the transactions upon which the State of Nebraska is
authorized to impose a tax allowed by the Nebraska Local Option Revenue Act by
which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of
other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and
records as necessary for the collection of this tax.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of 4 years all such books, invoices and other records, which shall be
open for examination during normal working hours by the City Administrator or
his or her duly designated persons. If such person keeps or maintains his or
her books, invoices, accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the
state, upon demand of the City Administrator he or she shall make the same
available at a suitable place within the city, to be designated by the City
Administrator, for examination, inspection and audit by the City Administrator
or his or her duly authorized persons. The taxpayer shall reimburse the city
for the reasonable costs of examination, inspection and audit if the City
Administrator determines that the taxpayer paid 90% or less of the tax owing
for the period of the examination.
      (3)   The City Administrator, in his or her discretion, may make, permit
or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices,
accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the
state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside
the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have
entered into a binding agreement with the city to reimburse it for all costs
and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or
audit made in such place.
   (D)   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for
the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the City
Administrator or his or her duly authorized persons may conduct investigations
concerning any matters covered by this subchapter and may examine any relevant
books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person.
   (E)   The city shall retain monthly 3% of the gross amount received from the
occupation tax imposed hereby, or a monthly minimum of $25 per general retail
occupation tax return required to be made pursuant to this subchapter,
whichever is higher, as an administrative fee.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.32 RECOVERY OF UNPAID TAX BY ACTION AT LAW.
   (A)   The City Administrator may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the city.
   (B)   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
penalty or interest thereon when due, the city may recover at law the amount of
such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Lincoln County, Nebraska or
of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of
business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.
   (C)   The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City
Administrator, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount
due.
   (D)   The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due
under this subchapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other
existing remedies, or remedies provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.33 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX; HEARING.
   If the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, after holding a hearing, shall find
that any person has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of
the tax imposed by this subchapter, such official may suspend or revoke any
city license, permit or other approval held by such tax evader. Such person
shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than
7 days after notice is given of the time and place of the hearing to be held,
addressed to the last known place of business of such person. Pending the
notice, hearing and finding, any licensee, permit or other approval issued by
the city to the person may be temporarily suspended. No suspension or
revocation hereunder shall release or discharge the person from civil liability
for the payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution
for such offense.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.34 SUNSET PROVISION.
   The occupation tax imposed by this subchapter shall terminate and collection
of the tax shall cease upon the earlier of: (1) payment in full of all
indebtedness issued by the North Platte Community Redevelopment Authority
pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS 18-2142.04 of the Act, for which such
occupation tax receipts have been pledged being the Enhanced Employment Area
Occupation Tax Revenue Bond and any subsequently issued bonds for the North
Platte Mall Rehabilitation Project, as described in the Redevelopment Contract
or any amendments thereto; or (2) December 31, 2041.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.35 ENHANCED EMPLOYMENT AREA DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   Tract 1.
      (1)   That portion of Lots 1, 2, 3, 8, 9 and 10 in Siegelin and Waibel's
Subdivision of part of the NW1/4SE1/4 of Section 4, Township 13 North, Range 30
West of the 6th P.M. in North Platte, Lincoln County, Nebraska and that portion
of the vacated alley between said Lots 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, and 10, all more
particularly described as follows:
      (2)   Beginning at a point which lies 697.0 feet south and 33.0 feet east
of the northwest corner of said SE1/4 of said Section 4; thence going south,
parallel to the west line of said SE1/4 of said Section 4, for a distance of
150.0 feet; thence going S89°39'E, parallel to the north line of said SE1/4 of
said Section 4 for a distance of 150.0 feet; thence going north parallel to the
west line of said SE1/4 of Section 4 for a distance of 150.0 feet; thence going
N89°39'W parallel to the north line of said SE1/4 of Section 4 for a distance
of 150.0 feet to the Place of Beginning.
   (B)   Tract 2.
      (1)   All of Siegelin and Waibel's Subdivision to North Platte, Lincoln
County, Nebraska, including vacated South Pine Street, vacated K and L Streets
and the vacated alley as recorded in Book 3 at Page 29, except that part of Lot
5 conveyed to the State of Nebraska by warranty deeds recorded in Book 152 at
Page 429 and Book 152 at Page 431; and
      (2)   Except that portion of Lots 1, 2, 3, 8, 9 and 10 in Siegelin and
Waibel's Subdivision of part of the NW1/4SE1/4 of Section 4, Township 13 North,
Range 30 West of the 6th P.M. in North Platte, Lincoln County, Nebraska; and
that portion of the vacated alley between said Lots 1, 2, 3, 8, 9 and 10, all
more particularly described as follows:
         (a)   Beginning at a point which lies 697.0 feet south and 33.0 feet
east of the northwest corner of said SE1/4 of said Section 4; thence going
south, parallel to the west line of said SE1/4 of said Section 4, for a
distance of 150.0 feet; thence going S89°39'E, parallel to the north line of
said SE1/4 of said Section 4 for a distance of 150.0 feet; thence going north
parallel to the west line of said SE1/4 of Section 4 for a distance of 150.0
feet; thence going N89°39'W parallel to the north line of said SE1/4 of Section
4 for a distance of 150.0 feet to the Place of Beginning; and
         (b)   Except the east 99.1 feet of the south 25 feet of Lot 5 in
Siegelin and Waibel's Subdivision of the NW1/4SE1/4 of Section 4, Township 13
North, Range 30 West of the 6th P.M., North Platte, Lincoln County, Nebraska,
together with the south 25 feet of the west 2.9 feet of the vacated alley in
said subdivision which abuts said Lot 5 as above described, all in the City of
North Platte and all that part of East "L" Street in the City of North Platte,
now vacated, which lies south of that part of said Lot 5 and the alley as above
described.
   (C)   Tract 3. Block 4, South Platte Business Park, a subdivision of Lot 7
of Fritz's Subdivision of part of the SE1/4 of Section 4, Township 13 North,
Range 30 West of the 6th P.M., in North Platte, Lincoln County, Nebraska and
vacated alley recorded in Book 383 at Page 279; except tract conveyed to the
State of Nebraska, Department of Roads by deeds recorded October 15, 2012 as
document numbers 201206108 and 201206109.
(Ord. 4164, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.36 TAX CERTIFICATE.
   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The certificate shall specify the amount of the tax
and the name of the person and business that paid the tax. The occupation tax
certificate shall be displayed in a prominent place, or carried in such a way
as to be easily accessible, while business is being conducted.
(Prior Code, § 14-34) (Ord. 4189, § 1, 12-17-2024)
§ 110.37 LEVIES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The city shall have power to raise revenue by levying and collecting a
license tax on any occupation or business within the limits of the city and
regulate the same by ordinance. The occupation tax shall be imposed in the
manner provided in Neb. RS 18-1208, except that Neb. RS 18-1208 does not apply
to an occupation tax subject to Neb. RS 86-704. All such taxes shall be uniform
in respect to the classes upon which they are imposed. All scientific and
literary lectures and entertainments shall be exempt from such taxation, as
well as concerts and other musical entertainments given exclusively by the
citizens of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-525)
   (B)   The City Council shall have authority, by ordinance, to impose an
occupation tax of not more than $5 per annum on each fire insurance
corporation, company, or association, doing business in the city, for the use,
support, and benefit of volunteer fire departments, regularly organized under
the laws of the state regulating the same. The City Clerk shall collect with
diligence the occupation tax so imposed. Upon the receipt of the tax the Clerk
shall pay over the proceeds thereof to the City Treasurer who shall credit the
same to a fund to be known as Special Occupation Tax Fund for benefit of the
Volunteer Fire Department. Upon proper claim filed by the Chief of the Fire
Department and allowed by the City Council, the Treasurer shall pay over the
proceeds of the tax in the Fund from time to time for the use of the Fire
Department, as hereinbefore provided.
(Neb. RS 35-106)
   (C)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm, or
corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and doing business
within the corporate limits of the city in any sum which exceeds 2 times the
amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain such
license.
(Neb. RS 53-132)
(Ord. 4189, § 1, 12-17-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Occupation taxes generating more than $300,000; imposition or increase;
election required, see Neb. RS 18-1208
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Registration; regulation generally
   
111.02   Exceptions
Itinerant Vendors
   
111.20   Definitions
   
111.21   License required; hours and locations of sales
   
111.22   Application for license
   
111.23   Occupation tax
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 REGISTRATION; REGULATION GENERALLY.
   To prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous and unhealthful goods and
services, and to protect the public by maintaining records of the products sold
and the persons and companies responsible for the sales, all peddlers and
hawkers shall, before doing business within the city, register with the city’s
Police Department. The registration shall contain all the necessary information
and documents required for the protection of the residents of the city. Any
person so registered shall be subject to any fees, occupation taxes and other
rules and regulations which the governing body deems appropriate for the
purposes stated in this section; provided, however, any such person shall
always be required to furnish his or her state sales tax number.
(Prior Code, § 14-61)
§ 111.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person selling
produce raised within the county, or to wholesale salespersons soliciting
merchants directly.
(Prior Code, § 14-62)
ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 111.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT and ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person,
whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, and whether a resident of the
city or not, who engages temporarily within the city in the business of selling
and delivering goods, wares and merchandise or taking orders for goods or
merchandise, to or at homes, apartments or other residential premises in the
city, without having been invited by the resident of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 14-81)
§ 111.21 LICENSE REQUIRED; HOURS AND LOCATIONS OF SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for an itinerant vendor to engage in such business
within the city without first obtaining a license, which shall be effective
from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any farmer, truck grower
or others who produce, hawk or peddle products of the farm, fruit or other
staples of food, or who peddle, sell or offer to sell any commodity or article
of commerce or trade, to park their conveyances or erect a place of business
for the purpose of selling the products upon any street within the Business
District or any other area of the city where this type of sales is prohibited
by Chapter 156 of this code, unless done in conjunction with a farmer’s market.
(Prior Code, § 14-82) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file a written sworn
application signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city police,
showing:
   (A)   The name of the person having the management or supervision of the
applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed that it will be
carried on in the city; the local address of the person while engaged in the
business; the permanent address of the person; the capacity in which the person
will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and
address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will
be carried on, if any; and, if a corporation, under the law of what state the
corporation is incorporated;
   (B)   The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the
applicant’s business and the length of time during which it is proposed that
the business shall be conducted;
   (C)   A statement of the nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for
sale by the applicant;
   (D)   A brief statement of the nature of the advertising done or proposed to
be done in order to attract customers;
   (E)   Credentials from the person for whom the applicant proposes to do
business, authorizing the applicant to act as the representative; and
   (F)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business or
the method or plan of doing the business as the city police may deem proper.
(Prior Code, § 14-83)
§ 111.23 OCCUPATION TAX.
   The applicant for a license under this subchapter shall pay an occupation
tax, in such amount as indicated in this title, to cover the cost of processing
the application and issuing the license.
(Prior Code, § 14-84)
CHAPTER 112: PLUMBERS
Section
   
112.01   Registration required; application
   
112.02   Board of Examiners; contents of examination; failure to pass
examination
   
112.03   Examination required; issuance of certificate of registration
   
112.04   Bond
   
112.05   Registration of firms
   
112.06   Expiration and renewal of registration
   
112.07   Waiver of reexamination for non-residents
   
112.08   Lapsed registrations
   
112.09   Revocation of certificate of registration
   
112.10   Allowing use of name by other person
   
112.11   Registration fees
   
112.12   Exception for utility companies
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1908, 18-1909
§ 112.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall engage in or work at the business of master plumber or
journeyman plumber in the city until he or she shall have registered as a
master plumber or journeyman plumber. Application for registration shall be
made, in writing, to the Plumbing Inspector, showing the name and residence of
the applicant, the business location of the applicant and such other
information as may be required.
(Prior Code, § 14-111) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 BOARD OF EXAMINERS; CONTENTS OF EXAMINATION; FAILURE TO PASS
EXAMINATION.
   There is created a board of plumbing examiners to pass upon the
qualifications of all persons applying to obtain either a master or
journeyman’s plumber license. The Board shall consist of 5 members, 1 of whom
shall be the Utilities Manager or some qualified person appointed by him or
her. The second and third members shall be master plumbers holding licenses
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The fourth member shall be
the City Sanitarian and the fifth member shall be the Plumbing Inspector. The
second and third members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
the City Council. The second and third members shall hold their respective
offices for a period of 2 years or until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The Chairperson of the Examining Board shall be elected by the
members. It shall be the duty of the Board of Examiners to promulgate all
necessary questions, rules and regulations for examinations that are given to
the applicant applying for a license under the provisions of this chapter. Each
examination may be oral or written or practical. All such tests and questions
shall be sufficient to ascertain and test the qualifications of the applicant
as a plumber. If the applicant fails to pass the examination, he or she shall
not be eligible for another examination until 30 days have elapsed. If the
applicant, after taking the second examination, fails to make a passing grade,
the applicant shall not be eligible for another examination until 90 days have
elapsed from the last examination. After the third examination, the applicant
shall wait for a period of 6 months before becoming eligible for the next
examination. Vacancies on the Board of Examiners shall be filled by appointment
by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-112)
§ 112.03 EXAMINATION REQUIRED; ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Before the applicant shall be registered as a master plumber or journeyman
plumber, he or she shall submit to an examination to determine his or her
fitness and competency to engage in the business of a master plumber or
journeyman plumber, which examination shall be given by the Examining Board as
provided in this chapter. Upon the payment of the required registration fee,
the applicant, after having, by the examination, shown himself or herself to
the satisfaction of the Examining Board to be fit, competent and qualified to
engage in the business of a master plumber or journeyman plumber and having
gained final approval from the Board, shall be registered and given a
certificate of registration signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 14-113)
§ 112.04 BOND.
   Before a license is issued under this chapter by the Examining Board, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond in the amount of $10,000,
conditioned that the applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify
the city from all liabilities, claims, damages, judgments, costs and expenses
of every nature and description caused by the willful or negligent conduct of
the plumber while engaged in the business of plumbing. The provisions of this
section may be satisfied by the applicant depositing with the Clerk an
insurance policy providing public liability and property damage insurance to
the city and the general public in the same amount as the bond, executed by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state; provided an
endorsement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to and
become part of each and every such liability insurance policy deposited with
the city, and the endorsement shall contain each and every condition of the
bond required by the governing body. The obligee of the bond or the beneficiary
of the insurance policy shall be the city, and action may be maintained thereon
by anyone injured by a breach of the conditions of the bond or of the covenants
contained in the required endorsement on the policy of insurance for a period
of 1 year after the completion of any plumbing work.
(Prior Code, § 14-114)
§ 112.05 REGISTRATION OF FIRMS.
   (A)   Any firm may be registered under this chapter as a master plumber in
the name of the firm; provided that, the firm shall have a master plumber who
is duly registered as provided in this chapter. The master plumber must be a
bona fide officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the
firm and is actually engaged in the planning, superintending and practical
installation of plumbing and drainage. The master plumber listed and registered
by the firm shall be in actual charge of and responsible for the installation,
removal or repair of any plumbing or drainage work done by the firm. Before the
firm shall be registered as a master plumber, there shall be filed with the
Chairperson of the Examining Board a certificate from the Examining Board
showing the fitness and competency of the individual who is qualified as a
master plumber and who shall be in charge of the firm’s plumbing and drainage
laying activities.
   (B)   One individual must qualify as master plumber to enable the firm to
hold a master plumber’s license, and, in case the individual withdraws from or
ceases to be connected with the firm, the Examining Board shall forthwith
revoke the registration of the firm.
(Prior Code, § 14-115)
§ 112.06 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   All registrations under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year
in which they are issued and shall not be assignable. Certificates of
registration, at the time of their expiration, may be renewed upon the
recommendation of the Examining Board, without an examination, upon payment of
the required registration fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-116)
§ 112.07 WAIVER OF REEXAMINATION FOR NON-RESIDENTS.
   Should a non-resident licensee under this chapter reapply for a job license
within a period of 1 year, the reexamination of the applicant may be waived,
subject to the approval of the Examining Board and upon payment of the
registration fees.
(Prior Code, § 14-117)
§ 112.08 LAPSED REGISTRATIONS.
   Any person registered under the provisions of this chapter as a master
plumber or journeyman plumber who does not renew his or her certificate of
registration for a period of 15 months after the expiration of the certificate
shall pay the examination fee required by this chapter for a master plumber or
journeyman plumber, and shall submit himself or herself to an examination by
the Examining Board before the person can be again registered under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-118)
§ 112.09 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   The governing body, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any
master plumber’s or journeyman’s certificate of registration, upon the
recommendation of the Examining Board, if the certificate was obtained through
error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent,
or has a second time wilfully violated any of the provisions of the city’s
Plumbing Code. If a certificate of registration is revoked, the holder of the
certificate shall not apply for registration for 1 year after the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 14-119)
§ 112.10 ALLOWING USE OF NAME BY OTHER PERSON.
   (A)   No registered plumber shall allow his or her name to be used by
another person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation
of any work. If any registered plumber violates this provision, the governing
body shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration issued to the
plumber.
   (B)   In addition to having his or her certificate of registration revoked,
the master plumber may be prosecuted under the violation section of the city’s
Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 14-120)
§ 112.11 REGISTRATION FEES.
   The City Clerk shall collect all registration and renewal fees under this
chapter as occupation taxes and shall credit the fees to the city General Fund.
The governing body shall have the right to classify plumbers for the purpose of
setting registration and renewal fees in such categories as it may in its
discretion set. The categories are hereby declared to be reasonable and non-
discriminatory. The actual amounts of the registration and renewal fees shall
be found in this chapter and shall also be on file at the office of the City
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 14-121)
§ 112.12 EXCEPTION FOR UTILITY COMPANIES.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to plumbers shall not apply to any
public utility company serving the city and its inhabitants under a franchise
agreement with the city, or its agents and employees, and shall not be
construed as a limitation or restriction upon any franchises heretofore granted
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-122)
CHAPTER 113: GASFITTERS
Section
   
113.01   Registration required; application
   
113.02   Board of Examiners; contents of examination; failure to pass
examination
   
113.03   Examination required; issuance of certificate of registration
   
113.04   Bond
   
113.05   Registration of firms
   
113.06   Expiration and renewal of registration
   
113.07   Revocation of certificate of registration
   
113.08   Lapsed registrations
   
113.09   Allowing name to be used by other person
   
113.10   Registration of non-residents
   
113.11   Fees
§ 113.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall engage in the business of repairing, alteration or
installation of natural gas piping systems and appliances until he or she shall
have registered as a gasfitter as provided in this chapter. Application for
registration shall be made in writing at the office of the Gas Inspector
showing the name and residence of the applicant, the business location of the
applicant and such other information as may be required.
(Prior Code, § 14-151)
§ 113.02 BOARD OF EXAMINERS; CONTENTS OF EXAMINATION; FAILURE TO PASS
EXAMINATION.
   There is hereby created a board of gasfitters examiners to pass upon the
qualifications of all persons applying to obtain either a master or journeyman
gasfitter’s license. The Board shall consist of 4 members, 1 of whom shall be
the general manager of the gas company, or some qualified person appointed by
him or her. The second and third members shall be master gasfitters holding
licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The fourth member
shall be the Gas Inspector. The second and third members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The second and third members
shall hold their respective offices for a period of 2 years or until their
successors are appointed and have qualified. The Chairperson of the Examining
Board shall be elected by the members. It shall be the duty of the Examining
Board to promulgate all necessary questions, rules and regulations for
examinations that are given to the applicant applying for the license. Each
examination may be oral or written or practical. All such tests and questions
shall be sufficient to ascertain and test the qualifications of the applicant
as a gasfitter. If the applicant fails to pass the examination, he or she shall
not be eligible for another examination until 30 days have elapsed. If the
applicant, after taking the second examination, fails to make a passing grade,
he or she shall not be eligible for another examination until 90 days have
elapsed from the last examination. After the third examination, the applicant
shall wait for a period of 6 months before eligible for the next examination.
Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-152)
§ 113.03 EXAMINATION REQUIRED; ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Before the applicant shall be registered as a gasfitter, he or she shall
submit to an examination to determine his or her fitness and competency to
engage in the business of a gasfitter, which examination shall be given by the
Examining Board as provided in this chapter. Upon the payment of the required
registration fee, the applicant, after having by the examination shown himself
or herself to the satisfaction of the Examining Board to be fit, competent and
qualified to engage in the business of a gasfitter and having gained final
approval from the Board, shall be registered and given a certificate of
registration signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 14-153)
§ 113.04 BOND.
   Each registered gasfitter, as a condition to the issuance of each
certificate, shall obtain and file with the City Clerk a personal surety bond,
in the amount of $10,000, signed by 1 or more sufficient sureties, or a
corporate surety doing business in the city, to be approved by the governing
body, conditioned that the licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city
from all accidents, damage, liability, claims, judgments, costs or expenses
caused by the willful or negligent conduct of the gasfitter; provided that, if
the applicant is already the holder of a master plumber’s license, he or she
may provide a joint bond in the sum of $10,000 which shall embrace and include
all the conditions required in both a master gasfitter’s and master plumber’s
bond. During the period of the license, the applicant for a license will be
governed by the rules and requirements provided in this chapter, or that may
hereafter be prescribed and adopted by the city during the period of his or her
license, with reference to natural gas work, to the satisfaction of the city.
The obligee of the bond shall be the city, and action may be maintained thereon
by anyone injured by a breach of its condition. All bonds tendered by
gasfitters shall be approved in writing as to form and substance by the City
Attorney. In addition to the filing of the bond, each registered gasfitter
shall obtain a general public liability insurance policy for property damage
and bodily injury, and file a certificate thereof with the City Clerk, in
policy limits set by resolution of the governing body and on file at the office
of the Clerk. Action may be maintained thereon by anyone injured by a breach of
the conditions of the bond or the covenants contained in the required
endorsement on the policy of insurance for a period of 1 year after the
completion of any gasfitting work.
(Prior Code, § 14-154)
§ 113.05 REGISTRATION OF FIRMS.
   Any firm may be registered under this chapter as a gasfitter in the name of
the firm, provided that the firm shall have a gasfitter who is duly registered
as provided in this chapter. The gasfitter in the firm must be a bond fide
officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the firm and is
actually engaged in the planning, superintending and practical installation of
gas piping and appliances. The gasfitter registered by the firm shall be in
actual charge of and responsible for the installation, removal or repair of any
gas piping or appliance work done by the firm. Before the firm shall be
registered as a gasfitter, there shall be filed with the Chairperson of the
Examining Board a certificate from the Examining Board of Gas Mechanics and
Fitters showing the fitness and competency of the individual who is qualified
as a gasfitter and who shall be in charge of the firm’s gas piping and gas
appliance installations. One individual must qualify as a gasfitter to enable
the firm to hold a gasfitter’s license, and, in case the individual withdraws
from or ceases to be connected with the firm, the Examining Board shall
forthwith revoke the registration of the firm. A registered firm may not employ
non-registered personnel in its natural gas activities, without obtaining the
registration and license for each employee; provided, however, that the work of
the non-registered employees is at all times under the jurisdiction, authority
and control of the registered officer or member thereof. Any firm not
maintaining an established place of business within the city shall be required
to obtain registration and licensing of all employees who may be engaged in the
inspection, cleaning, repair, alteration, sale or installation of natural gas
piping systems and appliances.
(Prior Code, § 14-155)
§ 113.06 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   All registrations under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year
in which they are issued and shall be not assignable. Certificates of
registration, at the time of their expiration, may be renewed upon the
recommendation of the Board without an examination, upon the payment of the
required registration fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-156)
§ 113.07 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   The governing body shall have the power to revoke any gasfitter’s
certificate of registration if the certificate was obtained through error or
fraud, or if the registrant is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has on 2 or
more occasions violated any of the provisions of the city constituting its
Building Code or Gas Code, or any provisions of this chapter. No person or firm
shall apply for registration for 1 year after revocation.
(Prior Code, § 14-157)
§ 113.08 LAPSED REGISTRATIONS.
   Any person registered under the provisions of this chapter as a natural gas
mechanic and fitter, who does not renew his or her certificate of registration
for a period of 15 months after the expiration of the certificate, shall pay
the examination fee required by this chapter and shall submit to another
examination.
(Prior Code, § 14-158)
§ 113.09 ALLOWING NAME TO BE USED BY OTHER PERSON.
   No registered gasfitter shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation of any
work. If any registered gasfitter violates this provision, the Examining Board
shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration issued to the gasfitter,
and, in addition to the revocation of the certificate of registration, the
gasfitter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14-159)
§ 113.10 REGISTRATION OF NON-RESIDENTS.
   Non-resident applicants under this chapter, upon their satisfying the
Examining Board of their competence, shall be granted a license. All non-
resident licensees obtaining a 1-job certificate shall file the same bond and
liability insurance provided for resident gasfitters. As a condition to the
issuance of a non-resident license, the licensee at the time of issuance must
execute and file with the City Clerk a designation of resident agent and power
of attorney appointing the City Clerk agent of the licensee to receive and
accept service of summons within the city on all litigation that may arise from
or as the result of the work of the non-resident licensee.
(Prior Code, § 14-160)
§ 113.11 FEES.
   The City Clerk shall collect all registration and renewal fees for
gasfitters as occupation taxes. The governing body shall have the right to
classify gasfitters for the purpose of setting registration and renewal fees,
in such categories as it may, in its discretion, set. The categories are hereby
declared to be reasonable and non-discriminatory. The actual amounts of the
registration and rental fees shall be found in this chapter and shall also be
on file at the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 14-161)
CHAPTER 114: AVIATION
Section
   
114.01   Helicopter fields; permit
   
114.02   Unnecessary noise; dropping objects
   
114.03   Private beacon lights
Statutory reference:
   Aviation fields, see Neb. RS 18-1501 et seq.
§ 114.01 HELICOPTER FIELDS; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any helicopter or similar aircraft
to land on or to take off from any roof or ground area within the city unless
the roof or area is a licensed landing area permitted and allowed by the Mayor
and Council. No person shall construct, operate or suffer to remain any roof or
ground area within the city where any helicopter or similar aircraft lands or
takes off or is serviced or is stored in a hanger or otherwise without first
having made application to and having received a permit in writing from the
Mayor and Council to do so. All such applications shall be accompanied by plans
and specifications, shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be referred
to the City Engineer for his or her recommendation as to public protection and
safety before Council action. The City Clerk shall issue the license and permit
as granted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.02 UNNECESSARY NOISE; DROPPING OBJECTS.
   (A)   When any aircraft is in flight above the city, the pilot thereof, or
any other person therein, shall not make or permit any loud or unnecessary
noise to be made by the aircraft, its motor or any apparatus attached to or
contained in the aircraft; nor shall the pilot or other person permit the use
of any radio, mechanical device or apparatus for the intensification or
amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise for advertising
purposes.
   (B)   The pilot shall not drop or release, or permit any person to drop or
release, any object or thing which may endanger life or injure property, or
drop or release any paper or advertising matter therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 10-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 PRIVATE BEACON LIGHTS.
   No person shall install or operate a beacon light in the city. The term
BEACON LIGHT, as used in this section, means any light which, by reason of
construction, design, operation or candlepower, resembles a beacon light used
in air commerce, or which may interfere with or confuse air navigation.
(Prior Code, § 10-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 115: AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
Section
Bowling Alleys
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License
   
115.03   Conduct on licensed premises
Public Dances
   
115.20   Definitions
   
115.21   Presence of children
   
115.22   Responsibilities of sponsor; conduct of dance
   
115.23   Intoxicated or disorderly patrons
   
115.24   Hours
   
115.25   Exits and restroom facilities
Bingo
   
115.40   Compliance with applicable laws; permit
   
115.41   Tax on gross receipts
   
115.42   Quarterly reports
   
115.43   Adoption of state law
Pool and Billiards
   
115.55   Definitions
   
115.56   License
   
115.57   Conduct on licensed premises
   
115.58   Unobstructed view of interior required; closing or locking rooms
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate bowling alleys, billiard tables and other forms of
amusement, see Neb. RS 16-226
BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Where no definition is specified, the
normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
   BOWLING ALLEY. Any room, building or structure in which a game consisting of
rolling a heavy ball down a wooden lane in an attempt to knock over wooden pins
set upright at the opposite end of the lane is played, whether or not it is in
connection with any other business.
(Prior Code, § 6-31)
§ 115.02 LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain or operate any
bowling alley for profit without having first obtained a license from the city.
Any person desiring a license to operate, maintain or own a bowling alley shall
file a written application with the City Clerk. The application form shall
contain such information and documents, or copies thereof, as the governing
body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the application.
   (B)   Upon determination that the granting of the license would be
beneficial to the city, the governing body shall immediately direct the City
Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of a fee set by
resolution of the governing body. The license shall be subject to revocation at
any time for good and sufficient cause by the governing body upon the issuance
of proper notice, and a hearing if the licensee should make such a request.
   (C)   Any person so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees or other
rules and regulations as may be set by resolution of the governing body for the
benefit of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-32) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a bowling alley to allow
or permit any disturbance of the peace, fighting, gambling, drinking of
alcoholic beverages, drunkenness, use of profanity or obscene books and
pictures.
(Prior Code, § 6-33) Penalty, see §
10.99
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 115.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance, rock festival, masquerade or ball given or
conducted for which a fee, contribution or collection for purposes of admission
is charged. The term PUBLIC DANCE shall not be construed to include dances,
music festivals, masquerades or balls to which admission is limited strictly to
persons expressly invited by the person, organization or society giving or
holding the dance, masquerade or ball, and which is not given or conducted
designedly for profit or gain to the person, organization or society giving or
conducting the dance, masquerade or ball. The provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to any dance conducted under the supervision and direction of
the governing body of any college or school district within the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-61)
§ 115.21 PRESENCE OF CHILDREN.
   It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 14 years to be present
at any public dance unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
(Prior Code, § 6-62) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.22 RESPONSIBILITIES OF SPONSOR; CONDUCT OF DANCE.
   Any person who sponsors or manages a public dance is hereby charged with the
knowledge and notice of all the provisions in this subchapter as well as the
responsibility of enforcing all city and state laws. Any person who fails to
manage and control a dance in a lawful and peaceful manner shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-63) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.23 INTOXICATED OR DISORDERLY PATRONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any sponsor or manager of a public dance to permit
any person to enter and participate in the public dance if the sponsor or
manager has reason to believe that the patron is in an intoxicated or
disorderly state.
(Prior Code, § 6-64) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.24 HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manage, sponsor or participate in a
public dance later than the hour of 1:00 a.m. No public dances shall be held on
Sunday, except between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 6-65) (Am. Ord. 3756, passed 4-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.25 EXITS AND RESTROOM FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall or place which is
not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits and restroom facilities, and no
hall or building which is not equipped with at least 2 exits and restrooms
shall be used for the purpose of conducting a public dance.
(Prior Code, § 6-66) Penalty, see §
10.99
BINGO
§ 115.40 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS; PERMIT.
   (A)   Games of bingo shall be conducted within the city in accordance with
all laws of the city and the state if the game of bingo is played for or
involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed by the state to conduct
the game of bingo shall obtain a written permit from the governing body before
commencing operation of the game. Application shall be made to the City Clerk
for the permit. The application form shall contain the information and
documents, or copies thereof, as the governing body deems necessary to
determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the determination
that granting the application would be proper, the governing body shall
immediately direct the City Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon
the payment of the currently required annual permit fee. The license shall be
subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any person so licensed shall
be subject to any other fees, rules and regulations which the governing body
may designate. All permits so issued will automatically expire on September 30
following their issuance or renewal. The fee for each renewal shall be set from
time to time. The fee shall be credited to the General Fund.
   (B)   The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of bingo is
conducted.
(Prior Code, § 6-91)
Statutory reference:
   Bingo generally, see Neb. RS 9-201 et seq.
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 9-239
§ 115.41 TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS.
   A tax of 2% of the gross receipts of each licensed association deriving
revenue from the game of bingo is hereby imposed and levied against each such
association and payable on or before the thirtieth day of the immediately
succeeding calendar quarter to the City Treasurer. The tax shall be credited to
the city’s General Fund, and shall be used to pay for the cost of regulation
and enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-92)
§ 115.42 QUARTERLY REPORTS.
   Each association conducting the game of bingo shall submit a written
quarterly report to the City Clerk covering the preceding calendar quarter on
or before the thirtieth day of the immediately succeeding calendar quarter.
(Prior Code, § 6-93)
§ 115.43 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   All applicable state statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended
shall be, and will constitute, a part of this chapter as if repeated verbatim
in this chapter, and violation of any state statute will be a distinct and
separate offense against the city as well as against the state. Violators
thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the city for each of such offenses,
and, if convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-94)
POOL AND BILLIARDS
§ 115.55 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   POOL AND BILLIARDS. A game played on a table in which the object is to drive
balls into the pockets, and which is conducted for profit or gain. All
ordinances relating to pool and billiards shall apply to any such game, whether
or not it is conducted in connection with any other business.
(Prior Code, § 6-121)
§ 115.56 LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain or operate any game of
pool or billiards for profit or gain without having first obtained a license
from the city. Any person desiring a license to operate, maintain or own a pool
or billiard game or hall shall file a written application with the City Clerk.
The application form shall contain such information and documents, or copies
thereof, as the governing body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or
reject the application. Upon the determination that the granting of the license
would be beneficial to the city, the governing body shall immediately direct
the City Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of a fee
set by resolution of the governing body. The license shall be subject to
revocation at any time for good and sufficient cause by the governing body upon
the issuance of proper notice and a hearing if the licensee should make such a
request. Any person so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees or other
rules and regulations as may be set by resolution of the governing body for the
benefit of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-122) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 16-226
§ 115.57 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a pool and billiards
establishment to allow or permit any disturbance of the peace, fighting,
gambling, drunkenness, use of profanity or obscene books and pictures.
(Prior Code, § 6-123) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.58 UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF INTERIOR REQUIRED; CLOSING OR LOCKING ROOMS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a pool or billiards
establishment to obstruct the view from the outside into the establishment by
the use of screens, blinds, paint or other means. It shall further be unlawful
for the owner or operator of a pool or billiards establishment to close or lock
any room, except rooms used for storage purposes only, while the pool or
billiards establishment is open and available for public use.
(Prior Code, § 6-124) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   License required for manufacture or sale
   
116.03   Location of places of sale
   
116.04   Dwellings connecting with place of sale
   
116.05   Display of license
   
116.06   Qualifications of licensees
   
116.07   Examination of applicants for license
   
116.08   Notice and hearing procedures for issuance of license
   
116.09   Renewal of license
   
116.10   City powers and duties regarding licensees
   
116.11   Responsibility of owner of licensed premises for violations
   
116.12   Responsibility of employer for violations
   
116.13   Credit sales prohibited
   
116.14   (Reserved)
   
116.15   Sale in other than original package
   
116.16   Minors in establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or
consumed
   
116.17   Hours of sale
   
116.18   Sanitary conditions required in retail establishments
   
116.19   Hiring minors to dispense alcoholic beverages
   
116.20   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions
   
116.21   Conduct on licensed premises
   
116.22   Compliance with zoning regulations
   
116.23   Right of entry of police
   
116.24   Dancing in licensed premises
   
116.25   Suspension or revocation of license
   
116.26   Licensing standards
   
116.27   Responsible beverage server training required
   
116.28   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person prohibited
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-103.01
through 53-103.42 shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 4-1)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see Neb. RS 53-103
§ 116.02 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MANUFACTURE OR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for
sale or barter any alcoholic liquors within the city unless the person shall
have in full force and effect a license as provided by the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act.
(Prior Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-168.06
§ 116.03 LOCATION OF PLACES OF SALE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, no
license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within
150 feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons
or for veterans, their wives or children. This prohibition does not apply to
any location within such distance of 150 feet:
      (1)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail has been
granted by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission for two years continuously
prior to making of application for license;
      (2)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where sale of alcoholic
liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so
exempted was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935; or
      (3)   To a college or university in the state which is subject to Neb. RS
53-177.01.
   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued if the commission
gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as prescribed in Neb.
RS 53-133.
(Neb. RS 53-177)
   (C)   No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for consumption on
the premises within 300 feet from the campus of any college or university
within the municipality, except that this section:
      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by such
college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail
by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university at
student activities or events; and
      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a community college
culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.
(Neb. RS. 53-177.01) (Prior Code, § 4-3) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-177
   State Commission may waive 300 feet requirement, see Neb. RS 53-177.01
§ 116.04 DWELLINGS CONNECTING WITH PLACE OF SALE.
   (A)   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from the
premises to any other portion of the same building used for dwelling or lodging
purposes, and which is permitted to be used by the public.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent any connection with the premises
and such other portion of the building which is used only by the licensee, his
or her family or personal guests.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-178
§ 116.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his or her
license to be framed and hung in plain public view in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-148
§ 116.06 QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a license to sell at retail any
alcoholic beverages unless the person is a resident of the state; satisfied the
requirements of Neb. RS 53-125, as amended, and 53-126; is a person of good
character and reputation; a citizen of the United States; a person who has
never been convicted of a felony or any Class I misdemeanor pursuant to Neb. RS
Ch. 28, Art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or 12, or any similar offense under a prior
criminal statute or in another state; a person who has never had a liquor
license revoked for cause; a person whose premises, for which a license is
sought, does not meet standards for fire safety as established by the state’s
Fire Marshal; and a person who has not acquired a beneficial interest in more
than 2 alcoholic beverage retail establishments since March 4, 1963. The
beneficial interest requirement in this section shall not apply to a person
applying for an additional license for use in connection with the operation of
a hotel containing at least 25 sleeping rooms, or where the request is limited
to on-premises sale of beer only in a restaurant.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail
shall file with the state’s Liquor Control Commission. The Commission shall
then notify by registered or certified mail the City Clerk. The governing body
shall then meet and determine the desirability of the application and report
its recommendation for approval or denial of the application in writing to the
state’s Liquor Control Commission within 45 days of receipt from the state’s
Liquor Control Commission. The governing body may examine or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant; examine or cause to be examined the books
and records of any such applicant; hear testimony; and take proof for its
information in the performance of its duties. For the purpose of obtaining any
of the information desired, the governing body may authorize its agent, the
City Clerk or the City Attorney to act on its behalf. The governing body may
conduct the examination and hold the hearing upon the receipt from the
Commission of the notice and copy of the application. The governing body shall
fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the
governing body shall receive evidence, under oath, either orally or by
affidavit, from the applicant and any other person concerning the propriety of
the issuance of the license. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be published in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the city 1
time not less than 7 and not more than 14 days before the time of the hearing.
The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all persons
desiring to give evidence before the local governing body in support of or in
protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the time of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 21 days after the receipt of
notice from the Commission. After the hearing, the governing body shall cause
to be spread at large in the minute record of its proceedings a resolution
recommending either issuance or refusal of the license. The City Clerk shall
thereupon mail to the Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy
of the resolution, which shall state the cost of the published notice.
(Prior Code, § 4-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-131, 53-134
§ 116.08 NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Notice. Notice of a hearing, held pursuant to Neb. RS 53-134, shall be
given to the applicant by the City Clerk and shall contain the date, time and
location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally or factually
related may be heard and considered together unless any party thereto makes a
showing sufficient to satisfy the Council that prejudice would result
therefrom.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Hearings will be informal and conducted by the Mayor. The intent is
an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action. Each witness may present
his or her testimony in narrative fashion or by question and answer.
      (2)   The governing body or the applicant may order the hearing to be
recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant.
      (3)   The governing body and its representatives shall not be bound by
the strict rules of evidence and shall have full authority to control the
procedures of the hearing, including the admission or exclusion of testimony or
other evidence. The governing body may admit and give probative effect to
evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably
prudent individuals. The Mayor may limit testimony where it appears
incompetent, irrelevant or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any
application and the opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and
to cross examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of the application,
they shall choose a spokesperson to perform the function, who shall notify the
mayor of his or her representation prior to the start of the hearing.
      (4)   The order of the proceedings is as follows:
         (a)   Marking of exhibits; exhibits will be marked in advance by the
Clerk and presented to the Mayor during the presentation;
         (b)   Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by the
applicant;
         (c)   Testimony of any other citizens in favor of the proposed
license;
         (d)   Examination of the applicant, witnesses or citizens by the City
Attorney, City Administrator, governing body or duly appointed agent;
         (e)   Cross examination of the applicant, witnesses or citizens by the
spokesperson for the opposition, if any;
         (f)   Presentation of evidence and witnesses by the opposition;
         (g)   Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to the proposed
license;
         (h)   Presentation of evidence by city and law enforcement personnel;
         (i)   Cross examination by the applicant;
         (j)   Rebuttal evidence by both parties and by the city administration
or agent; and
         (k)   Summation by the applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.
(Prior Code, § 4-8)
§ 116.09 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Retail or bottle club licenses issued by the state’s Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed in the absence of a
request by the governing body to require the licensee to submit an application
for renewal. Any licensed retail or bottle club establishment located in an
area which is annexed to the city shall file a formal application for a
license, and, while such application is pending, the licensee shall be
authorized to continue all license privileges pursuant to this chapter until
the original license expires, is canceled or is revoked. If the license expires
within 60 days following the annexation date of the area, the license may be
renewed by order of the Commission for not more than 1 year. The City Clerk,
upon notice from the Commission, between January 10 and January 30 of each
year, shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in, or of general
circulation in, the city, 1 time, a notice in the form prescribed by law of the
right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the
city; provided that, Class C license renewal notices shall be published between
the dates of July 10 and July 30 of each year. The City Clerk shall then file
with the Commission proof of publication of the notice on or before February 10
of each year or August 10 of each year for class C licenses. Upon the
conclusion of any hearing required by §
116.07, the governing body may request a licensee to submit an application.
(Prior Code, § 4-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-135, 53-135.01
§ 116.10 CITY POWERS AND DUTIES REGARDING LICENSEES.
   (A)   The governing body is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail,
craft brewery, and microdistillery licensees carried on within the corporate
limits of the municipality .
(Neb. RS 53-134.03)
   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail or
electronic delivery from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission notice and a
copy of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a
craft brewery license, or a microdistillery license, the governing body may
make and submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or
refusal to grant the license to the applicant.
(Neb. RS 53-131)
   (C)   The governing body, with respect to licenses within the corporate
limits of the municipality, has the following powers, functions, and duties
with respect to retail, craft brewery, and microdistillery licenses:
      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery, or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor issued to persons
for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right of appeal to the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act to
determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation adopted by the governing body has been or is being violated, and at
that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection with such
determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of
the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or
any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation adopted by the governing body
has been or is being violated shall report such violation in writing to the
Executive Director of the Commission:
         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such violation has
occurred;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing police
investigation; or
         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution related to
such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney determines
that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would jeopardize such
prosecution, whichever is later;
      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to
act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
      (4)   To receive retail, craft brewery, and microdistillery license fees
as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the same, after the license
has been delivered to the applicant, to the Municipal Treasurer;
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail,
craft brewery, or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of cancellation or
revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee, and to hear
testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the governing
body may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided for citizen complaints, it determines that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation duly
enacted, adopted, and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. The order of
cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission within 30 days
after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Commission.
The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided for hearing on an
application in Neb. RS 53-133; and
      (7)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a
hearing at which the governing body shall receive evidence, either orally or by
affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the propriety
of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the
municipality, one time not less than 7 and not more than 14 days before the
time of the hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a
statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the governing body
in support of or in protest against the issuance of the license may do so at
the time of the hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after
the date of receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after the hearing
the governing body shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its
proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the
license. The Municipal Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first class mail,
postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the
published notice, except that failure to comply with this provision shall not
void any license issued by the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue
such a license, the cost of publication of notice shall be paid by the
Commission from the security for costs.
(Neb. RS 53-134)
   (D)   (1)   When the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the Municipal Clerk a retail, craft brewery, or microdistillery license issued
or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver the license to the
licensee upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:
         (a)   The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124 the fee is
payable to the Municipal Treasurer;
         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the
governing body upon the application for the license;
         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the municipality.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
municipality shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person,
firm, or corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and doing
business within the corporate limits of the municipality in any sum which
exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the
Act to obtain that license.
(Neb. RS 53-132)
(Prior Code, § 4-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134
§ 116.11 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OF LICENSED PREMISES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The owner of any premises used for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent as the
licensee if the owner shall permit the licensee to use the licensed premises in
violation of any section of this code or state statute.
(Prior Code, § 4-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-1,101
§ 116.12 RESPONSIBILITY OF EMPLOYER FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The employer of any officer, director, manager or employees working in a
retail liquor establishment shall be held to be liable for and guilty of any
act of omission or violation of any law or ordinance, and each act or omission
shall be deemed and held to be the act of the employer and will be punishable
in the same manner as if the act or omission had been committed by him or her
personally.
(Prior Code, § 4-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-1,102
§ 116.13 CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered, and if
any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to
be created shall not be recoverable at law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:
      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of such club;
      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from permitting
checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such
hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the accounts of such guests;
or
      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine from issuing
wine-tasting cards to customers.
(Neb. RS 53-183) (Prior Code, § 4-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-183
§ 116.14 (RESERVED).
§ 116.15 SALE IN OTHER THAN ORIGINAL PACKAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages or leases any premises
in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed to have, in his or her
possession, for sale at retail any alcoholic liquors contained in bottles,
casks or other containers except in the original package.
(Prior Code, § 4-16) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-184
§ 116.16 MINORS IN ESTABLISHMENTS WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE SOLD OR
CONSUMED.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
years to enter upon or remain upon any licensed premises or place where
alcoholic liquors are sold and consumed, unless accompanied by a parent or
guardian. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee to allow or permit
any person under age of 21 years to enter upon or remain upon any licensed
premises or place where alcoholic liquors are sold and consumed, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. However, individuals 19 years of age or
older who are employed to serve or dispense alcoholic liquor within the
establishment shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. The
provisions of this division shall not apply to restaurants or private clubs.
   (B)   Restaurants with separate dining and bar areas. In the case of a
restaurant which has separate dining and bar areas, it shall be unlawful for
minors to enter the bar area unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (C)   Using false identification. It shall be unlawful for any minor under
the age of 21 years to falsify any identification for the purpose of violating
the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Posting of notice. Every licensee of a place where alcoholic liquor is
sold and consumed shall display at all times, at all entrances, a printed card
with a minimum height of 12 inches and a width of 14 inches, with each letter
to be a minimum of 1 inch in height, which shall read as follows:
WARNING TO MINORS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO FINE UP TO ONE HUNDRED ($100.00) DOLLARS
FOR ENTERING UPON THESE PREMISES UNLESS ACCOMPANIED
BY A PARENT OR GUARDIAN
   (E)   “Restaurant” defined. The term RESTAURANT, as used in this section, is
defined as any public restaurant kept, used, maintained, advertised and held
out to the public as a place where meals are  served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, the place being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed
therein a sufficient number of kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve
food for its customers.
(Prior Code, § 4-17)
§ 116.17 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or his or her agent to
sell any alcoholic beverages within the city except during the following hours:
      (1)   Secular days: 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Sundays: 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
   (B)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises
for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed in this
section for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-18) (Ord. 3160, 2-17-1998; Am. Ord. 4101, 10-18-2022) Penalty,
see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-179
§ 116.18 SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED IN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment
that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be
adequate and convenient for customers and patrons, and the licensed premises
shall be subject to any health inspections the governing body or the code
enforcement may make or cause to be made. All applications for liquor licenses
shall be viewed in part from the standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a
report concerning the sanitary conditions shall be made at all hearings
concerning the application for or renewal of a liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 4-19) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.19 HIRING MINORS TO DISPENSE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor, regardless of sex,
under the age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including
beer, to the licensee’s customers.
(Prior Code, § 4-20) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.20 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued a
license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,211.08,
it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned
or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or
conducting any dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place open to the
general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon
the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant
to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. It is unlawful for any person to consume
alcoholic liquor in any dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place open
to the general public except as permitted by a license issued for such premises
pursuant to the Act. This division does not apply to a retail licensee while
lawfully engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages or to limousines or
buses operated under Neb. RS 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
   (C)   This section shall not apply to consumption of alcoholic beverages on
Iron Eagle Golf Course if the consumption does not otherwise violate any other
laws of the city or the state.
(Prior Code, § 4-21) (Ord. 2956, § 1, 4-19-1994) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.21 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any of the licensee’s
employees, agents, directors or officers shall engage in, allow, permit or
suffer in or upon any licensed premises any disturbances, lewdness, immoral or
illegal activities, or displays, brawls or unnecessary noises, or allow, permit
or suffer the licensed premises to be conducted in such manner as to create
public censure or become a nuisance, public or private.
(Prior Code, § 4-23) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.22 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
   Under the provisions of Chapter 156, pertaining to zoning, the sale of
alcoholic liquors, including beer, shall be construed to be a business in and
of itself, and no permit for the sale thereof shall be issued to any applicant
for licensed premises contrary to the provisions of
Chapter 156.
(Prior Code, § 4-24)
§ 116.23 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF POLICE.
   All police officers of the city are hereby authorized to enter at any time
upon any premises of any licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act within
the city to determine whether any of the provisions of the Act or of this
chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the city or by the state’s
Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to
examine sufficiently the premises of the licensee in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 4-25)
§ 116.24 DANCING IN LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be permissible to dance in any premises licensed under the Nebraska
Liquor Control Act; provided that, the licensee shall maintain a well-defined
and designated area for dancing, and provided further that the licensee shall
have paid to the City Clerk the required occupation tax levied against the
licensee who permits the dancing.
(Prior Code, § 4-26)
§ 116.25 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   A retail license to sell alcoholic liquors, which the Council is legally
empowered to revoke, may be either revoked or suspended by the City Council
whenever it shall find, after notice and hearing as provided by law, that the
holder of the license has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act, or of this chapter, or rule or regulation of the state’s Liquor
Control Commission, or for any 1 or more of the following causes:
   (A)   The licensee or his or her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed has been convicted of or has pled guilty to a felony under the laws of
the state or of any other state of the United States;
   (B)   The licensee or his or her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed has been convicted of or has pled guilty to any felony, or gambling,
pandering or any misdemeanor relating to decency and morality;
   (C)   The licensee or his or her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed has been convicted of or pled guilty to violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquors;
   (D)   The licensee either swore falsely to any question in his or her
application for the license, or has failed to comply with the statements and
representations made by the answer to any question in the application, or has
failed to perform in accordance with any other statement or representation to
keep any promise, oral or written, made to the Council, in connection with the
licensee’s request for the license;
   (E)   The licensee or his or her manager or agent in charge of the premises
licensed has forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges for any one of
the violations of law or ordinances referred to in this section; and
   (F)   The licensee or his or her manager or agent has allowed any live
person to appear, or had reasonable cause to believe that any live person would
appear, in any licensed premises in a state of nudity, to provide
entertainment, to provide service, to act as hostess, manager or owner, or to
serve as an employee in any capacity. For the purposes of this division, the
term NUDITY shall mean the showing of any part of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks or the human female breast including the
nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full opaque covering.
(Prior Code, § 4-27)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension, cancellation or revocation of licenses, see Neb. RS 53-117.08,
53-134
§ 116.26 LICENSING STANDARDS.
   (A)   The City Council shall consider the following licensing standards and
criteria at the hearing and evaluation of any applicant for a retail alcoholic
liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic liquor or for
the expansion or change in location of the premises, and for the purpose of
formulating a recommendation from the governing body to the state’s Liquor
Control Commission in accordance with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act:
      (1)   The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in
the area;
      (2)   The recommendation of the Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency;
      (3)   Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity
of the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems and
the proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
      (4)   Zoning restrictions and the city’s zoning and land use policies;
      (5)   Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises;
      (6)   The existence of a citizen’s protest and any other evidence in
support of or in opposition to the application;
      (7)   The existing population and projected growth, both citywide and
within the area to be served;
      (8)   The existing liquor licenses, the class of the licenses and the
distance and time of travel to the licensed premises;
      (9)   The nature and needs of the neighborhood or community where the
proposed premises are located, as well as its projected growth;
      (10)   Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated
in conjunction with the proposed license is and will be consistent with the
public interest;
      (11)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management
and control exercised over the licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure
that the licensee can conform to all the provisions, requirements, rules and
regulations provided for in the Nebraska Liquor Control Act;
      (12)   The background information of the applicant established by
information contained in the public records of the state’s Liquor Control
Commission and investigations conducted by the Police Department; and
      (13)   Other information and data that may reasonably be considered
pertinent to the issuance of the license, including the compliance or non-
compliance with other relevant ordinances.
   (B)   The City Council may fix certain requirements and prescribe certain
conditions upon a license when it is granted or permitted to continue in full
force and effect, whether the requirements or conditions are imposed at a
formal hearing, by a written notice, or in a written stipulation, and the
requirements or conditions shall be deemed to be a part of the license as
though fully endorsed therein, and any violation or breach of any requirement
or condition is prohibited.
   (C)   The standards set out in this section are not necessarily of equal
value that can be computed in a mathematical formula. Rather, they are
standards which can be weighed and cumulated positively and negatively. The
burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application.
When applicable, the term APPLICANT, as used in this section, is synonymous
with LICENSEE.
(Prior Code, § 4-28)
Statutory reference:
   Powers, functions of cities regarding liquor licenses, see Neb. RS 53-134
§ 116.27 RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVER TRAINING REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or entity with a Nebraska
retail liquor license or special designated permit to allow employees or
designated persons to sell, serve or furnish alcoholic beverages within the
city without first obtaining a responsible beverage server training certificate
by completion of a responsible beverage server training course devised and
conducted by the North Platte Police Department.
   (A)   Proof of completion will be provided by the Police Department for
persons successfully completing the training. The proof of completion will be
in the form of a server training certificate, which shall remain with said
individual wherever employed within the city. The server training certificate
will be valid for 3 years.
   (B)   All Nebraska liquor licensees or special designated permit holders
within the city must keep current with the Police Department a list of
employees and/or designated persons that serve, sell or furnish alcoholic
beverages under the said license or permit.
   (C)   All persons who serve, sell or furnish alcoholic beverages under any
Nebraska liquor license or special designated permit must complete the
responsible beverage server training prior to serving, selling or furnishing
alcoholic beverages within the city.
(Ord. 3755, passed 4-7-2009) Penalty, see §
116.99(C)
§ 116.28 SALE OF GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver,
or permit the sale, gift, or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any
minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-180)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-135
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating or refusing to obey any of the provisions of §
116.16 shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25 and not more
than $500 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person, business or entity violating §
116.27 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in the amount of
$250 for a first offense, and $500 for a second and subsequent offense. Each
and every day that a violation occurs or exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-17) (Am. Ord. 3755, passed 4-7-2009)
CHAPTER 117: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
117.01   Purpose and intent
   
117.02   Findings
   
117.03   Definitions
   
117.04   Classification of businesses
   
117.05   License required; application for license
   
117.06   Investigation of application
   
117.07   License issuance and display
   
117.08   License fee
   
117.09   Inspections
   
117.10   License term and renewal
   
117.11   License suspension
   
117.12   License revocation
   
117.13   Transfer of license
   
117.14   Location of sexually oriented business
   
117.15   Nonconforming uses
   
117.16   Films or videos
   
117.17   Additional regulations concerning public nudity or semi-nudity
   
117.18   Additional regulations concerning alcohol
   
117.19   Prohibition of children in a sexually oriented business
   
117.20   Hours of operation
   
117.21   Display of sexually oriented materials to minors
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within
the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or sexual activities.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.02 FINDINGS.
   Based on convincing documented evidence, studies, findings and reports
concerning the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
regarding both commercial and residential areas and the nexus between sexually
oriented businesses, obscene materials and sexual exhibits and alcohol
consumption, and illegal drug distribution and use, the City Council finds:
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses have negative secondary effects on the
existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent
to them, causing increased crime, the downgrading of property values, the
downgrading of adjacent neighborhoods making adjacent neighborhoods
significantly less attractive and less safe for raising children and
denigrating both residential life and commercial activity for other types of
businesses and sexually oriented businesses downgrade the quality of life and
fitness of property for other uses in areas both immediate and adjacent to such
businesses.
   (B)   The negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses are
increased when they are located in close proximity to each other and when the
service or consumption of alcohol is permitted at or near such locations.
   (C)   Improper conduct involving sexual acts occurs at sexually oriented
businesses which provide private or semi-private booths or viewing rooms for
the viewing of films, videos or live performances.
   (D)   The findings noted above raise substantial governmental concerns for
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and it is
appropriate for the purpose of promoting and protecting the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city particularly the children of the community
and those conducting general business that reasonable regulations be enacted so
as to address the substantial governmental concerns to minimize and control the
negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby promote
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, protect
the citizens from increased crime, preserve the value of property, and preserve
the quality of life and the quality and character of surrounding neighborhoods
for residential and commercial purposes.
   (E)   The enactment of reasonable regulations of sexually oriented
businesses which involve locational criteria, licensing criteria, operational
criteria and the prohibition of alcohol and illegal substance use are
appropriate to address the substantial governmental concerns and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (F)   A reasonable licensing procedure and zoning requirements are
appropriate mechanisms to place the burden of reasonable regulations on the
owners of sexually oriented businesses and such a licensing procedure will
place an incentive on the owners to see that the sexually oriented business is
operated in a manner which is consistent with the health, safety and welfare of
patrons, employees and citizens of the city.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to 5 or fewer persons per
machine at any 1 time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities
and/or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE.  
      (1)   A commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in- trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion
of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any 1 or more
of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions,
slides, laser or compact discs, or other visual representations which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental or material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store so long as 1 of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas or if the business advertises the sale or rental of any such
material in a way that can be seen or heard from the outside of the location.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features any of the following:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, laser or compact discs, or other visual representations which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which does
any of the following:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact discs or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions.
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than 10 hours.
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by, or where the principal subject of depiction or description is, specified
sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-
time, part-time or contract basis,  regardless of whether the person is
denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another
status. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association, who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as 1 of its primary business purposes
for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business to a sexually oriented
business or from 1 type of sexually oriented business to another type or types
of sexually oriented business.
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business.
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued but also includes the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. A commercial establishment which regularly features a
person who appears in a state of nudity and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, or photographed by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Nebraska; or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs
in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation.
   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing or depiction of the human post-
pubertal male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full
opaque covering, the showing or depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, or the showing or depiction of the female breast with
less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the
areolae of the nipple. This definition shall include the entire portion of the
human female breast below the top of the areolae of the nipple, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other clothing.
   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in a
state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of
the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business regardless of whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company or partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
   RESIDENTIAL. A single family, 2 family, or multiple family use as defined in
the ordinances of the City of North Platte.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and the female breast below the top of the areolae of
the nipple, with other portions of the body covered by supporting straps,
materials or devices. This definition shall include the entire portion of the
human female breast below the top of the areolae of the nipple, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other clothing.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that offers for
any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex.
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when 1 or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, semi-nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  The human, post-pubertal male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, the
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered, or the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the areolae of the nipple.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
area, buttocks or female breasts whether clothed or unclothed; or
      (2)   Acts whether actual or simulated, of human sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT.  The increase in floor area occupied by the
business by more than 25% as the floor area exists on the date this chapter
takes effect or on the date of the issuance of a sexually oriented business
license.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.04 CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcade;
   (B)   Adult bookstore, adult video store or adult novelty store;
   (C)   Adult cabaret;
   (D)   Adult motel;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theater;
   (F)   Adult theater;
   (G)   Escort agency;
   (H)   Nude model studio;
   (I)   Sexual encounter center.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.05 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to operate, a sexually
oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular
type of classification of business.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made to the City Clerk on a form
provided by the City Clerk.
   (C)   The applicant must meet all qualifications stated in this chapter
before a license is issued and continuously thereafter during the license term.
The application shall require and the applicant shall provide such information
and documentation as is specified in this chapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each officer, director, general partner, managing partner or other
person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the
business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must meet the qualifications as stated in this chapter and each applicant shall
be considered as a licensee if a license is granted.
   (E)   The completed application for a sexually oriented business license
shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 21 or more years of age;
         (b)   A partnership or limited liability company, the partnership or
limited liability company shall state its complete name, and the names of all
partners or members, residence address and whether the partnership or company
is general or limited, a copy of the partnership, LLC/LLP organizational
agreement, if any, and verification of current state registration, if any;
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the name, capacity and
address of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of
the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
      (2)   Name of business. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must
state the sexually oriented business's name and submit any registration
documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime as specified in
§
117.07(A)(7)(a), and, if so, the crime, date, place and jurisdiction.
      (4)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license or holds a present
license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another city or county and whether any license has been denied,
suspended or revoked in this or any other jurisdiction, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner or member in a
partnership or limited liability company or an officer, director, or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter or in another
jurisdiction or whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the
license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation.
      (5)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or operates other similar sexually oriented businesses in another city or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other businesses.
      (6)   The classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any.
      (8)   The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
      (9)   The applicant's driver's license number, social security number,
and state or federal issued tax identification number.
      (10)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing
the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6
inches.
   (F)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates a sexually
oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for that
particular classification of business.
   (G)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the law and this chapter by the Building Inspector and Police Department.
   (H)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or county
licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business license.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.06 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application for a sexually oriented
business license, the Chief of Police or designee shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant and application including a location inspection
and shall issue an investigation report.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or designee shall forward a copy of the
application and investigation report to the Building Inspector and the Building
Inspector shall inspect the location.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.07 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall recommend to the City Clerk approval of the
issuance of a license to an applicant within 20 days after receipt by the City
Clerk of an application unless he or she finds 1 or more of the following to be
true:
      (1)   An applicant is not then 21 or more years of age.
      (2)   An applicant is currently required to register pursuant to the
Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act.
      (3)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his or her
payment to the city or county of fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him
or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license including all information requested on the
application form or has falsely answered a question or request for information
on the application form.
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is not
in compliance with state or local building codes, rules and regulations.
      (6)   The investigation, inspection and license fees required by this
chapter have not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime:
         (a)   Involving:
            1.   Any of the following offenses as described in Nebraska State
Statues:
               a.   Prostitution;
               b.   Pandering;
               c.   Keeping a place of prostitution;
               d.   Debauching a minor;
               e.   Obscenity;
               f.   Contributing to the delinquency of a child;
               g.   Child pornography;
               h.   Possession, distribution or sale of child pornography;
            2.   Any of the following offenses as described in Nebraska State
Statues:
               a.   Incest;
               b.   Public indecency;
               c.   Allowing a child to participate in child pornography;
            3.   Sexual assault or sexual assault of a child as described in
Nebraska State Statutes;
            4.   Solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as
described in Nebraska State Statutes; or
            5.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses;
         (b)   For which:
            1.   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the date of release
from probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a
misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than 10 years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the date of
release from probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is a felony offense; or
            3.   Less than 10 years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, or
the date of release from probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if
the convictions are of 2 or more misdemeanors of the offenses listed in
division (A)(7)(a) above.
   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant under division (A) of this section.
   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in division
(A)(7)(a) above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when
the time period required by division (A)(7)(b) has elapsed and all fines
reference the criminal offenses have been fully paid.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant within 45 days after receipt of an application. The City Clerk, upon
approving the issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall cause to
be sent to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written
notice of that action and that the applicant must pay the investigation/
inspection and license fees at the Office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk's
approval of the issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant to
operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees
required by this chapter and has obtained possession of the license. The City
Clerk, upon denial of the issuance of sexually oriented business license, shall
cause to be sent to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice of that action and the applicant can appeal such decision to the
City Council, in writing filed with the City Clerk, within 30 days of the date
of denial. City Council will hear the appeal within 30 days from the date the
written appeal is received. After hearing, Council will affirm or reverse the
decision of the City Clerk within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing. The
hearing will be informal and rules of evidence do not apply. The applicant has
the right to be represented. In case of reversal, the license shall issue.
   (E)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business, and the classification for which the license is
issued. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any
time.
   (F)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only 1
classification and the applicant can operate a business for only 1 licensed
location in the city.
   (G)   The Police Department, Fire Department, and the City Building
Inspector shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance
or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the City
Clerk. The certifications of the Building Inspector and Fire Department shall
be promptly presented to the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.08 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The amount of the annual license fee for a sexually oriented business
shall be reflected in the fee resolution adopted annually by the City Council
   (B)   In addition to the annual license fee to be paid to the city at
license issue as required by division (A) of this section, an applicant for an
initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of making
application, pay a nonrefundable investigation fee, also in an amount reflected
in the fee resolution adopted annually by the City Council, for the city to
conduct an investigation of the application and for the city also to conduct
inspections of the location to insure that the proposed sexually oriented
business is in compliance with the locational and other restrictions set forth
in §
117.14.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.09 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   An applicant, licensee, operator or employee shall permit
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, City Building
Inspector, and any other state, county or city agency in the performance of any
function connected with the enforcement of this chapter or other applicable
laws, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
   (B)   An applicant, licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business or
his or her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor offense if he refuses to
permit an inspection of the premises by a representative of an agency
designated in division (A) of this section at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.10 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Each license shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business license may be renewed only by making
application as provided in §
117.05. Application for renewal should be made at least 45 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 45 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the
application.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.11 LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall direct the City Clerk to suspend a license
for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a licensee or
an employee of a licensee:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
      (2)   Is required to register under the Nebraska Sex Offender
Registration Act.
      (3)   Engaged in or permitted or did not control excessive use of
alcoholic beverages on the sexually oriented business premises.
      (4)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
      (5)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
   (B)   Appeal of the decision of the City Clerk and the Chief of Police as to
the existence of or non-compliance with the above matters shall be made to the
City Council. Hearing will be informal and the rules of evidence shall not
apply. The hearing will occur within 15 days from the filing of the appeal upon
written notice mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing to the business
address and applicant residence address as it appears on the application which
the licensee is to amend if the residence address changes.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.12 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Council shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
117.11 occurs and the license has been suspended within the proceeding 12
months.
   (B)   The City Council shall revoke a license if Council determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operates the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
117.07(A)(7)(a) for which the time period required in §
117.07(A)(7)(b) has not elapsed.
      (6)   On 2 or more occasions within a 24-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed
in §
117.07(A)(7)(a) for which a conviction has been obtained and the person or
persons convicted were licensees or employees of the sexually oriented business
at the time the offenses were committed; or
      (7)   A licensee or an employee of the sexually oriented business has
knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This
division shall not apply to an adult motel unless the licensee or employee
knowingly allowed such sexual acts to occur either in exchange for money or in
a public place or within public view.
   (C)   After revocation, the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for 2 years from the date revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the City Council finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective and
a corrective plan which addresses the violation and assures that the violation
will not occur again is provided to Council. If the license was revoked under
division (B)(5) above, an applicant may not be granted another license until
the appropriate number of years required under §
117.07(A)(7)(b) has elapsed.
   (D)   The determination by the City Council as to the existence of or non-
compliance with the above matters shall be made in open City Council session
after mailing notice of hearing time, place and date to the license holder or
its representatives 15 days in advance of said hearing, stating that Council
will consider revoking the license and the grounds therefor. At said hearing,
the license holder or its representatives may present oral or written evidence
in support of the continuance of its license and may confront and question any
witnesses or evidence in opposition to the continuation of its license.
Although rules of evidence do not apply, any decision will be based on credible
evidence of violation of the requirements as stated herein.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.13 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the location designated in the license.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.14 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated or caused
to be operated, in any zoning district other than a I-1 zoning district as
defined in the city ordinances.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated or caused
to be operated, within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church or other building primarily used for religious services or
associated church structure such as a parish or fellowship hall;
      (2)   A public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, home schools,
elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, special education schools and
community colleges. School includes the school grounds and playgrounds.
      (3)   A property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, either
single or multiple family;
      (4)   A park;
      (5)   A hospital;
      (6)   Community recreation center;
      (7)   Public library;
      (8)   Facility for youth service such as youth center, boys or girls
club, scout, 4-H or other youth program meeting building.
   (C)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated, caused
to be operated or substantially enlarged, within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
   (D)   (1)   For the purposes of §
117.14(B), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in §
117.14(B).
      (2)   The presence of any political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements
of this section.
   (E)   For purposes of division (C) of this section, the distance between any
2 sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to any intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall
of the structure in which each business is located.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.15 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on November 5, 2008,
that is in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 3
years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for
a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use upon application and issuance of a license.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the establishment of a §
117.14(B) use, subsequent to the grant of the sexually oriented business
license, within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired, has not
been continuously in effect, or has been revoked.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.16 FILMS OR VIDEOS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, classified as an adult arcade, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of 150 square feet or less of floor space a film, video, cassette,
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least 1 employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has 2 or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any reason from at least 1 of the manager's stations and all must be staffed
when viewing access is made available so that all areas other than restrooms
are supervised at all times viewing access is permitted. The supervision
required in this division must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in division (A)(2) above remains unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to this chapter.
      (4)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than 1 person at any time.
      (5)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than 1 foot-candle as measured at the
floor level.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
   (B)   A person having a duty under division (A) above commits a misdemeanor
if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.17 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY OR SEMI-NUDITY.
   (A)   No person shall appear, in a sexually oriented business, in a state of
nudity or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities.
   (B)   No person shall appear, in a sexually oriented business, in a seminude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at
least 6 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 2 feet from
the door.
   (C)   No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business,
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, and no patron or
customer shall pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
   (D)   No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business,
touch a patron or customer or the clothing of a patron or customer.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.18 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING ALCOHOL.
   No sexually oriented business shall sell or serve alcohol and no sexually
oriented business shall permit the consumption of alcohol on the premises of
the sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.19 PROHIBITION OF CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   No person under the age of 19 years shall be allowed on the premises of a
sexually oriented business and it is the licensee's affirmative duty to enforce
this minor age restriction through supervision and verification by
identification.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.20 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually oriented business may remain open at any time between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00
p.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.21 DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS TO MINORS.
   (A)   No licensee or employee of a licensee shall permit a person under the
age of 19 years of age to be present on its business premises, which age
limitation will be enforced by age verification by said business.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall display posters, signs, depictions
or other visual representation on outside walls or any inside or outside window
which depict any of the following:
      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks, or
female breasts;
      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks,
or that portion of the female breast below the top of the aerolae of the
nipple; or
      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (C)   The windows and doors of a sexually oriented business will be tinted
to the extent that there is no view of the interior from the exterior of the
business.
   (D) DISPLAY means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining
assistance from an employee of the business establishment:
      (1)   It is available to the general public for handling and inspection;
or
      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any article
or section of this chapter and ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified in the particular article or section
for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such
violation shall be a fine in any sum not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 6 months or both said fine and imprisonment at the
discretion of the sentencing court. A separate violation shall be deemed to
have been committed on each 24-hour period that a violation continues after
conviction.
(Ord. 3739, passed 10-21-2008)
CHAPTER 118: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
118.01   Purpose
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   Administration; delegation of powers and authority
   
118.04   Cable operator; applicability
   
118.05   Video programming; exemptions
   
118.06   Same; request for relief by cable operator
   
118.07   Inconsistencies with federal or state law
   
118.08   Notices
   
118.09   Indemnity
   
118.10   Insurance
   
118.11   Performance bond
   
118.12   Furnishing reports
   
118.13   Records
   
118.14   Customer service
   
118.15   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
   
118.16   Construction and use of public ways
   
118.17   Technical standards
   
118.18   Emergency alert system
   
118.19   Service area and expansion
   
118.20   Franchise
   
118.21   Franchise fees
   
118.22   Assignment of franchise
   
118.23   Educational and governmental access
   
118.24   Public service
   
118.25   Default
   
118.26   Removal of cable system
   
118.27   Federal legislation, rules and regulations, franchise subject to
amendment
   
118.28   Tampering and unauthorized reception of certain signals
   
118.29   Severability
§ 118.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning cable television;
   (B)   Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are
responsive to the needs and interests of the city;
   (C)   Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect
to the regulation of cable systems;
   (D)   Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects
cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator's past
performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the
FCC and this chapter;
   (E)   Promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary
regulations that would impose undue burdens on cable systems;
   (F)   Provide for access and inspection of a cable operator's records in
order to monitor compliance with local, state and federal laws, and any
franchise agreement;
   (G)   Enforce customer service standards;
   (H)   Provide a construction and installation policy for a cable operator's
system;
   (I)   Provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city
in light of the cable operator's construction, operation and maintenance;
   (J)   Provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the
city may be warned of a potential, imminent, or actual emergency situation that
exists in the area;
   (K)   Create a procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees; and
   (L)   Create a default and revocation procedure for cable operators.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, or any franchise issued pursuant to
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFFILIATE. Another person or entity who owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the person or
entity.
      APPLICANT. A person or entity submitting an application or proposal to
the city for a franchise to operate a cable system under the terms and
conditions of this chapter and any state or federal regulations.
      BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission
of local television broadcast signals.
      CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, which
is codified as 47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et seq., or any future federal legislation
concerning the subject matter provided for in the Cable Act.
      CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or entity which:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through 1 or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
or
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE.
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of: (i) video
programming or (ii) other programming service; and
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection or use of video programming or other programming service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming, and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within the city; provided, however, this
shall not include:
         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of 1 or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public way;
         (c)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that the facility
shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of § 621(c) of the
Cable Act) to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on-demand services;
         (d)   An open video system that complies with § 653 of the Cable Act;
         (e)   Any system exempted under the Cable Act.
      CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is
used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel.
      CHARGE. A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the
subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service
or repair of the cable service.
      CITY. The City of North Platte, Nebraska, including any areas annexed to
the city after this date.
      CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the City of North Platte.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of North Platte.
      EASEMENT. Any public easement or other compatible use created by
dedication or by other means, to the city for public utility or other purposes
including cable television. EASEMENT shall include a private easement used for
the provision of cable service.
      EMERGENCY. An imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced
situation where the health, safety or welfare of all, or a representative
portion, of the residents of the city is threatened. An emergency (by
illustration) may include a snowstorm, flood, tornado, severe thunderstorm,
hazardous waste infiltration, petroleum, munitions or nuclear explosion, or
aircraft crash.
      ENTITY. A partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company or such other form of conducting business authorized by state law.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or any successor governmental
entity.
      FRANCHISE. The authorization issued by the city which authorizes a non-
exclusive right to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within the
city.
      FRANCHISE FEE. Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the
city on a cable operator or subscriber, or both, solely because of their status
as such. FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
         (a)   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including
any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators
or their services but not including a tax fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers);
         (b)   Agreed upon capital costs incurred by the cable operator for
PEG, or governmental access facilities;
         (c)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing
of a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
         (d)   Any fee imposed under the copyright laws of the United States.
      GROSS REVENUE. Any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, received by a cable operator from the operation
of a cable system within the city. GROSS REVENUE does not, however, mean (i)
any taxes, fees or assessments collected by a cable operator from subscribers
for pass-through to a government agency (including sales taxes, franchise fees
or FCC user fees); (ii) unrecovered bad debt or bona fide credits, refunds and
deposits paid to subscribers; (iii) revenues from activities exempted under the
Cable Act or by the FCC; and (iv) PEG channel support recovered from
subscribers.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of North Platte.
      OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a cable operator makes
available to all subscribers generally.
      PEG CHANNEL. A public, educational or governmental channel which is
carried on a cable system.
      PERMIT. A written authorization issued to a cable operator by the city,
other than a franchise.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any public street, public place, public easement or right-of-
way dedicated to the public use.
      REPORTING QUARTER. A cable operator's fiscal quarter as reported to the
city. If a cable operator does not report to or notify the city concerning the
dates of its fiscal quarters, then the REPORTING QUARTERS for a cable operator
shall be considered to be the periods ending on the last day of March, June,
September and December of each calendar year.
      SCHOOL. Any K-12 school operated within the city by any public school
system.
      SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by a
cable operator, and for which a separate rate is charged.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBSCRIBER. A person lawfully receiving cable service delivered by a
cable operator.
      VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
      VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER. A provider of video programming which is
authorized by the city or applicable law to utilize the public way to provide
video programming to residents of the city.
   (B)   It is intended that the definitions of any of the terms above which
are also defined in the Cable Act be consistent with the corresponding Cable
Act definitions. In the event that it is determined that any of the above
definitions are inconsistent with the Cable Act, then the definitions contained
in the Cable Act shall control.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.03 ADMINISTRATION; DELEGATION OF POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   Unless prohibited by federal or state law, the Council may delegate its
powers and authorities with respect to a cable operator to one or more duly
authorized representatives of the city, including the Mayor, the City
Administrator, a Cable Advisory Committee or an outside consultant; provided,
however, the Council may never delegate its power to franchise or to revoke a
franchise to another person.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.04 CABLE OPERATOR; APPLICABILITY.
   Unless exempted entirely or in part from this chapter or any of its
provisions, or granted relief by the Council from any of its provisions, then
this chapter shall be applicable to all cable operators.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.05 VIDEO PROGRAMMING; EXEMPTIONS.
   A provider of video programming shall not be considered as a cable operator
and subject to this chapter if the provider does not use or cross any public
way. An exempted person or entity remains exempted only as long as it meets the
above criteria. An exempted person or entity is, however, expected to abide by,
and comply with, any other applicable city, county, state and federal laws and
regulations, including any applicable federal or state consumer protection or
consumer service laws and regulations.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.06 SAME; REQUEST FOR RELIEF BY CABLE OPERATOR.
   (A)   Any cable operator may file a written petition, at any time, with the
city requesting relief from one or more provisions of this chapter. The relief
requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the
petitioning cable operator only) of 1 or more provisions of this chapter. In
order to receive any relief from 1 or more of the provisions of this chapter, a
cable operator must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Council that at least 1
of the following facts exist:
      (1)   The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC or state law; or
      (2)   That the provision in question materially affects, and is in
conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing
franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise); or
      (3)   That the imposition of the provisions and/or requirements will
create an undue economic hardship on the cable operator so as to imperil or
eliminate the cable operator's ability to provide cable service to a majority
of current subscribers.
   (B)   As an alternative to requesting relief, a cable operator may petition
for clarification as to the precise intent and effect that 1 or more provisions
or sections of this chapter has on the petitioning cable operator.
   (C)   If the Council grants relief to a cable operator, then the franchise
agreement shall be amended to reflect the extent of the relief.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.07 INCONSISTENCIES WITH FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.
   If any provision or section of this chapter is inconsistent with any
provision or section of a federal or state rule, regulation, or law, then the
federal or state rule, regulation, or law shall control.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.08 NOTICES.
   Each franchise shall designate the city's and the cable operator's contact
person to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents and other
correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact person
either by personal service with signed receipt of delivery, certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by recognized overnight delivery
service with receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records,
documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any permissible means
including, but not limited to: personal service, overnight mail, email or
facsimile. Delivery shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.09 INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Each cable operator shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
city, its officials, authorized agents and employees from any and all penalty,
damage, or loss arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or
award of damages which might be claimed now or in the future, which arise out
of, or are caused by, the construction, erection, location, products
performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal
or restoration of the cable system within the city by a negligent act or
omission of the cable operator, its authorized agents or employees,
contractors, or authorized representatives; provided, however, the cable
operator shall not be obligated to indemnify the city for any penalty, damage
or loss resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the city or from
any use of the cable system by the city (to include the use of PEG channels).
   (B)   Reasonable attorney's fees, consultant's fees, expert witness fees and
other expenses of litigation are included except as set forth in division (C)
(4) below as those costs which may be recovered by the city.
   (C)   With respect to any request for indemnification made to a cable
operator by the city:
      (1)   The city shall give the cable operator written notice of its
obligation to indemnify the city at least 10 calendar days prior to the
deadline for responding to the claim or action, and if no such deadline exists,
within 30 days of receipt of written notification of a claim or action.
      (2)   The cable operator shall then have the right to defend, settle or
compromise any such claims at the cable operator's expense and with the
assistance of counsel of the cable operator's choice. The city shall provide
reasonable cooperation in connection with the defense subject to the cable
operator's obligation to reimburse the city for actual out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by the city as the result of a request by the cable operator.
      (3)   If the cable operator fails to defend a claim within a reasonable
time, the city shall be entitled to assume the defense and the cable operator
shall be bound by the results and shall be liable to the city for the damages
incurred by the city to include the costs referred to above as recoverable by
the city.
      (4)   If a cable operator obtains counsel for the city, and/or its
officials, agents and employees, then any one of them shall have the right to
approve counsel, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city,
its officials, agents and employees shall have the right to retain counsel of
their own at their own expense.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.10 INSURANCE.
   (A)   A cable operator shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
cable service, insurance coverage (the “insurance”) in at least the following
limits:
 
Workers' Compensation                 Statutory limits
                                      $2,000,000 per occurrence, Combined
Commercial General Liability          Single Liability (CSL) $2,000,000 general
                                      aggregate
Auto Liability (including coverage on $1,000,000 per occurrence, CSL
all owned and non-owned hired autos)
Umbrella Liability                    $1,000,000 per occurrence, CSL
 
   (B)   The insurance shall specifically include the city as an additional
insured with respect to any liability arising out of the cable operator's
performance.
   (C)   The insurance shall be issued by 1 or more companies licensed to do
business in the state.
   (D)   The insurance shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance
company to furnish the city with reasonable written advance notice of the
cancellation of the insurance.
   (E)   Before a cable operator provides cable service, the cable operator
shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the
city. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
city prior to the expiration of the then existing insurance.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.11 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   A cable operator shall comply with the following bonding requirements:
   (A)   A construction/completion bond shall be furnished prior to the time
that a cable operator commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/
maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay exceeding
$50,000 in value where the construction takes place in 1 or more easements or
in the public way; provided, however, the following shall not be considered in
determining whether a project exceeds $50,000: (i) the cost attributable to any
portion of the construction that utilizes aerial facilities consisting of
existing poles owned by the cable operator or other utilities, or (ii)
construction within a new subdivision where the construction of facilities is
coordinated with the developer of the subdivision. The amount of the bond shall
equal at least 90% of the projected capital construction cost or outlay, but
shall not exceed $250,000. The construction/completion bond shall remain in
force at all times until 1 year after completion of construction as determined
by the city, unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an
agreement between the city and the cable operator.
   (B)   Any construction/completion bond shall specifically guarantee that a
cable operator will timely abide by its construction, upgrade, rebuild, or
repair/maintenance schedule for the cable system and/or any time table for
technical and service improvements or additions to the cable system as may be
committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time by the city and the cable
operator.
   (C)   If the city draws on a bond as a result of a cable operator's failure
to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the
cable system, or failure to complete a cable system upgrade or rebuild or
repair/ maintenance project, then the cable operator shall replenish the bond
within 30 days to the level required in this section.
   (D)   The Council may authorize a cable operator to substitute a cash
deposit, letter of credit, or a guaranty of another person or entity for any of
the bonds provided for in this section; provided, however, the person or entity
providing a letter of credit or guaranty, and the form of the letter of credit
or guaranty, shall be subject to the approval of the City Council in its sole
discretion.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.12 FURNISHING REPORTS.
   (A)   A cable operator's schedule of charges for regular subscriber service,
its policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent
subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and
conditions adopted as the cable operator's policy in connection with its
subscribers shall be filed with the city upon request.
   (B)   Upon written request of the city, a cable operator shall furnish, at
no cost to the city, copies of any or all non-confidential filings with the FCC
and the United States Copyright Office within 30 days of the request.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.13 RECORDS.
   A cable operator shall keep complete and accurate records concerning the
business and operations of the cable system. In addition:
   (A)   The city by its authorized representatives shall have the right, on
reasonable advance written notice, to review all records pertaining to a cable
operator's cable operations with respect to the city as are reasonably
necessary to determine a cable operator's compliance with the franchise. Such
notice shall specifically reference the section(s) of the franchise or the
cable ordinance for which the review is requested. The cable operator agrees
that it will furnish the information requested electronically, or make it
available for the city's review, to the city within 30 days of the request.
   (B)   Non-revenue financial records will only be requested in the aggregate
on a summary prepared by the cable operator.
   (C)   The city acknowledges the sensitivity of a cable operator's records,
and will request this information only on as needed basis, and will treat this
information as confidential and proprietary to the fullest extent allowed by
law. The cable operator shall not be required to produce any records in
violation of the Cable Act or any other applicable law. Until otherwise ordered
by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the city agrees that, to the
extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of a
cable operator's records marked confidential to any person.
   (D)   The city shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an
independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert,
to review the records of a cable operator pertaining to revenue information.
   (E)   If after a review or audit of a cable operator's records, it is
discovered that the cable operator has underpaid the city by an amount that
exceeds the greater of (i) $2,500, or (ii) 3% of the total amount paid for any
reporting quarter, then the city may require the cable operator to reimburse
the city for the actual cost of the audit, in addition to the amount of
underpayment; provided, however, no such reimbursement shall be required if the
reason for the underpayment is due to the annexation of additional areas into
the city, for which notification of the annexation was not provided to a cable
operator.
   (F)   A cable operator shall not be required to maintain any records for
franchise compliance purposes longer than 4 years, except for written service
complaints, which shall be kept for 1 year.
   (G)   A cable operator shall maintain a full and complete set of plans,
records and strand maps showing the location of the cable system.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.14 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   A cable operator shall comply with the following customer service
requirements:
   (A)   A cable operator shall comply with the customer service standards as
provided for in the FCC regulations, as may be amended from time to time. This
section shall be considered as notice to cable operators of the city's election
to enforce those standards.
   (B)   A cable operator shall (i) maintain a customer service facility within
the boundaries of the city staffed by customer service representatives that
have the capacity to accept payment, adjust bills, respond to repair,
installation, reconnection, disconnection, or other service calls; distribute
or receive converter boxes, remote control units, or other equipment related to
the provision of cable or video service; or (ii) provide customers with bill
payment facilities through retail, financial, or other commercial institutions
located within the boundaries of the city; or (iii) provide an address, toll-
free telephone number or electronic address to accept bill payments and
correspondence, and provide secure collection boxes for the receipt of bill
payments and the return of equipment, provided that if a cable operator
provides secure collection boxes, it shall provide a printed receipt when items
are deposited; or (iv) provide an address, toll-free telephone number or
electronic address to accept bill payments and correspondence, and provide a
method for customers to return equipment to the cable operator at no cost to
the customer.
   (C)   A cable operator shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a
phone service operated such that complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be received at any time.
   (D)   A cable operator shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning special service requirements for disabled, sight or
hearing impaired or ambulatory impaired subscribers.
   (E)   A cable operator shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is
installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning
the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the cable
operator's name, address and local or toll-free telephone number. To the extent
required by applicable law, a cable operator shall give the city 30 days' prior
notice of any rate increases, channel lineup or other substantive service
changes.
   (F)   A cable operator shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules
or regulations under federal or state law.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.15 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A cable operator shall not deny cable service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on
the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, or
religious affiliation.
   (B)   Cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the extension of
cable service, to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because
of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not, however, prohibit a cable
operator from:
      (1)   Offering bulk rate discounts or promotions;
      (2)   Denying service based on location of residence, if that residence
is outside the parameters for line extension or standard installations as
provided for in this chapter or the cable operator's franchise.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.16 CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   All facilities of a cable operator shall be located, installed and
maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and
customary use, traffic and travel upon public ways and easements, and according
to any public way or easement use standards established by the city. In
addition:
   (A)   A cable operator shall construct, operate, maintain and repair its
cable system in compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the
city, the state and the FCC, as are customary to the cable television industry.
To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise,
or state or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   A cable operator shall obtain all required permits from the city
before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the opening or
disturbance of any public way.
   (C)   All facilities of a cable operator shall be installed and located as
to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe,
adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The cable
operator shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public, to include barricades,
flags, lights or other devices as are reasonably required for public safety.
   (D)   A cable operator shall use existing poles, conduits and other
facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new,
different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public ways
without obtaining all permits required by the city. Any poles or other fixtures
placed in any public way by the cable operator shall be placed in such a manner
as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
   (E)   The cable operator shall, at its own expense, restore any damage or
disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operation,
construction, or maintenance of the cable system to a condition reasonably
comparable to the condition of the public way immediately prior to such damage
or disturbance.
   (F)   If a cable operator's system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition
or an unreasonable interference with property, then the cable operator shall at
its own expense voluntarily, or upon request of the city, remove or move, as
appropriate, that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition.
   (G)   A cable operator shall not place equipment where it will interfere
with the rights of property owners or with other public utility services or any
other service facility that benefits the city or its residents' health, safety
or welfare.
   (H)   A cable operator shall, at its expense, protect public ways and
easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same public
way, any property of the cable operator when necessitated by reason of: traffic
conditions, public safety, a street closing, street construction or
resurfacing, change or establishment of a street grade, installations of other
city utility services, or any improvement, construction or repair related to
health, safety or welfare. Except in case of emergency, the city shall provide
at least 10 days written notice to the cable operator of the need for a
relocation or temporary disconnection. In addition, the city shall have the
right to remove any of the cable operator's facilities in the event of
emergency, and no charge shall be made by the cable operator to the city for
restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the
city.
   (I)   If the city elects to alter or change the grade of any public ways,
the cable operator upon reasonable notice from the city, shall relocate any
portions of its cable system impacted by the city's public way alterations, at
the cable operator's expense.
   (J)   A cable operator shall, at the request of any person holding a lawful
permit issued by the city, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in or remove from the street as necessary any property of
the cable operator, provided that the expense of doing so is paid by the person
making the request and the cable operator is given reasonable advance written
notice to prepare for such changes. The cable operator may require such payment
in advance. For purposes of this section, REASONABLE ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE
shall be no less than 10 business days in the event of a temporary relocation
and no less than 120 days for a permanent relocation.
   (K)   A cable operator shall have the authority to trim trees in the public
way at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities.
   (L)   In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution of both
telephone and power companies are underground or are later placed underground,
a cable operator's feeder and subscriber drops shall also be placed
underground. To the extent reasonably possible, a cable operator shall
coordinate the joint use of facilities with the telephone and power companies.
Subscriber drops shall be buried within a reasonable time period, subject to
weather conditions.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.17 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   A cable operator shall comply with any rules and regulations of the FCC
concerning technical operation, signal quality, consumer electronics equipment
compatibility and performance monitoring.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.18 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
   A cable operator shall comply with all applicable federal statutes, rules
and regulations with respect to emergency alert systems.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.19 SERVICE AREA AND EXPANSION.
   Cable service shall be provided as follows:
   (A)   A cable operator shall make cable service distributed over its cable
system available, at a charge which does not exceed the cable operator's normal
rate for standard installations, to every residence within any area within the
city where there is a minimum density of at least 30 residences per lineal
strand mile of cable as measured from the cable operator's closest trunk line
or distribution cable that is actively delivering cable service as of the date
of such request for service; provided, however, (i) such installation shall be
financially and technically feasible, (ii) the cable operator shall have legal
access to the subscriber's location, and (iii) the subscriber shall be within
125 feet of the cable operator's existing distribution system.
   (B)    Notwithstanding the above, a cable operator shall have the right, but
not the obligation, to extend the cable system into any other area of the city
and to make cable service available to residential subscribers or to
businesses, upon such terms and conditions as determined by the cable operator.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.20 FRANCHISE.
   No person or entity, other than the city, shall be permitted to construct,
operate or maintain a cable system where any part of the cable system's
facilities to occupy or cross public ways without first having entered into a
franchise. With respect to all franchises:
   (A)   The city may award 1 or more non-exclusive franchises; provided,
however, anytime (i) a franchise is issued, (ii) the city otherwise grants a
permit to a video programming provider, which contains terms that are more
favorable to a particular cable operator or video programming provider, or
(iii) the city constructs, operates, or maintains its own cable system within
the city limits, then the city shall, within 30 days of a written request from
another cable operator or video programming provider, modify that cable
operator's franchise or video programming provider authorization to insure that
the obligations applicable to any 1 cable operator or video programming
provider are no more burdensome than those imposed on 1 or more competing cable
operators, video programming providers, or the city's own cable system. If the
city fails to make modifications consistent with this requirement, the
requesting cable operator's franchise or video programming provider's
authorization shall be deemed so modified 30 days after the initial written
request.
   (B)   An applicant shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and
hearing which affords due process to both the city and the cable operator. If
the applicant is selected as a cable operator, then the applicant will enter
into a franchise agreement with the city.
   (C)   Unless prohibited by law, the city reserves the right to construct,
operate or maintain its own cable system within the city limits, provided the
city shall regulate all cable operators, video programming providers, and its
own cable system in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner.
   (D)   If the council awards a franchise to an applicant, or approves a
proposal for renewal of a franchise, then a franchise agreement shall be
signed. A newly franchised cable operator may not lay any cable until the
franchise agreement is executed by the cable operator and the city. At a
minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following:
      (1)   The term or duration of the franchise;
      (2)   An agreement to comply with this chapter;
      (3)   Any applicable construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule; and
      (4)   Any applicable build-out and density standard.
   (E)   Upon entering into a franchise, a cable operator may construct,
install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a cable system
within the city. In so doing:
      (1)   The cable operator may utilize the public ways and those easements
dedicated to the public use.
      (2)   The cable operator shall be responsible for obtaining its own
easements for private property and pole attachment agreements with other
utilities.
   (F)   The term of a franchise may be for a period not to exceed 10 years
from the date that a franchise, or a franchise renewal, is approved by the
Council. Proceedings for the renewal of a franchise shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of the Cable Act.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.21 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   Each cable operator shall pay to the city a franchise fee equal to 5%
of the gross revenues of the cable operator. The city reserves the right at any
time, upon 90 days' notice to all cable operators, to amend this section so as
to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable under federal law,
in the event that the maximum rate is increased. It is intended that the
franchise fees will promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the city. Accordingly, the franchise fee shall be deposited into the general
revenues of the city, unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   The franchise fees may be passed through to subscribers as a line item
on subscriber bills or otherwise, consistent with federal law.
   (C)   Within 45 days after the end of each reporting quarter, a cable
operator shall file with the city a detailed financial and revenue report
showing the gross revenues received by the cable operator for operations within
the city during the preceding reporting quarter. The report shall include gross
revenue from all sources upon which a franchise fee is payable. Gross revenue
may be reported in the aggregate by general service type or source.
   (D)   In the event that payment is not made within 60 days after the end of
a reporting quarter, then the cable operator may be declared in default of the
franchise, and the city may take action against the cable operator as
authorized in this chapter.
   (E)   The acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as a release of,
or an accord or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for further
or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other
performance or obligation of a cable operator.
   (F)   Payments of compensation made by a cable operator to the city pursuant
to this chapter shall be considered in addition to any and all taxes of general
applicability owed to the city by the cable operator that are not included as
franchise fee under federal law.
   (G)   A franchise fee shall not be payable on any gross revenue source(s)
which are excluded by federal law.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.22 ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A cable operator's franchise may not be assigned in whole or in part
without the city's prior written approval. For purposes of this section,
ASSIGNED or ASSIGNMENT shall mean the transfer, sale, or any other form of
assignment of a cable system, to include any transaction or action which
effectively or actually changes ownership from 1 person or entity to another to
include the transfer of 50% or more of the ownership interest of an entity or
the parent of an entity. Any attempted assignment without prior written
approval shall constitute a default in the franchise. A proposed assignment
shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   At least 120 days before a proposed assignment is scheduled to
become effective, the cable operator shall make a written request to the
Council for the city's approval of the proposed assignment.
      (2)   The city will not unreasonably withhold its consent to an
assignment. However, in making its determination, the Council shall consider
the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the proposed assignee.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall restrict the city from considering
criteria established under state or federal law, rule or regulation.
      (4)   Before an assignment is approved by the city, the proposed assignee
shall sign a statement indicating that it has read, understands, and intends to
abide by any existing franchise agreement.
      (5)   The city may include certain amendment(s) to the franchise or this
chapter as a condition to the assignment; provided, however, any such amendment
(s) shall either (i) be by mutual agreement between the city and the proposed
assignee, or (ii) shall not have a material adverse effect on the rights and
obligations of the cable operator under the franchise.
      (6)   In the event of any approved assignment, the assignee shall assume
all obligations and liabilities of the former cable operator.
      (7)   The city's consent to an assignment shall not relieve the former
cable operator of its liability under the franchise agreement until the
assignment actually takes place unless specifically relieved by federal or
state law or by the Council at the time an assignment is approved. In the event
of an assignment, the former cable operator shall remain liable for any
franchise fees incurred as of the time that the assignment is effective for the
period governed by the applicable statute of limitations.
      (8)   If the cable operator has provided the city with all information as
required by this section or the FCC in a timely manner, and the city has not
taken action on the cable operator's request for transfer within 120 days after
receiving such request, consent by the city shall be deemed given.
   (B)   Consent shall not be required for an assignment to a wholly-owned
subsidiary entity of a cable operator or the current parent entity of a cable
operator, whether the ownership is direct or indirect, such as through other
wholly-owned intermediate subsidiaries. In addition, consent shall not be
required for the granting of a security interest in the cable operator's system
including its franchise. However, if the holder of the security interest
repossesses, forecloses or takes other action concerning its collateral, it
shall dispose of the cable system within a reasonable period of time and the
disposition by the holder of the security interest shall be considered an
assignment subject to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.23 EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
   To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill a public,
educational and governmental access policy that will facilitate the long range
needs of the city, each cable operator shall provide at its own expense 1 PEG
channel under the control of the city. The following shall apply to the PEG
channel:
   (A)   The city is solely responsible for the content it provides over the
PEG channel. The cable operator shall not exercise any editorial control over
any programming of the PEG channel, and shall also not be subject to any civil
or criminal liability for any programs carried on the PEG channel.
   (B)   The PEG channel may be placed on any tier of service available to all
subscribers, including the digital tier. The city shall provide programming on
the PEG channel to occupy 70% of the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
for any 12 consecutive week period. The cable operator shall provide written
notice to the city in the event that the above programming levels are not
maintained or if the city does not adequately use the channel. If the
programming is not restored to occupy 70% of the hours between 11:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. within a 1 week period within 30 days of written notice, the cable
operator reserves the right to have the channel returned to the cable operator
for the cable operator's use. If at any later time, which must be at least 1
year from the return of the PEG channel to the cable operator, the city desires
to utilize the PEG channel, it may notify the cable operator of its desire to
do so, and the PEG channel shall be made available to the city within 30 days
of the request. The above programming requirements shall apply with respect to
continuance of the PEG channel by the city.
   (C)   If the city is utilizing the PEG channel, signal input location shall
be provided at City Hall. Only those signal input locations actually being used
shall be required.
   (D)   Cable operators may interconnect their cable systems for the purpose
of sharing PEG access programming, provided that the cable operators are able
to reach agreement for the interconnection. Nothing in this section should be
construed as requiring a cable operator to add additional PEG channels.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.24 PUBLIC SERVICE.
   A cable operator shall furnish, upon request, and subject to applicable law,
1 outlet for public buildings as identified in a cable operator's franchise.
With respect to this service:
   (A)   The cable service provided pursuant to this section shall not be used
for commercial purposes and shall not generally be available for public
viewing. The city shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the
cable system that results in the inappropriate use or any loss or damage to the
cable system.
   (B)   The city shall hold the cable operator harmless from any and all
liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of cable service to
city buildings.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.25 DEFAULT.
   (A)   When a cable operator violates a provision of this chapter, or acts so
as to compromise the legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability
of the cable system or the cable operator itself, in either case, to a degree
that the interests of the subscribers are negatively affected, then a cable
operator shall be considered in default of this chapter.
   (B)   Examples of a default shall include, but are not limited to:
bankruptcy (except for a reorganization as long as the cable operator is in
compliance with an approved plan or other court order), insolvency, failure to
pay taxes or franchise fees, failure to receive written city approval for an
assignment, or failure to substantially abide by the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement or this chapter, to include the failure to operate its
cable system. Provided:
      (1)   It is not the city's intention to subject a cable operator to
penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of a franchise for violations where
the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative
impact on the subscribers within the city, or where strict performance would
result in practical difficulties and hardship to a cable operator which
outweigh the benefit to be derived by the city and/or subscribers.
      (2)   Events in the nature of force majeure or conditions which cannot be
corrected because they are matters reasonably beyond the ability of the
affected cable operator to anticipate and control shall not be considered a
default. This provision includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual
weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays
caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their
utility poles to which a cable operator's cable system is attached, as well as
unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work
necessary; provided, however, such noncompliance shall only be excused for as
long as the cable operator is reasonably pursuing compliance.
   (C)   In the event that a default occurs, the city shall provide written
notice of the default to the affected cable operator. The notice of default
shall specify the violation(s).
   (D)   The cable operator shall have 30 days from the receipt of the written
notice to bring itself into compliance so that it is no longer in default of
its franchise or this chapter, as the case may be; provided, however, if by the
nature of default, the default cannot be cured within this 30 day period, the
cable operator shall initiate reasonable steps to remedy the default and notify
the city of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be
completed.
   (E)   If the cable operator fails to cure its default within the time period
provided for above, the matter shall be set for public hearing before the
Council to be held within 75 days after the notice of default was mailed to the
cable operator. Written notice of the time and place of the public hearing
shall be sent to the cable operator at least 20 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
   (F)   At the hearing, the cable operator shall have an opportunity to state
its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses. If the
cable operator fails to attend the hearing where a continuance of the hearing
has not been granted by the Council, then the cable operator may be declared in
default of the franchise agreement.
   (G)   If the default has not been resolved by the time of or as a result of
the hearing, the Council may, after the public hearing, direct the cable
operator to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may
declare the cable operator in default of the franchise agreement, and revoke or
terminate the franchise. The Council's action shall be delivered to the cable
operator in writing within 15 days of the Council's action.
   (H)   If the Council directs corrective action to be taken and the cable
operator does not rectify the default within the time specified, then the
Council may without further notice declare the cable operator to be in default
and revoke or terminate the franchise.
   (I)   If the cable operator fails to comply with any determination by the
Council, which determination is not stayed or overturned by order of an
appropriate court, then the city shall have any and all remedies available to
it by law, provided the cable operator may continue to operate the cable system
until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.26 REMOVAL OF CABLE SYSTEM.
   (A)   In the event of termination or forfeiture of a franchise agreement or
abandonment of a cable operator's cable system, the city may require the cable
operator to remove all or any portion of its cable system from all public ways;
provided, however, that the cable operator will not be required to remove those
portions of its cable system required to provide telecommunications services or
other non-cable service to the extent that the cable operator lawfully provides
telecommunications services or other non-cable service over the cable system.
   (B)   If a cable operator has failed to commence removal of its cable
system, or such part as designated by the city, within 120 days after written
demand for removal is given, or if the cable operator has failed to complete
such removal within 12 months after written demand for removal is given, the
city may apply funds secured by the franchise agreement toward removal.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.27 FEDERAL LEGISLATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS, FRANCHISE SUBJECT TO
AMENDMENT.
   In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all cable
operators shall be expected to comply with all applicable provisions of the
Cable Act and all other federal laws directed at controlling or regulating
cable operators, and any rules and regulations issued pursuant to those laws.
In addition, any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
amendment by mutual agreement of the parties to incorporate any applicable
federal legislation, rules or regulations which become effective after the date
of the franchise.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.28 TAMPERING AND UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION OF CERTAIN SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or
receiving, any communications service offered over a cable system, unless
specifically authorized to do so by a cable operator, or as may otherwise be
specifically authorized by law.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term ASSIST IN INTERCEPTING OR
RECEIVING shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended
by the manufacturer or distributor for the unauthorized reception of cable
service.
   (C)   Without securing permission from a cable operator, or making payment
to a cable operator, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection
with any part of a cable system for the purpose of receiving or intercepting,
or assisting others to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully
by a cable operator.
   (D)   No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove or
damage any facilities used for the distribution of cable service.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine of up to $100. Each day that the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
§ 118.29 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter will be deemed severable, and if any
provision of this chapter is held illegal, void, or invalid under applicable
law, that provision may be changed to the extent reasonably necessary to make
the provision legal, valid and binding. If any provision of this chapter is
held illegal, void or invalid in its entirety, the remaining provisions of this
chapter will not be affected.
(Ord. 4016, § 1, 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 119: GAMES OF SKILL
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   (Reserved)
   
119.03   Prohibition
   
119.04   Hours of operation
   
119.05   Right of entry
   
119.06   Violation; penalty
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of Title XI and this chapter, the definitions found in Neb.
RS 77-3001 through 77-3014 shall be used.
(Ord. 4137, § 1, 9-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4190, § 1, 1-21-2025)
§ 119.02 (RESERVED).
§ 119.03 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or company to operate a mechanical
amusement device within the City of North Platte without first obtaining a
license from the Department of Revenue pursuant to the Mechanical Amusement
Device Tax Act, Neb. RS 77-3001 through 77-3014.
(Ord. 4137, § 1, 9-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4190, § 1, 1-21-2025)
§ 119.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or company operating a mechanical
amusement device within the City of North Platte to allow or permit a
mechanical amusement device to be operated within the city between the hours of
1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. each and every day of the week.
(Ord. 4137, § 1, 9-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4190, § 1, 1-21-2025)
§ 119.05 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   All police officers of the city are hereby authorized to enter at any time
upon any premises of any person or company operating a mechanical amusement
device within the City of North Platte to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the city or
by the state have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine
sufficiently the premises of the person or company in connection therewith. All
persons or companies operating a mechanical amusement device within the City of
North Platte shall further make available to all police officers of the city,
at any officer’s request, the licensee’s books and records related to
mechanical amusement devices, specifically including any and all video
surveillance footage of the licensed premises.
(Ord. 4137, § 1, 9-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4190, § 1, 1-21-2025)
§ 119.06 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.
(Ord. 4137, § 1, 9-5-2023; Am. Ord. 4190, § 1, 1-21-2025)
CHAPTER 120: TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
Section
   
120.01   Definition
   
120.02   Occupation tax imposed
§ 120.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of Title XI and this chapter, TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
are defined pursuant to Nebraska Sales and Use Tax regulation 1-065.
(Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-15-2024)
§ 120.02 OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   All telephone companies and mobile telecommunications services doing
business in the city are required to pay an occupation tax to the city in an
amount equal to 3% of the gross receipts from the legally established basic
monthly charges collected for local exchange telephone service to subscribers
within the city, intrastate message toll telephone service, intrastate
telephone communication service and telegraph service, wireless paging service,
and mobile telecommunications services for revenue in the city. This includes
those services which are sold by mutual companies. Payment of such occupation
tax is due in accordance with §
110.03(A).
(Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-15-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Disorderly conduct
   
130.002   Drinking in public
   
130.003   Curfew for minors
   
130.004   Window peeping
   
130.005   Indiscriminate distribution of handbills or advertisements
   
130.006   Littering
   
130.007   Loitering
   
130.008   Coasting behind motor vehicle
   
130.009   Refrigerators and similar appliances in the open and accessible to
children
   
130.010   Street games
   
130.011   Electrical apparatus interfering with radio or television reception
   
130.012   Obstructing a peace officer
Firearms; Fireworks
   
130.025   Discharge of firearms
   
130.026   Discharging slingshot, air gun, BB gun, arrows or similar projectiles
   
130.027   Discharge of fireworks generally
   
130.028   Prohibited fireworks
Tobacco Regulations
   
130.040   Possession of tobacco by minors
   
130.041   Tobacco; sale to minors
   
130.042   Sales service training required
   
130.043   Smoke Free Air Act; intent
   
130.044   Definitions
   
130.045   Smoking prohibition
   
130.046   Posting of warning
Material Harmful to Minors; Exhibition
   
130.055   Prohibited
   
130.056   Definitions
   
130.057   Defenses to prosecution
   
130.058   Notice of violation
Lotteries
   
130.075   Participation in city lotteries
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   “Public place” defined. For purposes of this section, the term PUBLIC
PLACE shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right
to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It shall also
include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business and also public grounds and areas or parks.
   (B)   Disorderly conduct prohibited. A person shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or
nuisance or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm,
disorder or nuisance, he or she willfully does any of the following acts in a
public place:
      (1)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb or health;
      (2)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
      (3)   Causes, provides or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct
so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another;
      (4)   Interferes with another’s pursuit of lawful occupation by acts of
violence;
      (5)   Obstructs, either singly or with other persons, the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear the public way when
ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such;
      (6)   Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor
or drug in such conditions as to be unable to exercise care for his or her own
safety or the safety of others;
      (7)   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police or
any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official;
      (8)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the city’s
Police Department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in
the lawful performance of his or her duties, or any other person when the words
have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing
displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited;
      (9)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable
noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to
any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed;
      (10)   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when
known to be such an official, where 1 or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity and the public health and safety
is imminently threatened; and/or
      (11)   Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture, as
the term “obscene” is defined in Neb. RS § 28-807.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right
to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of
expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(2).
(Prior Code, § 36-1) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.002 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have, in
his or her possession, open containers of any alcoholic beverage in the public
streets, alleys, roads or highways or upon any property owned by the city or
other governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while upon the
public streets, alleys, roads or highways, or in theaters, dance halls or any
other place open to the public, except licensed liquor establishments.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-2) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.003 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17
years to ride in or operate any vehicle in or upon any street, alley or other
public place, or to loiter, wander, stroll, loaf or play in or upon any of the
streets, alleys or other public places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of any
day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of the
minor, unless the minor is engaged in lawful employment or is on an emergency
errand; provided that, when an activity of the kind normally attended by minors
under 17 years of age terminates after or less than 1 hour prior to 11:00 p.m.,
the curfew shall commence 1 hour after the termination of the activity.
Whenever it is known in advance that the minor must be out beyond the curfew
hour for 1 of the exceptions listed in this division, the parent and the
employer or school, whichever is applicable, shall provide the minor with
written permission for the minor to be out beyond the curfew hour.
   (B)   Responsibility of parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for the
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor
under the age of 17 years to allow or permit the minor person to do any of the
things or acts prohibited by this section.
   (C)   Proceedings against minor or parent or guardian. No minor person
arrested under the provisions of this section shall be incarcerated until he or
she has been taken home, or the parent, guardian or legal custodian notified,
and the arresting officer has ascertained whether or not the minor person is
within the control of his or her parent, guardian or legal custodian. If the
parent, guardian or legal custodian states that the minor cannot be controlled
by him or her, then the minor may be proceeded against. Otherwise, the parent,
guardian or custodian may also be proceeded against.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (2)   Involved in an emergency;
      (3)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      (4)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (5)   Married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
state law.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-3) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.004 WINDOW PEEPING.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private
premises of another to look or peep into any window, door or other opening in a
building occupied by any other person.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-4) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.005 INDISCRIMINATE DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS OR ADVERTISEMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave or
deposit in any street, alley, public place, automobile or truck any handbill,
poster or other advertising or printed material of any kind or description.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-9) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.006 LITTERING.
   (A)   Prohibited; exceptions. Any person who deposits, throws, discards or
otherwise disposes of any litter on any public or private property, or in any
waters, commits the offense of littering unless:
      (1)   The property is an area designated by law for the disposal of the
material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use
the property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for such purpose.
   (B)   “Litter” defined. The word LITTER, as used in this section, shall mean
all waste material susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or
otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property in the city, but does not
include wastes of primary processes of farming or manufacturing. The term WASTE
MATERIAL, as used in this subsection, shall mean any material appearing in a
place or in a context not associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Responsibility for litter thrown from motor vehicle or watercraft.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle
or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of the motor vehicle
or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-10) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007 LOITERING.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf,
wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a
public place in a manner so as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public parking lot, public street, public highway,
public sidewalk or other public place or building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians; and/or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public parking lot, public street, public
highway, public sidewalk or other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing
or fronting on any public parking lot, public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   Order to disperse. When any person causes or commits any of the
conditions enumerated in division (A) of this section, a police officer or any
law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing
the conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to
obey the orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings designated in this division.
      LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially 1 location and shall include the
concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to saunter,
to delay or to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression
“hanging around”.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business, and also public grounds and areas or parks.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-11) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.008 COASTING BEHIND MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall hitch, tie on or otherwise connect a sled,
toboggan, bobsled, coaster wagon or other small vehicle for the purpose of
coasting at the rear of any motor vehicle within the city.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-12) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.009 REFRIGERATORS AND SIMILAR APPLIANCES IN THE OPEN AND ACCESSIBLE TO
CHILDREN.
   (A)   Unsafe appliances prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit a refrigerator, icebox, freezer or any other dangerous appliance to be
in the open and accessible to children, whether on private or public property,
unless he or she shall first remove all doors and make the appliance reasonably
safe.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-13) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.010 STREET GAMES.
   (A)   Prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to play
catch, bat a ball, kick or throw a football, or engage in any exercise or sport
upon the city streets; provided this section shall not apply to playing on
culs-de-sac, circles, dead-end streets and any other non-through street.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the governing
body from ordering from time to time certain streets and public places blocked
off for the purpose of providing a safe area to engage in such exercise and
sport.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-14) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.011 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS INTERFERING WITH RADIO OR TELEVISION RECEPTION.
   (A)   Prohibited; exceptions. Any person operating, or causing to be
operated, any motor, sign or other electrical apparatus that is connected with
the light and power system shall equip the apparatus with proper filtering
attachments to eliminate interference; provided that the provisions in this
section shall not apply to the use of necessary medical equipment or apparatus
where electrical interference cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any
person who so operates, or causes to be operated, any such electrical apparatus
that interferes habitually with radio and television reception shall be deemed
to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-15) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.012 OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of obstructing a peace officer when, by
using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or
obstacle, he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders:
      (1)   The enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace
by a peace officer or judge acting under color of his or her official
authority; or
      (2)   A police animal assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to the
peace officer's official authority.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, POLICE ANIMAL means a horse or dog owned
or controlled by the state or any county, city, or village for the purpose of
assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to his or her official authority.
(Neb. RS 28-906)
FIREARMS; FIREWORKS
§ 130.025 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person, except an
officer of the law in the discharge of his or her official duty, to fire or
discharge any gun, pistol or other fowling piece within the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. The provision of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Areas approved by the governing body;
      (2)   Licensed shooting galleries or;
      (3)   Carrying on of any business or the presentation of any play,
theatrical or stage performance or public spectacle or exhibition duly
authorized or licensed.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-5) (Am. Ord. 4090, 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.026 DISCHARGING SLINGSHOT, AIR GUN, BB GUN, ARROWS OR SIMILAR
PROJECTILES.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or fire
within the limits of the city any arrow or slingshot or similar device, or any
BB gun, air gun, pellet gun or any other device of similar nature designed to
discharge a projectile propelled by the expansion of gas.
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Activities under the direct supervision of a governmental or
educational institution;
      (2)   Areas approved by the governing body; or
      (3)   A private enclosure within which the instrument is fired,
discharged or operated in the private enclosure in such a manner as to prevent
the projectile from traversing in the space outside of the private enclosure.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-6) (Ord. 3561, § 1, 8-3-2004) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.027 DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Permitted days and hours. A person commits the offense of discharging
fireworks if he or she discharges fireworks except during the period beginning
at 12:00 noon on June 28 and ending July 4 at 11:59 p.m. of each year.
Fireworks may be discharged only during the period of time between the hours of
12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. on June 28 through and including July 3; and between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. on July 4, except that a person may
discharge fireworks at times other than those times designated in this division
upon obtaining a permit to do so, at a location specified in the permit, which
permit shall be issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention if approved by the
Mayor and City Council upon application.
   (B)   Prohibited locations. It shall further be unlawful to discharge
fireworks within 100 feet of a fireworks stand. It shall further be unlawful to
discharge fireworks in or on any public streets, parks or other property owned
by the city, unless approved by the permitting process provided for in division
(A) of this section.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-7) (Ord. 3046, § 1, 1-3-1996; Am. Ord. 3186, § 2, 9-1-1998;
Am. Ord. 3376, § 1, 8-7-2001; Am. Ord. 3844, § 1, 5-1-2012) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.028 PROHIBITED FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Generally. 
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be
exploded fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever, except as
defined and permitted under the statutes of the state, provided, however, that
notwithstanding any statute of the State of Nebraska, or any action by the
State Fire Marshal, in no event shall fireworks commonly known as skyrockets,
bottle rockets, or any other form of fireworks consisting of a case containing
a combustible composition fastened to a guiding stick which is designed and
manufactured to be projected through the air by the reaction resulting from the
rearward discharge of gases liberated by combustion and fireworks commonly
known as helicopters or any other form of fireworks which launch in their
entirety and leave no base be ignited or exploded within the city and it shall
be unlawful for any person to sell at retail, offer for sale at retail,
discharge, explode, or use any of said fireworks within the city; and, further
provided, that fireworks commonly known as sky lanterns shall not be
permissible fireworks within the city, notwithstanding any action by the State
Fire Marshal to the contrary, and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell
at retail, offer for sale at retail, discharge, explode or use any of said
fireworks within the city.
      (2)   Sky lanterns shall mean devices that require a flame which produces
heated air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in
the air. Sky lanterns shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting
persons.
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
fireworks to be used for the purpose of public exhibitions or display under
authorization of the governing body or to fireworks furnished for agricultural
purposes pursuant to written authorization from the state’s Fire Marshal.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
130.999(A)(1).
(Prior Code, § 36-8) (Am. Ord. 3927, § 1, 12-1-2015)  Penalty, see §
130.999
TOBACCO REGULATIONS
§ 130.040 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
possess any tobacco products, electronic nicotine delivery systems, and/or
alternative nicotine products; provided that the possession by a person under
the age of 21 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of
the person in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home shall not be
prohibited, and provided further that a person under the age of 21 may stock,
sack and carry tobacco products, electronic nicotine delivery systems, and/or
alternative nicotine products in the course of their employment.
   (B)   TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall be defined to mean any substance containing
tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   (C)   ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM means any product or device
containing nicotine, tobacco, or tobacco derivatives that employs a heating
element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or
mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, to simulate smoking by
delivering the nicotine, tobacco, or tobacco derivatives in vapor, fog, mist,
gas, or aerosol form to a person inhaling from the product or device.
   (D)   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT means any noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means.
(Prior Code, §36-17) (Ord. 3109, §1, 5-6-1997; Am. Ord. 3213, §1, 12-1-1998;
Am. Ord. 4020, §1, 1-7-2020; Am. Ord. 4047, §1, 10-6-2020) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.041 TOBACCO; SALE TO MINORS.
   (A)   Whoever shall sell, give or furnish, in any way, any tobacco products,
electronic nicotine delivery systems, and/or alternative nicotine products in
any form whatsoever to any minor under 21 years of age, shall be guilty of an
offense.
   (B)   TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall be defined to mean any substance containing
tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   (C)   ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM means any product or device
containing nicotine, tobacco, or tobacco derivatives that employs a heating
element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or
mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, to simulate smoking by
delivering the nicotine, tobacco, or tobacco derivatives in vapor, fog, mist,
gas, or aerosol form to a person inhaling from the product or device.
   (D)   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT means any noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means.
(Prior Code, §36-18) (Ord. 3612, §1, 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. 4020, §2, 1-7-2020;
Am. Ord. 4047, §2, 10-6-2020) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.042 SALES SERVICE TRAINING REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or entity with a Nebraska
retail tobacco license to allow employees or designated persons to sell or
furnish tobacco products, electronic nicotine delivery systems, and/or
alternative nicotine products in any form whatsoever within the city without
first obtaining a responsible tobacco sales training certificate by completion
of a responsible tobacco sales training course devised and conducted by the
Police Department.
   (A)   Proof of completion will be provided by the Police Department for
persons successfully completing the training. The proof of completion will be
in the form of a tobacco sales training certificate, which shall remain with
the individual wherever employed within the city. The tobacco sales training
certificate will be valid for 3 years.
   (B)   All Nebraska tobacco licensees within the city must keep current with
the Police Department a list of employees and/or designated persons that sell
or furnish tobacco products, electronic nicotine delivery systems, and/or
alternative nicotine products in any form whatsoever under the license or
permit.
   (C)   All persons who sell or furnish tobacco products, electronic nicotine
delivery systems, and/or alternative nicotine products in any form whatsoever
under any Nebraska tobacco license must complete the responsible tobacco sales
training prior to selling or furnishing tobacco products, electronic nicotine
delivery systems, and/or alternative nicotine products in any form whatsoever
within the city.
(Ord. 3710, § 1, 10-16-2007; Am. Ord. 4020, §3, 1-7-2020; Am. Ord. 4047, §3,
10-6-2020)
§ 130.043 SMOKE FREE AIR ACT; INTENT.
   Sections
130.043 through
130.046 and
130.999(G) shall be known as the North Platte Smoke Free Air Act. The City
Council hereby declares that the purposes of these sections are:
   (A)   To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in all
enclosed facilities owned, leased or operated by the city; and
   (B)   To promote the right of employees and persons coming into enclosed
facilities owned, leased or operated by the city to breathe smoke free air, and
to recognize that the need to breathe smoke free air shall have priority over
the desire to smoke; and
   (C)   To provide certain smoke free areas of city parks for health and
aesthetic reasons.
(Ord. 3728, passed 6-17-2008)
§ 130.044 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
130.043 through
130.046 the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BALL FIELD. Includes city-owned baseball, softball, soccer and football
fields.
   CITY. The City of North Platte, Nebraska.
   CITY PARK. Includes city-owned parks and recreational areas.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling or roof that is
contained on all sides by walls (exclusive of doorways) or windows, either
permanent or temporary, which extend from the floor to the ceiling or roof.
   FACILITIES. Buildings, vehicles, equipment, and machinery, if they
constitute an enclosed area.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, plant, or other tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
(Ord. 3728, passed 6-17-2008)
§ 130.045 SMOKING PROHIBITIONS.
   Smoking shall be prohibited:
   (A)   In all enclosed areas in all facilities, including buildings and
vehicles owned, leased or operated by the city, including common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, reception areas, private
offices, elevators, hallways, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms,
and all other enclosed facilities;
   (B)   Within the fenced confines of any animal exercise area of any city-
owned park; and
   (C)   Within 25 feet of any electric carnival-style ride situated within the
boundaries of any city- owned park; and
   (D)   Within the perimeter fencing of public swimming pools and ball fields,
as well as bleachers and grandstands providing seating for public swimming
pools and ball fields; and
   (E)   Within 25 feet of any entrance or exit to or from the North Platte
Recreational Center, or the entrance, or any exit of the North Platte Public
Library.
   (F)   Within 50 feet of any portion of the footprint of the Splash Pad
situated in Memorial Park.
(Ord. 3728, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 3733, passed 8-5-2008; Am. Ord. 3877,
passed 8-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.046 POSTING OF WARNING.
   No person shall be prosecuted for violation of §§
130.043 through
130.046 unless the violation occurred in an area posted with a sign prohibiting
smoking. The signs shall set forth the words "No Smoking", or the international
"No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) and shall be
clearly and conspicuously posted on or adjacent to each entrance door of every
enclosed facility or area where smoking is prohibited by §§
130.043 through
130.046.
(Ord. 3728, passed 6-17-2008)
MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS; EXHIBITION
§ 130.055 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or supervision
of any business or commercial establishment to knowingly display, or make
accessible in an inappropriate manner, material harmful to minors. A person
shall be deemed not to have displayed or made accessible material harmful to
minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as “blinder racks”
so that the lower 2/3 of the material is not exposed to view.
(Prior Code, § 36-41) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.056 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, material is DISPLAYED IN AN
INAPPROPRIATE MANNER if it is exhibited or exposed to view in an area of the
business or commercial establishment where minors, who are unaccompanied by a
parent or lawful guardian, are allowed or invited or if it is visible from a
public street or public place to which minors have access.
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, material is MADE ACCESSIBLE IN AN
INAPPROPRIATE MANNER if it is available to minors, who are unaccompanied by a
parent or lawful guardian, such that they may handle, read, hear, view or look
through the material as part of the general public or otherwise and thereby be
exposed to material harmful to minors.
   (C)   All other definitions applicable to this subchapter are found in Neb.
RS 28-807, and such definitions are adopted and incorporated in this subchapter
by reference as if set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 36-42)
§ 130.057 DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this subchapter that:
   (A)   The person had reasonable cause to believe that the minor involved was
18 years of age or more, and reasonable cause is based on grounds such as, but
not limited to, the presentation by the minor involved to the person of a draft
card, driver’s license, birth certificate or other official or apparently
official document purporting to establish that the minor was 18 years of age or
more;
   (B)   The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian and the
person had reasonable cause to believe that the person accompanying the minor
was the parent or guardian of that minor;
   (C)   The person’s activity consists of teaching in regularly established
and recognized educational institutions, galleries or libraries, or the
publication or use of standard textbooks, films, tapes or visual aids of any
such institution, or the practice of licensed practitioners of medicine or of
pharmacy in their regular business or profession, or the possession by
established schools teaching art, or by public art galleries, or artists or
models in the necessary line of their art, or to relevant references to or
accounts or portrayal of nudity, sex or excretion in religion, art, literature,
history, science, medicine, public health, law, the judicial process, law
enforcement, education, public libraries or news reports and news pictures by
any form of news media of general circulation; and
   (D)   The person has no financial interest in an activity, product or event
entitling such person to participate in the promotion, management, proceeds or
profits of the activity, product or event, and the person’s only connection
with the activity, product or event entitles the person to a reasonable salary
or wages for services actually rendered.
(Prior Code, § 36-43)
§ 130.058 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Actual notice of the nature of the material harmful to minors shall be given
to a person involved in or responsible for the material from the City Attorney
on the basis of information lawfully gathered and supplied to him or her by the
city’s Police Department or citizens.
   (A)   The notice shall be in writing and mailed by first class registered or
certified mail to the alleged offender at his or her last known business or
residential address.
   (B)   The notice shall state that:
      (1)   In the opinion of the City Attorney, the activity engaged in fails
within the prohibitions of this subchapter;
      (2)   If the activity has not ceased within 7 days the city will take
appropriate legal actions; and
      (3)   A declaratory judgment proceeding as described in this subchapter
is available if a person engaged in the challenged activity wishes to initiate
the legal determination of whether the activity is within the prohibition of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-44)
LOTTERIES
§ 130.075 PARTICIPATION IN CITY LOTTERIES.
   (A)   Participation by certain persons prohibited. The following persons
shall be prohibited from playing or participating in any manner in any lottery
established by or on behalf of the city:
      (1)   Persons under 19 years of age;
      (2)   Any member of the City Council, city official or the immediate
family of such member or official. For purposes of this section, the term
IMMEDIATE FAMILY shall mean a person who is related to the member or governing
official by blood, marriage or adoption and resides in the same household of
the member or governing official, or a person who is claimed by the member or
governing official as a dependent for federal income tax purposes. The term
CITY OFFICIAL shall refer to the Mayor;
      (3)   Owners or officers of a lottery operator with whom the city
contracts to conduct its
lottery; and
      (4)   The City Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Participation by employee or agent of lottery operator or sales
outlet. Employees or agents of a lottery operator or authorized lottery sales
outlet shall not play a lottery of the city for which the person performs work
during the time as the person is actually working at the lottery or while on
duty.
(Prior Code, § 36-101) (Ord. 2947, § 1, 12-14-1993) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any
section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Except as
otherwise provided, for purposes of this chapter, violations are divided into 2
classifications which are distinguished from one another by the following
penalties which are authorized upon conviction.
      (1)   Classification IV.
         (a)   Maximum: $1,000 fine, no imprisonment.
         (b)   Minimum: none.
      (2)   Classification V.
         (a)   Maximum: 7 days’ imprisonment, $1,000 fine or both.
         (b)   Minimum: none.
(Prior Code, § 36-16)
   (B)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of §
130.040 shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35 and not more
than $100.
(Prior Code, § 36-17) (Ord. 3109, § 1, 5-6-1997; Am. Ord. 3213, § 1, 12-1-1998)
   (C)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of §
130.041 shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $100 for a first
offense and $250 for each additional offense.
(Prior Code, § 36-18) (Ord. 3612, § 1, 9-20-2005)
   (D)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of §§
130.055 et seq. shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 36-47)
   (E)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of §
130.075 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and fined no more than $500 and no
less than $25 for each game played, and shall, as part of the sentence upon
conviction, be ordered to forfeit any prizes won in violation of §
130.075.
(Prior Code, § 36-101) (Ord. 2947, § 1, 12-14-1993)
   (F)   Any person, business or entity violating §
130.042 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in the amount of
$250 for a first offense and $500 for a second and subsequent offense. Each and
every day that a violation occurs or exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 3710, § 1, 10-16-2007)
   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
130.043 through
130.046 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in the amount of no
more than $100 for a first offense, and no more than $500 for a second and
subsequent offense.
(Ord. 3728, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 3733, passed 8-5-2008)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE
      
152.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
      
153.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
154.   SIGNS
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   General provisions; definitions
   
150.002   Minimum requirements
   
150.003   Safe conditions
   
150.004   Educational structures
   
150.005   Room sizes
   
150.006   Abatement of nuisance
   
150.007   Manufactured homes
   
150.008   Mobile homes
Building Codes
   
150.030   Building Code adopted by reference
   
150.031   Mechanical Code adopted by reference
   
150.032   Plumbing Code adopted by reference
   
150.033   Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code adopted by reference
   
150.034   International Existing Building Code adopted by reference
   
150.035   International Residential Code (IRC) adopted by reference
   
150.036   International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) adopted by reference
   
150.037   International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference
Code Enforcement Officers I and II
   
150.050   Power and authority
   
150.051   Right of entry
   
150.052   Time of inspection
   
150.053   Appeal from decision
Building Permits
   
150.075   Building permits
   
150.076   Fees
   
150.077   Sidewalks
   
150.078   Disposition of fees
   
150.079   Permit limitation
Construction and Materials
   
150.090   Generally
   
150.091   Wood members; construction
   
150.092   Soil bearing values
   
150.093   Steel or metal buildings
   
150.094   Footings
   
150.095   Brick, mortar and masonry
   
150.096   Concrete
   
150.097   Prefabricated construction
Building Moving
   
150.135   Definitions
   
150.136   Regulation
   
150.137   Deposit
   
150.138   Issuance of general license prohibited
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.150   Definitions
   
150.151   Prohibition
   
150.152   Determination and notice
   
150.153   Hearing and appeal
   
150.154   Emergency
   
150.155   Special assessments
   
150.156   Fences required
Fences, Walls, Hedges
   
150.170   Scope
   
150.171   Classes
   
150.172   Requirements for residential and business zones; dwellings
   
150.173   Front yard
   
150.174   Side yard
   
150.175   Rear yard
   
150.176   Corner lot
   
150.177   Obstruction of vision
   
150.178   Finished side of fence
   
150.179   Visibility at alley approaches
   
150.180   Prohibited fences
   
150.181   Prohibited location
   
150.182   Prohibited materials
   
150.183   Permit required
   
150.184   Fence on retaining wall
   
150.185   Dilapidated, dangerous; removal
   
150.186   Fencing; utility substations
   
150.187   Fencing in commercial, industrial zoning districts
   
150.188   Screen fence
   
150.189   Fences on utility easements
   
150.190   Height; measurement
 
   
150.999   Violation; penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, see Neb. RS 18-132
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. A change or rearrangement in structural parts or exit
facilities; an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in
height; or the moving from one location or position to another. The term ALTER,
in its various moods, and tenses and participal forms, refers to the making of
an alteration.
   APPROVED. As to material and types of construction, means approval by the
Code Enforcement Officer as the result of investigation and tests conducted by
him or her, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized
authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
   ATTIC or ATTIC STORY. A story situated wholly or partly within the roof
space, which does not have a usable floor area exceeding 50% of the space of
the floor below, and which is used only as a portion of a dwelling situated on
the floors of the same building. An ATTIC STORY shall be considered as a half
story, but any story occupied separately as a dwelling or used for any other
purpose, shall be rated as a full story.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. An appointed board by the governing body established in
order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by
the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code.
   BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a structure that is safe and
stable, and adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for public,
institutional residence, business or storage purposes. Unless the content
clearly indicates otherwise, the term shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase “or part thereof”. Each part of a building separated from other parts by
a fire wall shall be considered to be a separate building.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of city’s adopted building codes or the
Building Official’s duly authorized representative.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer I, being the same as
the Building Inspector I, or the Code Enforcement Officer II, being the same as
the Building Official.
   CONTRACTOR. All persons engaged in the business of constructing, building,
rebuilding, repairing, altering and those engaged in wrecking and salvaging.
   DEAD LOAD. The weight of walls, partitions, floors, roofs and all other
permanent construction of a building.
   DIMENSIONS, LUMBER. The nominal thickness accepted as standard dimensions in
the lumber industry.
   DWELLING. A structure used as a residence.
   FLOOR AREA. The area included within surrounding walls of a building, or
part thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts.
   FOOTING. The spreading course at the base or bottom of a foundation wall,
column or pier, or other structural part of a building.
   FOUNDATION. A wall or pier below the first floor serving as support for a
wall, pier or column.
   FRONT OF LOT. The boundary line between a lot and the street on which the
lots in the block generally front.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The surface of the ground abutting the outside walls of a
building.
   GRADED LUMBER. The division of sawn lumber into quality classes with respect
to its physical and mechanical properties, as defined in more recently
published Manufacturers’ Standard Grading Rules.
   HOLLOW MASONRY UNIT. A masonry unit the net cross sectional area of which in
any plane parallel to the bearing surface is less than 75% of its gross cross
sectional area measured in the same plane.
   LIVE LOADS. All imposed, fixed or transient loads other than dead loads.
   MANUFACTURED HOMES.
      (1)   A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human
habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or
other device allowing it to be moved to other than a permanent site, which does
not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and
which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. §§ 3280 et seq.,
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
or
      (2)   A modular housing unit as defined in Neb. RS 71-1557 bearing the
seal of the Department of Health.
   MASONRY. That form of construction composed of stone, brick, concrete,
gypsum, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile, precast concrete or other
similar building units or materials or a combination of these materials laid
unit by unit and set in mortar.
   OWNER. The duly authorized agent or attorney, as purchaser, devisee,
fiduciary and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property
in question.
   PILASTERS. All bearing walls having a horizontal cross section of 4 square
feet or less and bonded at the sides into associated masonry.
   PREFABRICATED. Any building component that cannot be visually inspected
during or after erection at building site.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. A building in which persons congregate for civic,
political, educational, religious, social or recreational purposes, including,
among others, courthouses, schools, colleges, libraries, museums, exhibition
buildings, lecture halls, churches, assembly halls, lodge rooms, dance halls,
theaters, bath houses, armories, recreation piers, stadiums, passenger
stations, bowling alleys, skating rinks, gymnasiums, city halls, grandstands,
motion picture theaters, auditoriums, clubs and restaurants. Office buildings,
stores and similar buildings shall be considered as “semi-public” buildings.
   REMODEL. See ALTERATION.
   REPAIR. The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used
in the existing work, not including additional work that would affect the
structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit
facilities, or that would effect a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas
piping, wiring or heating installation, or that would be in violation of a
provision of this chapter or any other law.
   ROOF. The roof slab or deck with its supporting members.
   ROOF STRUCTURE. A structure above the roof of any part of a building
enclosing a stairway, tank, elevator machinery or ventilating apparatus, or
such part of a shaft as extends above the roof and not containing living or
recreational accommodations.
   ROOFING. The covering applied to a roof for weather resistance, fire
resistance or appearance.
   SIDEWALK PERMIT. The permit which is required by this chapter for
construction of a sidewalk on a street right-of-way.
   SOLID MASONRY. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid contiguously
with the joints between the units filled with mortar, or consisting of plain
concrete.
   STREET. Any public thoroughfare, street, avenue, boulevard, park, lane,
terrace, concourse or space more than 20 feet in width which has been dedicated
or deeded to the public for public use.
   STREET LINE. The boundary line between a lot and a street.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the soil, or attached to something having a
permanent location on the soil.
   VENEER. The outer facing of brick, stone, concrete, tile or similar material
attached to an enclosing wall for the purpose of providing ornamentation,
protection or insulation but not adding substantial strength to the wall.
   WALL. The following:
      (1)   BEARING WALL. A wall which supports any load in addition to its own
weight.
      (2)   CURTAIN WALL. A non-bearing wall between columns or piers.
      (3)   ENCLOSURE WALL. An exterior, non-bearing wall in skeleton
construction, anchored to columns, piers or floors, but not necessarily built
between columns or piers.
      (4)   EXTERIOR WALL. Any outer wall of a building other than a party
wall.
      (5)   FACED WALL. A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so
bonded as to exert common action under load.
      (6)   FOUNDATION WALL. A wall below the adjacent ground level and serving
as support for a wall, pier, column or other structural part of a building.
      (7)   INTERIOR WALL. A wall entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of
the building.
      (8)   NON-BEARING WALL. A wall that supports no load other than its own
weight.
      (9)   VENEERED WALL. A wall having a masonry facing that is attached to
the backing but not so bonded as to exert common action under load.
   WRITTEN NOTICE. That a written notice shall be considered to have been
served if delivered in person to the person to be notified, or his, her or its
agent, or if delivered at or sent by registered mail to that last business
address known to the officer giving the notice.
(Prior Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3093, § 1, 12-17-1996;
Am. Ord. 3420, § 1, 6-4-2002)
§ 150.002 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   All of the requirements and restrictions prescribed by this chapter shall be
construed to be minimum requirements and restrictions unless otherwise stated.
(Prior Code, § 12-2) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.003 SAFE CONDITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in occupancy or control of
a building or structure to fail to maintain such building or structure in a
safe condition, or to maintain in good working order any of the safeguards
prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-3) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 EDUCATIONAL STRUCTURES.
   All educational structures must comply with and meet the requirements of the
International Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.005 ROOM SIZES.
   Every dwelling unit shall have at least 1 habitable room which shall have
not less than 150 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have
an area of not less than 70 square feet. Every kitchen shall have not less than
50 square feet of floor area. Habitable rooms, except for the kitchen, shall be
not less than 7 feet in any horizontal dimension.
(Prior Code, § 12-6) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.006 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the city may proceed
by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner provided by
law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court may together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Prior Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.007 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   A manufactured home shall be located and installed according to the
same standards for foundation system, permanent utility connections, setback
and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family
dwelling on the same lot.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the following architectural and
esthetic standards:
      (1)   The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area;
      (2)   The home shall have no less than 18-foot exterior width;
      (3)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2-1/
2 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
      (4)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single-family
constructions;
      (5)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock;
      (6)   The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and
removable towing apparatus removed; and
      (7)   The home must bear a label certifying that it was built in
compliance with National Manufacturing Home Construction and Safety Standards,
24 C.F.R. §§ 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, or, if a modular housing unit, as defined in
Neb. RS 71-1557, bearing the seal of the Department of Health.
(Prior Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.008 MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   MOBILE HOME shall be defined as set forth in §
156.003 of this code.
   (B)   No mobile home shall be located and installed within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of North Platte unless and until inspected and
approved by a Building Inspector of the city or his/her designee according to
mobile home standards set forth in division (D) herein.
   (C)   A mobile home shall be installed according to the same standards
regarding utility connections, setbacks and minimum square footage which apply
to a site-built, single family dwelling on the same lot. Mobile homes in a
mobile home park must also adhere to mobile home parks regulations set forth in
§
152.01 of this code.
   (D)   Mobile homes shall also meet the following architectural and aesthetic
standards.
      (1)   The home shall have wheels, transporting lights and towing
apparatus removed, if towing apparatus is designed to be removed.
      (2)   All mobile homes, regardless of year, shall pass an inspection by a
city Building Inspector or his/her designee and shall meet all of the following
standards:
         (a)   Roof structure solid and capable of protecting interior from
snow, rain and wind.
         (b)   Shall not have any rooms, garages, carports or storage areas
attached to this mobile home.
         (c)   Walls shall be straight and in good condition.
         (d)   Exterior trim and panels shall be solid and attached.
         (e)   All flashing shall be solidly attached around roof and openings.
         (f)   All metal frame work shall be straight and free of structurally
corrosive damaging rust.
         (g)   Belly wrap shall be in place and sealed.
         (h)   Siding shall be free of any cracks or holes.
         (i)   All vents shall be protected with proper covers.
         (j)   Front and rear doors shall open, close and latch properly.
         (k)   Floors shall be solid and smooth.
         (l)   All interior doors shall open, close and latch properly.
         (m)   All windows shall open and close properly and seal tightly.
         (n)   All glass shall be unbroken.
         (o)   Water heater and furnace shall be in working order and properly
supported.
         (p)   Water heater and furnace shall be labeled for mobile home
installation.
         (q)   All gas, water and sewer lines shall be properly supported.
         (r)   Code approved type of piping material shall be used for gas,
water and sewer.
         (s)   Working smoke alarms and CO detector shall be in proper
locations.
         (t)   Outlets and switches shall be in working order.
      (3)   The home must bear a label certifying it has been inspected in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development and is constructed in conformance with the Federal Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards in effect on the date of manufacture.
   (E)   Fees. Inspection for mobile homes completed by the city Building
Inspectors will be calculated at a cost of hourly rate, mileage and materials
as per the fee schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.
   (F)   Mobile and manufactured homes must be blocked, anchored (tiedowns) and
skirted according to manufacturer instructions or the City of North Platte
Building Department Standard which is derived from Code of Standards, Subpart
D-Foundations and Subpart E-Anchorage, within 30 days.
(Ord. 3885, passed 4-1-2014)
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.030 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in buildings
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated and
converted, the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, printed in book or
pamphlet form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein, except for Part IV, Energy
Conservation, Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency, and except for Chapter 30,
Elevators and Conveying Systems, insofar as such code does not conflict with
the statutes of the state or the provisions of this chapter. One copy of the
International Building Code, 2018 Edition is on file at the office of the City
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. Additional
copies shall be available for public dissemination at the office of the Chief
Building Official and 1 copy available at the City Library reference section.
The provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and within the 2-mile building and zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-41) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3397, § 1, 11-6-2001;
Am. Ord. 3472, § 1, 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 3508, § 1, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3863,
passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. 3995, § 1, 9-4-2018; Am. Ord. 4017, § 1, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.031 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in buildings
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated and
converted, the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, printed in book or
pamphlet form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein, except for Part IV, Energy
Conservation, Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency, and except for Chapter 30,
Elevators and Conveying Systems, insofar as such code does not conflict with
the statutes of the state or the provisions of this chapter. One copy of the
International Building Code, 2018 Edition is on file at the office of the City
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. Additional
copies shall be available for public dissemination at the office of the Chief
Building Official and 1 copy available at the City Library reference section.
The provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and within the 2-mile building and zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-41) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3397, § 1, 11-6-2001;
Am. Ord. 3472, § 1, 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 3508, § 1, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3863,
passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. 3995, § 1, 9-4-2018; Am. Ord. 4017, § 1, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.032 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and stable installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in the
installation of plumbing and heating, the International Plumbing Code, 2018
Edition printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference
in addition to all amended editions as though printed in full herein insofar as
such code does not conflict with the statutes of the state. At least 1 copy of
the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. Additional copies shall be available for public dissemination at the
office of the Chief Building Official and 1 copy available at the City Library
reference section. The provisions of the Plumbing Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and within the 2-mile building and zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-43) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3397, § 1, 11-6-2001;
Am. Ord. 3472, § 1, 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 3508, § 1, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3863,
passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. 4017, § 3, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.033 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide minimum standards, provisions, requirements and equitable
remedies consistent with other laws for the repair, vacation or demolition of
dangerous buildings, the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings, as promulgated and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein insofar as such code does not conflict with the statutes of the
state. At least 1 copy of the Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,
1997 Edition, shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. Additional copies shall
be available for public dissemination at the office of the Chief Building
Official and 1 copy available at the City Library reference section. The
provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall
be controlling throughout the city and within the 2-mile building and zoning
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-44) (Ord. 3397, § 4, 11-6-2001; Am. Ord. 3472, § 4, 5-20-
2003; Am. Ord. 3863, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 150.034 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To regulate and govern the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition
and relocation of existing buildings including historic buildings. The
International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, as promulgated and printed
in pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, in addition to all
amended editions, as though printed in full herein, insofar as such code does
not conflict with the statutes of the state. At least 1 copy of the
International Existing Code, 2018 Edition, shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. Additional copies shall be available for public dissemination at the
office of the Chief Building Official and 1 copy available at the City Library
reference section. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code
shall be controlling throughout the city and within the 2-mile building and
zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-45) (Ord. 3472, § 5, 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 3508, § 4, 1-6-2004;
Am. Ord. 3863, passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. 4017, § 4, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.035 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE (IRC) ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health and public
welfare in the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of
detached 1 and 2-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings, the
International Residential Code (IRC), 2018 Edition, printed in book or pamphlet
form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as
though printed in full herein insofar as such code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state or the provisions of this chapter provided, however, that
the following provisions of The International Residential Code (IRC) 2018
Edition, shall not be adopted:
      Part III, Chapter 3, Section R 309.5 and Section 313, Automatic Fire
Sprinkler Systems.
      Part VIII, Chapters 34 through 41, Electrical (inclusive)
      Part IV, Chapter 11
      Chapter 3, Section 302.13 Floors, Gen. F.P.
   And provided further that:
      Part IV Chapter 11 of the 2009 Edition of the IECC (International Energy
Conservation Code), Chapters 1 through 4 (inclusive) is adopted and
incorporated herein in lieu of Part IV, Chapter 11 of the IRC.
That the following entry shall be added to Part III, Chapter 3, Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria:
 
            Wind            Subject to
Gro Ro   Design       Seis  Damage From         Wa    Ice
und of                mic          Fro          ter   Barrier Flood Air   Me an
Sno Li        Topogr  Desig        st           Des   Underla Hazar Freez Ann
w   ve   Spe  aphic   n     Weath  Lin Term ite ign   yment   d     ing   ual
Loa Lo   ed   Effects Categ ering  e            Te mp Require       Index Te mp
d   ad                ory          De                 d
                                   pth
25  30   90                        36  Mode     -5ºF         11/1/       48.7
PSF PS F MP H No      A     Severe inc rate          No      1979  1500  ºF
                                   hes Heav y
 
 
                                       Altitude   Indoor    Design    Heating
Elevation  Latitude Winter   Summer    correction design    temperatu temperatu
                    heating  cooling   factor     temperatu re        re
                                                  re        cooling   difference
2789       41º     -4       92        0.900      70ºF     75ºF     74ºF
Cooling    Wind     Wind     Coinciden
temperatu  velocity velocity t wet     Daily      Winter    Summer
re         heating  cooling  bulb      range      humidity  humidity
difference
17ºF      15 MPH   7.5 MPH  70ºF     High       30%       50%
 
   Part VII, Chapter 26, Section P2603.5.1 shall provide for sewer depth not
less than 12 inches.
   One copy of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, is on file at
the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. Additional copies shall be available for public dissemination
at the office of the Chief Building Official and 1 copy available at the City
Library reference section. The provisions of the International Residential Code
shall be controlling throughout the city and within the 2-mile building and
zoning jurisdiction
(Prior Code, § 12-46) (Ord. 3508, § 5, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3863, passed 3-19-
2013; Am. Ord. 4017, § 5, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.036 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE (IFGC) ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and proper installation, methods of connection and installation of gas piping
from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories, the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as promulgated and printed in
pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein insofar as such code does not
conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. At least 1 copy of the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. Additional copies shall be available for public dissemination at the
office of the Chief Building Official and 1 copy available at the City Library
reference section. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall be
controlling throughout the city and within the 2-mile building and zoning
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 12-47) (Ord. 3508, § 6, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3863, passed 3-19-
2013; Am. Ord. 4017, § 6, 12-3-2019)
§ 150.037 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of providing for the regulation and governing of energy
efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical,
lighting and power systems, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009
Edition, in addition to all amended editions and supplements, is hereby
incorporated by reference as though printed in full herein, insofar as such
code does not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska, provided,
however, that the following provisions of the International Energy Conservation
Code 2009 Edition, shall not be adopted:
      Chapter 4, Section 403.2.2 part (1)(2); Duct Pressure Testing.
At least 1 copy of the International Energy Conservation Code shall be on file
in the office of the City of North Platte Clerk and shall be available for
public inspection at all reasonable times. Additional copies shall be available
for public dissemination at the office of the Chief Building Official and 1
copy available at the City Library reference section. The provisions of the
International Energy Conservation Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and within the 2-mile building and zoning jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-48) (Ord. 3603, § 1, 6-7-2005; Am. Ord. 3863, passed 3-19-
2013)
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS I AND II
§ 150.050 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   The Code Enforcement Officers shall be the city official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all buildings and housing regulations as herein prescribed.
He or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the
city as often as necessary to ensure compliance with all city ordinances. He or
she shall have the power and authority to order all work stopped on any
construction, alteration or relocation which violates any provisions prescribed
herein. He or she shall issue permission to continue any construction,
alteration or relocation when he is satisfied that no provision will be
violated. A stop work order shall be in writing served on any person engaged in
work being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Permission to
resume work shall also be in writing and served upon those actually doing the
work.
(Prior Code, § 12-71) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.051 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Code Enforcement
Officer entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour upon presentation by the city
enforcement officer of his or her credentials.
(Prior Code, § 12-72) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.052 TIME OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer, upon notification from the permit holder
or his or her agent, shall make inspections of the building or structure and
shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed, or shall
notify the permit holder, or his or her agent that the work fails to comply
with the requirements of the code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do work, or cause work to be
done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without the
written approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be required to make such inspections within 24 hours of the time he or
she is requested to do so. In the event of his or her failure to inspect, the
contractor may proceed with construction subject to compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-73) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.053 APPEAL FROM DECISION.
   If it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this chapter has been
wrongly interpreted by the Code Enforcement Officer; that the time allowed for
compliance with any order of the Code Enforcement Officer is too short; or that
conditions peculiar to a particular building make it unreasonably difficult to
meet the literal requirements prescribed by this chapter and the Code
Enforcement Officer, the contractor, the owner, his or her agent or the
occupant may file a notice to appeal within 10 days after the decision or order
of the Code Enforcement Officer has been made to the Board of Appeals. The
Board of Appeals shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to
modify the decision or order of the Code Enforcement Officer. Such a decision
shall be final, subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have
at law or equity. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state
the reasons why the appeal should be considered or made. A variance shall be
granted only where it is evident that reasonable safety and sanitation is
assured and may include conditions not generally specified by this code to
achieve that end. The Board of Appeals is not empowered to waive requirements
of the code. A copy of any variance so granted shall be sent to both the Code
Enforcement Officer and the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 12-74) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3420, § 2, 6-4-2002)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.075 BUILDING PERMITS.
   Any person desiring to commence or proceed to remodel a commercial building,
excavate, erect, construct, repair, enlarge, demolish or relocate any building
or dwelling, or cause the same to be done, shall file with the Code Enforcement
Officer an application for a building permit. The application shall set forth
the legal description of the land or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the
estimated cost, the names of the owner, architect and contractor, and such
other information as may be requested thereon. The application, plans and
specifications so filed with the Code Enforcement Officer shall be checked and
examined by the Code Enforcement Officer and if they are found to be in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinances, use,
area, height regulations and setback regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue the applicant a permit upon the payment of the permit fee set by
the Mayor and Council. Whenever there is a discrepancy between permit
application procedures contained herein and those contained in any building
code adopted by reference, the provisions contained herein shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 12-101) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.076 FEES.
   The Development Department of the city shall collect fees for all building,
sign, fence and other development permits in amounts specified in the City
Council’s annually adopted user fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 12-102) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3455, § 1, 3-4-2003)
§ 150.077 SIDEWALKS.
   Any person desiring to construct a sidewalk on a street right-of-way shall
secure a permit thereof from the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 12-103) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.078 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All building permit fees collected under the provisions of this chapter
shall be credited to the general fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-104) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.079 PERMIT LIMITATION.
   If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not have begun within 6
months of the date thereof, or if the construction shall be discontinued for a
period of 6 months, the permit shall be void. Before work can be resumed, a new
permit shall be obtained in the same manner and form as an original permit.
(Prior Code, § 12-105) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS
§ 150.090 GENERALLY.
   The materials and workmanship used in the erection, alteration and repair of
buildings or structures shall be subject to the minimum standards set forth in
this chapter, and, as to matters not expressly set forth in this chapter, shall
conform to generally accepted rules and practices.
(Prior Code, § 12-131) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.091 WOOD MEMBERS; CONSTRUCTION.
   All wood members shall be so framed, anchored, tied and braced together as
to develop the strength and rigidity necessary for the purposes for which they
are used. Preparation, fabrication and installation of wood members and glues
and mechanical devices for fastening thereof, shall conform throughout to good
engineering practices. Walls and structural framing shall be erected true and
plumb in accordance with the design. Bracing shall be placed during erection
whenever necessary to take care of all loads to which the structure may be
subjected.
(Prior Code, § 12-133) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.092 SOIL BEARING VALUES.
   (A)   In the absence of satisfactory tests, the bearing value per square
foot of soils shall be deemed to be as follows:
Type of Soil All Readings in Tons
Type of Soil                                              All Readings in Tons
Soft clay, medium                                         1.5
Stiff clay, medium                                        2.5
Sand, fine, loose                                         2
Sand, coarse, loose; compact fine sand, and loose sand-   3
gravel mixture
Gravel, loose; and compact coarse sand                    4
Sand-gravel mixture, compact                              6
Hardpan and exceptionally compacted or partially cemented 10
gravels or sands
Sedimentary rocks such as hard shales, sandstones,        15
limestones, silt stones, in sound condition
Foliated rocks such as schist or slate in sound condition 40
Massive bedrock, such as granite, diorite, gneiss trap    100
rock, in sound condition
 
 
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer, in the absence of data satisfactory to
him or her, may require the owner to make tests of a satisfactory character and
carried to such depths as will disclose the character of any materials
underlying the site of the proposed building or structure which may affect the
stability or settlement of the structure. The records shall be certified by a
registered engineer or architect.
(Prior Code, § 12-151) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.093 STEEL OR METAL BUILDINGS.
   Steel or metal buildings shall be designed to meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   Roof live load: 30 pounds per square foot.
   (B)   Wind load: 20 pounds per square foot.
   (C)   All outside walls which are not load bearing shall have a curtain wall
12 inches below finish ground level.
   (D)   All load bearing walls shall have a footing and foundation wall as
specified in this subchapter.
   (E)   All metal building contractors shall present to the Code Enforcement
Officer, prior to the erection of the building, a letter from the manufacturer
that the building shipped for the permit application will comply with loadings
enumerated in this subchapter. The letter shall bear the signature and seal of
a registered engineer or architect employed by the manufacturer.
(Prior Code, § 12-152) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.094 FOOTINGS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The foundation of every permanent structure shall be supported by
satisfactory bearing material such as natural deposits of rock, gravel, sand,
rock flour (inorganic silt), clay or any combination thereof which does not
contain an appreciable amount of organic matter. No foundation of a building
shall be placed on fill material unless designed and approved by a professional
engineer. All loose or deleterious material shall be removed from the formed
area before placing concrete.
      (2)   Where footings are supported at different levels, or at different
levels from footings of adjacent structures, foundation plans shall include
vertical sections showing, to true scale, all such variations in grade.
      (3)   In stepped footings, the angle of slope or depth and location of
steps shall be such that the allowable stresses are not exceeded at any
section. In stepped footings, the effective cross section in compression shall
be limited by the area above the neutral plane. Stepped footings shall be cast
as a unit.
      (4)   No footings or foundation shall be placed on frozen soil.
      (5)   A total perimeter frost footing is required for all structures,
except as listed in division (E).
(Prior Code, § 12-153)
      (6)   Depth of footing/foundation for additions on existing structures
can match existing depth provided the original foundation is at least 24 inches
below grade.
   (B)   Thickness. Footings and foundation walls shall be designed to
withstand all vertical and horizontal loads. The following table lists the
minimum thickness requirements for masonry, light non-combustible and wood
frame structures not over three stories in height where soil conditions do not
require special design:
 
             Thickness of
             Foundation Walls in                           Depth of
             Inches                                        Foundation and
Number of                          Width of   Thickness of Footing Below
Stories                            Footing in Footing in   Finished       Rebar
             Concrete Unit Masonry Inches     Inches       Surface in
                                                           Inches


1 wood frame 6        8            16         8            36             2-#4
1            8        8            16         8            36             2-#4
2            8        8            20         8            36             2-#4
3            8        12           20         8            36             2-#4
 
(Prior Code, § 12-154)
   (C)   Depth. Foundations and footings, except when founded on rock, and
except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be carried down below the
frost line. Foundations and footings of light noncombustible and wood frame
structures may be carried to the depth designated in the table set forth in
division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 12-155)
   (D)   Commercial buildings. Footings and foundations for commercial
buildings shall be constructed of concrete or masonry materials, designed to
support all loads to be imposed upon them, but in no case, not less than as
stated in the table set forth in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 12-156)
   (E)   Garages, sheds and carports.
      (1)   Garages and sheds. Foundations for detached garages and storage
sheds shall be determined based on gross square footage of the structure.
         (a)   Single story buildings (walls not exceeding 10 feet in height):
 
Size (Square Feet) Footing Dimension            Floor Thickness
0 to 200           No footing or floor is required, but the building is
                   required to be securely fastened down.
201 to 450         8 x 18-inch concrete with 1- 4-inch concrete minimum
                   #4
450+               8 x 36-inch concrete with 1- 4-inch concrete minimum
                   #4 T&B
 
         (b)   Two-story garages or garages having attic storage over 450
square feet:
            1.   Garages up to 1,500 square feet cumulative must utilize the
footing required for detached accessory structures, or a design submitted
stamped by a professional engineer.
            2.   Garages over 1,501 square feet cumulative must utilize the
footing required for 1-story single-family residential structures, or a design
submitted stamped by a professional engineer.
      (2)   Carports. Foundations for detached carports are determined by the
support mechanism of the structure.
         (a)   Four-inch minimum slab only:
            1.   Can be utilized only on a single-car carport with a maximum
size of 12 feet by 20 feet.
            2.   Can be used only on a single-car carport with a continuous
bottom runner of any material allowed by code.
            3.   Required to be fastened to the slab at 6-foot intervals with a
fastener within 12 inches of each end. Fasteners are required to be 1/2-inch
wedge type, penetrating a minimum of 3 inches into the concrete slab.
         (b)   Post hole type footing:
            1.   Direct bury of the post a minimum of 34 inches with a concrete
block a minimum of 12 inches round by 2 inches depth placed beneath the post,
or poured.
            2.   a.   The post can be any material allowed by code; or
               b.   Poured footing 12 inches round by 36 inches deep with the
post mechanically fastened to the concrete footing.
            3.   No floor is required for this structure.
         (c)   Garage and shed footings:
            1.   A carport can utilize any footing type listed above for
garages and sheds.
            2.   A carport can utilize any footing type listed for residential
construction.
            3.   No floor is required for this structure. Note: If the intent
for the carport is that someday it will be enclosed and utilized as a garage,
the foundations as listed above for garages and sheds should be used.
      (3)   Patio covers. Foundations for patio covers are determined by the
support mechanism of the structure and whether the structure is attached or
detached to the main structure.
         (a)   Unenclosed patio covers:
            1.   Direct bury of the post a minimum of 34 inches with a precast
concrete block a minimum of 12 inches round by 2 inches depth placed beneath
the post.
            2.   a.   The post can be any material allowed by code; or
               b.   Poured footing 12 inches round by 36 inches deep with the
post mechanically fastened to the concrete footing.
            3.   A patio cover can utilize any footing type listed for
residential construction.
         (b)   Enclosed patio cover: Must utilize the foundation type listed
for single-family residential construction.
      (4)   Building setbacks and separation requirements. All garages, sheds
and carports must meet all building setbacks (front, side and rear) and
separation requirements from other buildings/structures pursuant to
Chapters 150 and
156 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12-157)
(Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 4042, passed 11-3-2020)
§ 150.095 BRICK, MORTAR AND MASONRY.
   Brick, hollow clay tile, precast concrete blocks or tiles shall meet the
requirements of the American Society for Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.). For all
masonry, mortar shall contain not less than 1 part Portland cement, 1 part lime
and 6 parts sand, or 1 part masonry cement and 3 parts sand. Masonry units
shall be set in mortar beds.
(Prior Code, § 12-158) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.096 CONCRETE.
   (A)   Classification. The following classifications of concrete shall govern
and apply:
      (1)   Four thousand pound sand-gravel and limestone (27% to 33%) for
foundations that extend above grade exposed to weather; all structural concrete
columns, beams, spandrels, walls and slabs, exterior sidewalks, curbing,
miscellaneous exterior concrete. Minimum of 6 bags of cement per cubic yard,
maximum of 5-1/2 gallons of water per bag of cement.
      (2)   Five hundred pound sand-gravel and limestone (27% to 33%) for high
strength columns and all precast concrete units other than exposed aggregate
units. Minimum of 7 bags of cement per cubic yard. Maximum of 4-1/2 gallons of
water per bag.
      (3)   Seven thousand pound sand-gravel and coarse aggregate (50% to 60%)
for 1-inch topping for industrial building floors subject to considerable wear
or slight chemical attack. Minimum of 9 bags of cement per cubic yard. Maximum
of 4 gallons of water per bag.
      (4)   Four thousand pound sand-gravel for troweled floors of grade not
subject to severe wear or any chemical attack. Also for 1-1/2 or thicker
topping material not subject to severe wear or any chemical attack. Minimum of
6-1/2 bags of cement per cubic yard. Maximum of 5-1/2 gallons of water per bag.
      (5)   Three thousand pound sand-gravel for footings, foundations below
grade and base coarse for slabs on grade to receive topping. Minimums of 5-1/
2 bags of cement per cubic yard. Maximum of 6-1/2 gallons of water per bag.
(Prior Code, § 12-159)
   (B)   Mixing, pouring, forms and reinforcement.
      (1)   All materials used in making concrete shall be mixed until they
have been uniformly distributed.
      (2)   Mixtures shall be poured continuously, and shall not be poured in
freezing weather unless proper precautions are taken.
      (3)   Double forms shall be used for all foundation walls of basements.
Metal reinforcement of concrete shall conform to the requirements of the
A.S.T.M.
(Prior Code, § 12-160)
   (C)   Floors and walls.
      (1)   Garage, basement, terrace and porch floors and walks which are
inside property lines, when made of concrete, shall be of not less than 4
inches in thickness and shall be placed on a compacted bed. Concrete driveways
shall be of not less than 4 inches in thickness.
      (2)   Concrete slab floors placed directly on earth shall be not less
than 4 inches thick. Topping when poured monolithic with the slab may be
included as a structural part of the slab. Sleepers for the nailing of a wood
floor shall not decrease the required structural depth of the slab unless
placed in the direction of span and then shall not be placed more than ½ inch
into the slab.
      (3)   Concrete slab floors directly on earth shall be not less than 4
inches thick. The slabs shall be designed structurally to support all live and
dead loads as outlined in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-161) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.097 PREFABRICATED CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Approval required. All materials, arrangements of materials and
methods of construction of prefabricated buildings or structures or
prefabricated parts of buildings or structures, before being used, shall be
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and the City Engineer as complying
with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Certificate of compliance. Before the Code Enforcement Officer shall
approve any prefabricated assembly, the contractor, or, if there is no
contractor, the owner of the property, shall furnish to the Code Enforcement
Officer a certificate, signed by a testing agency approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer, of compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The
certificate shall specify that the assembly has been inspected by the agency
and complies with all of the requirements of this chapter. If mechanical
equipment has been installed in an assembly in such a manner that it cannot be
inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer, the certificate shall also specify
that the equipment complies with the requirements of this chapter pertaining to
the equipment. All compensation of the certifying services shall be paid by the
contractor or owner of the property furnishing the certificate. Failure on the
part of any approved certifying agency to make the required inspections, or the
making, by any approved certifying agency of false or improper certificates,
shall constitute grounds for cancellation of approval of the agency by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
   (C)   Tests and expense. If it appears to the Code Enforcement Officer that
tests are necessary to determine the stability of the structural design of any
prefabricated assembly, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the tests.
During the tests, the assembly shall be subjected to loads acting at the same
points and in the same direction as the loads that would fall upon it in the
completed structure. The Code Enforcement Officer may also require reasonable
tests to be made on an assembly to determine its durability and weather
resistance. These tests shall be made in accordance with the standards of the
A.S.T.M. insofar as such standards are applicable. The expense of the tests
shall be paid by the contractor or, if there is no contractor, the owner of the
property before the assembly is approved.
   (D)   Inspections. In the case of prefabricated construction, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall also inspect the placement of prefabricated
assemblies at the building site. The Code Enforcement Officer, in his or her
discretion, may make a continuous inspection during the assembling of sidewalls
and roofs, in which event the contractor, or if there is no contractor, the
owner of the property, shall pay to the Code Enforcement Officer the costs of
the inspection.
   (E)   Materials. All materials, arrangements of materials and methods of
construction of prefabricated buildings or structures, or prefabricated parts
of buildings or structures, shall comply with the standards prescribed in the
currently adopted building code, pertaining to prefabricated materials and
construction, and in addition, as to all matters not fully governed by this
chapter pertaining to materials and construction generally. All materials and
assemblies shall be grade marked or labeled unless the material or assembly is
a type that is not marked or labeled in the construction industry.
   (F)   Loads. Prefabricated assemblies shall sustain, without failure or
undue deflection, test loads equal to the combined dead load and the minimum
live load strengths prescribed by this subchapter for construction generally.
Due compensation shall be supplied for loss of material in connection with the
installation of pipes, conduits or other equipment. Panels that are required to
be tested shall be tested after all chases and cavities for equipment have been
cut. No additional material shall be removed from any prefabricated assembly
during construction of the building or structure.
   (G)   Connections. Bolts or other devices designed to connect prefabricated
assemblies shall be capable of developing the strength of members connected and
to resist wind loads as specified in the provisions of this subchapter
pertaining to construction generally. Connections consisting of bolts or other
devices between roofs and the supporting walls shall be capable of withstanding
an uplift equal to not less than 5 pounds per square foot of horizontally
projected roof area in addition to withstanding the other stresses specified
herein. Individual units or sections of prefabricated assemblies of either
wall, roof, floor or ceiling, shall be so connected that joints shall be
weather and wind proof; and the joints shall be properly caulked in the
approved manner and covered, on the weather side, with approved battens or
other approved weather covering.
(Prior Code, § 12-169) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
BUILDING MOVING
§ 150.135 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings, ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Includes the terms STRUCTURE and OBJECT.
(Prior Code, § 12-191) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.136 REGULATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any
building or structure upon, along or across any street or alley within the city
without a written permit to do so. Application may be made to the Building
Inspector, and shall include the present and future location of the building to
be moved, the proposed route, the date and time in which the removal is to be
made, the equipment to be used, and such other information as the Building
Inspector may require. The application shall be accompanied with a permit fee
and an inspection fee based upon the schedule adopted by the City Council.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall refer the application to the Chief of
Police for his or her written approval and designation of the proposed route
over which the building is to be moved. Upon approval by the Chief of Police,
the Building Inspector shall then issue the permit; provided, that a good and
sufficient corporate surety bond, check or cash in an amount not less than
$10,000, conditioned upon moving said building without doing damage to any
private or city property, is filed with the City Clerk prior to the granting of
any permit. If it will be necessary for any building mover to interfere with
the telephone or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line, the company or
companies owning, using or operating the said poles, wires or line shall upon
proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by disconnecting the
poles, wires or line relative to the building moving operation. All expense of
the disconnection, removal or related work is furnished on different terms as
provided in the company’s franchise. Whenever the moving of any building
necessitates interference with a water main, sewer main, pipes or wire
belonging to the city, notice in writing of the time and route of the building
moving operation shall be given to the various city officials in charge of the
city’s Utility Department who shall proceed in behalf of the city and at the
expense of the mover to make such disconnections and do the work as is
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 12-192) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.137 DEPOSIT.
   (A)   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the Building
Inspector shall inspect the premises and report to the City Clerk as to the
extent of damages, if any, resulting from the relocation and whether any city
laws have been violated during the operation.
   (B)   Upon a satisfactory report from the Building Inspector, the City Clerk
shall return the corporate surety bond, cash or check deposited by the
applicant. In the event the basement, foundation or portion thereof is not
properly filled, covered or in a clean and sanitary condition, the governing
body may apply the money deposited for the purpose of defraying the expense of
correcting the condition.
   (C)   If the expense of correcting the hazardous condition is greater than
the amount of the deposit set by resolution of the governing body, as required
herein, the governing body may recover the excess expense by civil suit or
otherwise as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 12-193) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 3756, passed 4-7-
2009)
§ 150.138 ISSUANCE OF GENERAL LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   There shall be no license issued or general permit given to anyone to move
buildings at will or generally within the city; provided, the bond requirements
of §
150.136(B) may be satisfied by filing a corporate surety bond in an amount of
$10,000 which will be good for 1 year from date of so filing.
(Prior Code, § 12-194) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.150 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which
is dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause
or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the occupants of it
or neighboring structures; which because of faulty construction, age, lack of
proper repair or any other cause is especially liable to fire and constitutes
or creates a fire hazard; which by reason of faulty construction or any other
cause is liable to cause injury or damage by the collapse or fall of all or any
part of the structure. Any such unsafe building in the city is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 12-221) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.151 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe
building in the city and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person
in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in an unsafe
condition or to occupy the building or permit it to be occupied while it is in
an unsafe condition.
(Prior Code, § 12-222) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.152 DETERMINATION AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer of the governing body shall be
of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is an unsafe
building, he or she shall file a written statement to this effect with the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall thereupon cause the property to be posted
accordingly, and shall file a copy of such determination in the office of the
county’s Register of Deeds, and shall serve written notice upon the owner
thereof, and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by certified mail or by
personal service. The notice shall state that the building has been declared to
be in an unsafe condition; and that the dangerous condition must be removed or
remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it; and that
the condition must be remedied within 30 days from the date of receipt. Such
notice may be in the following terms:
      To
                                                                               
(owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known and described as
                                                                                     
.
      You are hereby notified that
                                                                          
(describe building) on the premises above mentioned has been determined to be
an unsafe building and a nuisance after inspection by
                                                        . The causes for this
decision are
                                                                                                               
(here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition).
      You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 30 days
from this date of receipt for this notice or the city will proceed to do so.
Appeal of this determination may be made to the governing body, acting as the
board of appeals, by filing with the City Clerk within ten days from the date
of receipt of this notice a request for a hearing.
   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken
an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists within 10 days from the time when this notice is
served upon the person by personal service or certified mail, the Code
Enforcement Officer may, upon orders of the governing body, proceed to remedy
the condition or demolish the unsafe building.
(Prior Code, § 12-223) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.153 HEARING AND APPEAL.
   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building, the owner of
the building, within the time stipulated, may in writing to the City Clerk
request a hearing before the governing body, sitting as the Board of Appeals,
to present reasons why the building should not be repaired or demolished. The
governing body shall grant the hearing within 10 days from the date of
receiving the request. A written notice of the governing body’s decision
following the hearing shall be sent to the property owner by certified mail. If
the governing body rejects the appeal, the owner shall have 5 days from the
sending of the decision to begin repair or demolition and removal. If after the
5-day period the owner has not begun work, the governing body shall proceed to
cause the work to be done; provided, the property owner may appeal the decision
to the appropriate court for adjudication during which proceedings the decision
of the governing body shall be stayed.
(Prior Code, § 12-224) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.154 EMERGENCY.
   Where any unsafe building or structure poses an immediate danger to the
health, safety or general welfare of any person or persons, and the owner fails
to remedy the situation in a reasonable time after notice by the Code
Enforcement Officer to do so, the city may summarily repair or demolish and
remove the building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 12-225) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.155 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   In case the owner of any building or structure shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to comply with notice by or on behalf of the city to repair,
rehabilitate or demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe and
a public nuisance, the city may proceed with the work specified in the notice
to the property owner. A statement of the cost of the work shall be transmitted
to the governing body, which is authorized to levy the cost as a special
assessment against the land. The special assessment shall be a lien on the real
estate and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 12-226) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
§ 150.156 FENCES REQUIRED.
   The Code Enforcement Officer may require that the owner or his or her agent
erect, within a specified time, a fence around any construction project or
dangerous and unsafe building which he or she deems it advisable to fence.
(Prior Code, § 12-227) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES
§ 150.170 SCOPE.
   The regulations in this subchapter govern the type, location, construction
and maintenance of fences, walls and hedges in all zoning districts, provided,
however, that unplatted A-1 Agricultural Districts outside of the municipal
corporate limits shall be exempt from these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 12-251) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998; Am. Ord. 3721, § 4, 3-18-2008)
§ 150.171 CLASSES.
   (A)   Fences, walls and hedges are classified as:
      (1)   Masonry walls;
      (2)   Ornamental iron fences;
      (3)   Woven wire fence;
      (4)   Wood and plastic fences (more than 50% open);
      (5)   Solid fences (wood, plastic or metal less than 50% open); and
      (6)   Hedges.
   (B)   The term FENCE is used in this subchapter as a generic term including
all such classes, except where the context otherwise indicates.
(Prior Code, § 12-252) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.172 REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND BUSINESS ZONES; DWELLINGS.
   Fences in residential and business zoning districts and those enclosing a
lot or tract of land used for dwelling purposes in any zoning district must
conform to the requirements of all sections of this subchapter, except §
150.187.
(Prior Code, § 12-253) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.173 FRONT YARD.
   Fences constructed between the front building setback line and the front lot
line may be of any class, but shall not exceed 48 inches in height except
private and public schools may construct Class Two and Three fences not to
exceed 72 inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 12-254) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998; Am. Ord. 3455, § 2, 3-4-2003)
§ 150.174 SIDE YARD.
   Side yard fences back of the front building setback line may be of any class
but may not exceed 72 inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 12-255) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.175 REAR YARD.
   Rear yard fences may be of any class, but may not exceed 72 inches in
height.
(Prior Code, § 12-256) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.176 CORNER LOT.
   Anything in §§
150.172 through
250.175 to the contrary notwithstanding, no fence exceeding 36 inches in height
may be built in any clear vision as set forth in §
91.05.
(Prior Code, § 12-257) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.177 OBSTRUCTION OF VISION.
   No fence, retaining wall, shrub, tree or similar obstruction may be
constructed or maintained if it will obstruct traffic vision, as defined by §
91.05.
(Prior Code, § 12-258) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.178 FINISHED SIDE OF FENCE.
   The finished side of any class fence need not face to the outside of the lot
on which the fence is constructed. The choice rests with the owner of the
fence.
(Prior Code, § 12-259) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.179 VISIBILITY AT ALLEY APPROACHES.
   (A)   On the street side of all lots where an alley enters the street right-
of-way, a triangular clear vision zone shall be maintained. The zone shall
measure 10 feet into the lots as measured along the property line and 20 feet
parallel to the street measured from the edge of any alley, away from the
alley, along the property line. No fence, wall, hedge or shrub over 36 inches
in height shall be erected or maintained within the above defined clear-vision
zone.
   (B)   Regardless of other provisions of this section, no fence, wall or
hedge shall be erected or maintained in any yard which materially impedes
vision of vehicles entering an abutting street.
(Prior Code, § 12-260) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.180 PROHIBITED FENCES.
   No electric fences shall be permitted in any zoning district except in the
A-1 Agricultural Zoning District. No barbed wire fencing shall be permitted in
any residential zoning district. Barbed wire fencing materials may be used as a
portion of a fence in a commercial or industrial zoning district when the
material is located not less than 8 feet above grade. No razor edged fencing is
permitted in any zoning district except on a government-owned correction
facility site.
(Prior Code, § 12-261) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.181 PROHIBITED LOCATION.
   (A)   No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected or maintained in a public
right-of-way.
   (B)   A 3-foot clearance shall be maintained around the circumference of
fire hydrants.
(Prior Code, § 12-262) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.182 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   All fences shall be constructed from approved fencing materials and shall
not be constructed from railroad ties, tires, rubble or salvage. Railroad ties
may be used for retaining walls, landscape features and fence posts.
(Prior Code, § 12-263) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998; Am. Ord. 3721, § 5, 3-18-2008)
§ 150.183 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any fences and walls over 30 inches in height above an established
grade are erected in any zoning district along any required yard, the property
owner shall first obtain a permit from the Development Department. A fence
permit fee shall be charged based upon the City Council’s annual city charges
for service resolution. The property owner is responsible to locate all
property lines on which the fence is to be constructed.
(Prior Code, § 12-264) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.184 FENCE ON RETAINING WALL.
   If a fence is constructed on the top of a retaining wall, the height of the
fence is measured from the ground on the low side of the retaining wall;
provide, a Class Two, Three, Four or Six fence may be constructed on top of a
retaining wall to a height not more than 42 inches above the ground measured on
the high side of the retaining wall.
(Prior Code, § 12-265) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.185 DILAPIDATED, DANGEROUS; REMOVAL.
   The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designated representative may
order any dilapidated or dangerous fence removed.
(Prior Code, § 12-266) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.186 FENCING; UTILITY SUBSTATIONS.
   Fences enclosing public or private utility substations in residential zoning
districts may be of Class One, Two, Three or Four and may not exceed 72 inches
in height.
(Prior Code, § 12-267) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.187 FENCING IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Fences in commercial and industrial zoning districts may have fences in the
front yard setback area provided that a fence constructed between the front
setback line and the front lot line may not exceed 48 inches in height, and
must be either Class Two, Three or Six construction.
(Prior Code, § 12-268) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998; Am. Ord. 3455, § 3, 3-4-2003)
§ 150.188 SCREEN FENCE.
   (A)   Business, commercial or industrial lot adjoining residential lot.
Where a lot or tract of land in a business, commercial or industrial zone
adjoins a lot or tract of land in a residence zone, the occupant of the
business, commercial or industrial lot or tract of land shall construct and
maintain thereon adjacent to the common boundary line a suitable screen fence
not less than 72 inches high which the Director of Development determines will
not be detrimental to the adjoining property.
(Prior Code, § 12-269)
   (B)   Children’s areas. A security fence may be constructed in any zone
within a side or rear yard or a playground of a public or private school,
nursery or daycare facility, or a public park or playground. Such a fence shall
be of any open design having a ratio of 6 to 1 and shall not exceed 72 inches
in height.
(Prior Code, § 12-270) (Am. Ord. 3455, § 4, 3-4-2003)
   (C)   Tennis court; game areas. A fence with no height limitation may be
constructed in any zone to enclose tennis courts, public game areas and to
protect property owners from golf courses or driving ranges within a side or
rear yard of a lot or tract of land. The fence shall be constructed of wire
mesh or a net with open-meshed fabric.
(Prior Code, § 12-271) (Am. Ord. 3691, § 1, 5-1-2007)
(Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.189 FENCES ON UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   Anything in any other section of this subchapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, any fence, or part thereof, erected within that part of any
lot, block or other tract of land which is subject to an easement for the
construction, maintenance, operation or replacement of any water, sanitary or
storm sewer or gas line, or electric power, telephone or other utility poles,
cables or lines shall be constructed of the material and so designed as to be
readily removable, whenever necessary to enable the owner of the easement to
enjoy the use thereof. Provided, permission of the Director of Development to
erect a fence on land that is subject to such an easement shall not bind, and
shall be without prejudice to the rights of owners of easements other than the
city. The fences shall be subject to removal by, or upon request of, the owner
of the easement whenever necessary to enable the owner of the easement to enjoy
the easement and, if removed or replaced, shall be removed or replaced at the
expense of the owner of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 12-272) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.190 HEIGHT; MEASUREMENT.
   The height of a fence means, for purposes of this subchapter.
   (A)   In the case of a fence situated in a required building set back area
which abuts a street, the height measured from the finished grade on the side
nearest the street.
   (B)   In the case of a fence situated in other areas, the height measured
from the finished grade of the immediately adjacent part of the area for which
the fence constitutes a barrier. Provided, if a fence which is required by any
provision of this chapter is situated adjacent to a property line on 1 side of
which the level of the finished grade is different from the level of the
finished grade on the other side, the required height of the fence is the
height measured from the higher level.
(Prior Code, § 12-273) (Ord. 3177, 7-21-1998)
§ 150.999 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any
subchapter or section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular subchapter or section for which
the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall
be in any amount not to exceed $100 and/or imprisonment for any length of time
not to exceed 3 months, in the discretion of the court.
(Prior Code, § 12-17) (Ord. 3035, § 1, 9-5-1995)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Findings of fact
Licensing of Multiple Dwellings and Roominghouses
   
151.195   License required
   
151.196   Duration of license
   
151.197   Issuance and renewal of license
   
151.198   Application for license
   
151.199   Inspection prior to issuance of license
   
151.200   License fee
   
151.201   Designation of agent for non-resident applicants
   
151.202   Designation of agent for resident applicants
   
151.203   Deadline for filing application for renewal
   
151.204   Display of license; notification of transfer of ownership
   
151.205   Record of complaints and requests for repair
   
151.206   (Reserved)
   
151.207   Suspension of license authorized
   
151.208   (Reserved)
   
151.209   Reinstatement of suspended license
Administrative Rules and Regulations
   
151.220   Authority of City Council
Notice of Violation
   
151.235   (Reserved)
   
151.236   Discontinuance of electrical service
   
151.237   Reinspection of violations
   
151.238   Issuance of second notice
   
151.239   Posting and service of second notice
   
151.240   Recording of second notice
   
151.241   Transfer of property with existing violation
Repair or Demolition of Non-complying Dwellings; Revolving Fund
   
151.255   Repair by city
   
151.256   Demolition
   
151.257   Revolving fund
Collection and Dissemination of Information
   
151.270   Authority of Building Inspector
 
   
151.999   Penalty; additional remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition including Appendix
Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the minimum Property Maintenance Code of this municipality
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures in the City of North Platte;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, insofar as such code
does not conflict with the Statutes of the State of Nebraska or other specific
model codes adopted by the City of North Platte with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, as prescribed herein. One copy of the
International Property Maintenance Code is on file at the office of the City
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be controlling
throughout the municipality and throughout its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction.
   The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised:
      § 101.1. Insert, “City of North Platte”
      § 102.3. Amend to read, “Application of other codes. Repairs, additions
or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the currently adopted edition
of the International Building Code, International Residential Code,
International Existing Building Code, International Mechanical Code,
      International Plumbing Code, International Fuel and Gas Code,
International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code and the City of
North Platte Zoning Ordinance. Nothing in this code shall be construed to
cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City of North Platte Municipal
Code, other than as set forth in the Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code.”
      § 103.1. Amend to read, “General. The Development Department shall
oversee the administration of this code. The Building Inspector shall be the
executive official in charge thereof and shall hereinafter be referred to as
the Code Official.”
      §§ 103.2 through 103.3. Delete entirely.
      § 103.5. Amend to read, “Fees. The fees for activities and services
performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this
code shall be in accordance with the annual fee schedule adopted by the City of
North Platte City Council.”
      § 104.3. Amend to read, “Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an
inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the code
official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the Code Official is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or
perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or
premises is occupied the Code Official shall present credentials to the
occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the
Code Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, owner’s
authorized agent or other person having charge or control of the structure or
premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Code Official shall have
recourse to the remedies provide by law to secure entry including, but not
limited to, by seeking in a court of competent jurisdiction an order (1)
authorizing entry for purposes of making an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this code and/or (2) requiring that any party interfering with
entry for purposes of making an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
code cease and desist with any and all interference of entry and/or (3) any
other remedy to secure entry for purposes of making an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this code.”
      Insert § 105.3.3 to read “Professional’s Certification. Or a professional
engineer or architect’s stamp of the proposed alternate of the code with
supporting documents which shall include a stamped drawing certifying that the
alternate will perform in compliance with the code.”
      § 111.1. Delete entirely.
      § 111.2. Amend to read, “Board of Adjustment. In order to hear and decide
appeals of orders or determinations made by the Building Inspector relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, all appeals and requests for
interpretation shall be directed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
§§ 156.412 through 156.417 of the City of North Platte Municipal Code.”
      §§ 111.2.1 through 111.2.5. Delete entirely.
      §§ 111.3 through 111.8. Delete entirely.
      § 112.4. Insert “$100.00, $100.00.”
      § 202. Insert “LIMIT STATE. A structure that does not fulfill the
original design criteria. MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than
two (2) dwelling units or rooming units, except the term shall not be deemed to
embrace a motel or hotel. RODENT. A gnawing mammal of an order that includes
rats, mice, squirrels, hamster, porcupines and their relatives, distinguished
by strong constantly growing incisors and no canine teeth. SANITARY CONDITION.
The state (clean or dirty), at a particular time of disrepair. UNFIT. Not of
the necessary quality or standard to meet a particular purpose.”
      § 302.4. Insert “12 inches.”
      § 302.7. Amend to read, “Accessory structures. Accessory structures,
including detached garages, sheds, carports, fences, and walls, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.”
      § 302.8. Amend to read, “Except as provided for in other regulations,
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles shall not be parked, kept or stored on
any premises, and vehicles shall not at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Spray painting of vehicles of any type shall be conducted inside a completely
enclosed building or structure. Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted
to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area and designed for such
purposes.”
      § 302.9. Delete entirely.
      § 303. Delete entirely.
      § 304.1.1(4). Delete entirely.
      § 304.2. Delete entirely.
      § 304.3. Amend to read, “Premises identification. Buildings shall have
approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast
with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. Numbers shall be not less than 6 inches (152.4 mm) in height for
residential and shall not be less than 10 inches (254 mm) in height for
commercial.”
      § 304.14. Amend to read, “Insect screens. Every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swing door shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition. Exception: Screen doors shall
not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect
repellent fans, are employed.”
      §§ 304.18.1 through 304.18.3. Delete entirely.
      § 305.3. Amend to read, “Interior surfaces. Interior surfaces, including
windows and doors, shall be maintained. Loose plaster, decayed wood and other
defective surface conditions shall be corrected.”
      § 306.1.1. Amend to read, “Unsafe conditions. Where any of the conditions
cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or
system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to
comply with § 108 herein, the International Building Code, the International
Existing Building Code and the International Residential Code as amended in the
North Platte Code of Ordinances.”
      § 307. Delete “Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by
the adopted building code.”
      § 602.3. Amend to read, “Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units,
dormitory or guestrooms on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to
the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less
than 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms. Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter design
temperature of -3F (-19C), maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity.”
      § 602.4. Delete entirely.
      § 604.3.1.1. Amend to read, “Electrical equipment. Electrical
distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire,
cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge
protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires,
ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment
that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the
provision of the International Building Code and Nebraska State Electrical
Code. Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where
an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s
representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that
requires replacement:
         1.   Enclosed switches, rated not more than 600 volts or less;
         2.   Busway, rated not more than 600 volts;
         3.   Panelboards, rated not more than 600 volts;
         4.   Switchboards, rated not more than 600 volts;
         5.   Fire pump controllers, rated not more than 600 volts;
         6.   Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
         7.   Motor control centers;
         8.   Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;
         9.   Low-voltage power circuit breakers;
         10.   Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
         11.   Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
         12.   Liquid-filled transformers;
         13.   Cast-resin transformers;
         14.   Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends
have not been exposed to water;
         15.   Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet
locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;
         16.   Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
         17.   Motors;
         18.   Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.”
      § 604.3.2.1. Amend to read, “Electrical equipment. Electrical switches,
receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and
power distribution circuits that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced
in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code and
Nebraska State Electrical Code. Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and
fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from
the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates
that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.”
      § 606. Delete entirely.
      A102. through A104. Delete entirely.
(Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
LICENSING OF MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMINGHOUSES
§ 151.195 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a multiple dwelling or roominghouse unless he or she
holds a current, unrevoked operating license issued by the Building Inspector
in his or her name for the specific named multiple dwelling or roominghouse.
(Prior Code, § 28-251) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.196 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   Every operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be
issued for a period of 1 year from its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked,
and may be renewed for successive periods of not to exceed 1 year.
(Prior Code, § 28-252) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.197 ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized, upon application therefor, to
issue new operating licenses, and renewals thereof, in the names of the
applicant owners of multiple dwellings and roominghouses. No such licenses
shall be issued unless the multiple dwelling or roominghouse, in connection
with which the license is sought, is found after inspection to meet the
requirements issued pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 28-253) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.198 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be issued
or renewed unless the applicant owner has first made application therefor on an
application form provided by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector
shall develop such forms and make them available to the public.
(Prior Code, § 28-254) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.199 INSPECTION PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be issued
or renewed unless the applicant owner agrees in his or her application to such
inspections pursuant to this chapter as the Building Inspector may require to
determine whether the multiple dwelling or roominghouse in connection with
which the license is sought is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 28-255) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.200 LICENSE FEE.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be issued
or renewed unless the completed application form is accompanied by payment of
the license fee established by the current fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 28-256) (Am. Ord. 3864, passed 1-15-2013; Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-
15-2020)
§ 151.201 DESIGNATION OF AGENT FOR NON-RESIDENT APPLICANTS.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be issued
or renewed for a non-resident applicant unless the applicant designates in
writing, to the City Clerk, an agent, who is a resident of the local area, for
the receipt of service of notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter
and for services of process pursuant to this chapter. Any change of agent must
be provided, in writing, to the City Clerk within 10 days of said change.
(Prior Code, § 28-257) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.202 DESIGNATION OF AGENT FOR RESIDENT APPLICANTS.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be issued
or renewed for a resident applicant unless the applicant has first designated
an agent for the receipt of service of notices of violations of the provisions
of this chapter and for service of process pursuant to this chapter when the
applicant is absent from the city for 30 or more days. Such a designation shall
be made in writing, and shall accompany each application form. The applicant
may designate any person resident of the local area his or her agent for this
purpose. Any change of agent must be provided, in writing, to the City Clerk
within 10 days of said change.
(Prior Code, § 28-258) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.203 DEADLINE FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL.
   No operating license for a multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall be
renewed unless an application therefor has been made within 60 days prior to
the expiration of the present operating license.
(Prior Code, § 28-259) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.204 DISPLAY OF LICENSE; NOTIFICATION OF TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   Each license issued under this subchapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place within the common ways of the multiple dwelling or
roominghouse. No license shall be transferable to another person, or to another
multiple dwelling or roominghouse. Every person holding an operating license
shall give notice in writing to the Building Inspector within 24 hours after
having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed
multiple dwelling or roominghouse. The notice shall include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the multiple
dwelling or roominghouse.
(Prior Code, § 28-260) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.205 RECORD OF COMPLAINTS AND REQUESTS FOR REPAIR.
   Every owner or other person in charge of a licensed multiple dwelling or
roominghouse shall keep, or cause to be kept, records of all requests for
repair and complaints by tenants which are related to the provisions of this
chapter and to any applicable rules and regulations, and of all corrections
made in response to the requests and complaints. The records shall be made
available by the owner or other person in charge to the Building Inspector for
inspection and copying upon demand. The records shall be admissible in any
administrative or judicial proceeding pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter as prima facie evidence of the violation or the correction of violation
of this chapter or applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 28-261) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.206 (RESERVED).
§ 151.207 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AUTHORIZED.
   At the end of the time he or she has allowed for correction of any violation
cited as provided in this subchapter, the Building Inspector shall reinspect
the multiple dwelling or roominghouse, and, if he or she determines that such
conditions have not been corrected, he or she may issue an order suspending the
operating license.
(Prior Code, § 28-263) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.208 (RESERVED).
§ 151.209 REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   If, upon reinspection, the Building Inspector finds that the multiple
dwelling or roominghouse in connection with which the notice was issued is now
in compliance with this chapter and with applicable rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto, he or she shall reinstate the license. A request for
reinspection may be granted by the Building Inspector at his or her discretion.
(Prior Code, § 28-265) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 151.220 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to make, adopt, revise and amend the
rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the carrying out of the
purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-281)
NOTICE OF VIOLATION
§ 151.235 (RESERVED).
§ 151.236 DISCONTINUANCE OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
   The Building Inspector shall have the discretionary authority to order the
Light and Water Department of the city to discontinue electrical service to any
vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where violations of this chapter
exist or have been committed. The notice served upon the owner or other person
in charge of the vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit in accordance
with the terms of this section shall advise such owner or person in charge of
the discontinuance of electrical service.
(Prior Code, § 28-302) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.237 REINSPECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   At the end of the 30 days for the correction of any violation alleged, as
provided in this subchapter, the Building Inspector shall reinspect the
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 28-303) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.238 ISSUANCE OF SECOND NOTICE.
   If, upon reinspection as provided in this subchapter, the violations alleged
are determined by the Building Inspector not to have been corrected, he or she
shall issue a second notice of violation, which shall constitute an order
requiring that the then-existing failures to meet the requirement of this
chapter, or of applicable existing rules and regulations issued pursuant
thereto, shall be corrected within a reasonable time allowed, but not to exceed
60 days after the date of the reinspection, if the person served with the
notice does not request a reconsideration or petition for a hearing on the
matter in the manner provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-304) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.239 POSTING AND SERVICE OF SECOND NOTICE.
   The Building Inspector shall cause a copy of the second notice provided for
in this subchapter to be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violations are alleged to
exist, and shall serve it in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-305) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.240 RECORDING OF SECOND NOTICE.
   The Building Inspector, after the expiration of time granted the person
served with a second notice under this subchapter to seek reconsideration or a
hearing in the manner provided by this chapter, or after a final decision
adverse to the person served has been rendered by the City Council or by a
court of competent jurisdiction to which an appeal has been taken, shall cause
the second notice to be recorded in the Register of Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 28-306) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.241 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY WITH EXISTING VIOLATION.
   All subsequent transferees of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit in
connection with which a second notice has been recorded as provided in this
subchapter shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence of the
violations alleged, and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures
provided by this chapter and by applicable rules and regulations issued
pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their transferor.
(Prior Code, § 28-307) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
REPAIR OR DEMOLITION OF NON-COMPLYING DWELLINGS; REVOLVING FUND
§ 151.255 REPAIR BY CITY.
   (A)   Authority of Building Inspector. Whenever an owner or other person in
charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit fails, neglects or refuses
to make repairs called for by a second order or notice of violation issued
pursuant to §
151.238, the Building Inspector, in coordination with other city department
heads or their designees, may contract or otherwise provide the repairs, when,
in their judgment, a failure to make them will endanger the public health,
safety or welfare, and the cost of the repairs will not exceed assessed value
of the structure to be repaired.
   (B)   Right of entry to make repairs. Every owner or other person in charge
of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who has received notice of the
intention of the Building Inspector to make repairs shall give entry and free
access to the agent of the Building Inspector for the purpose of making the
repairs. Any owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit who refuses, impedes, interferes with, hinders or obstructs entry
by the agent pursuant to a notice of intention to make repairs shall be subject
to a civil penalty of $50 for each such failure to comply with this section.
   (C)   Collection of costs. When repairs are made at the direction of the
Building Inspector, the cost of the repairs shall constitute a debt in favor of
this city against the owner of the repaired structure. If the owner fails,
neglects or refuses to pay the city the amount of this debt, it shall be
recoverable in a civil action against the owner or his or her successor,
brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city, which shall possess
all rights of a private creditor.
(Prior Code, § 28-341) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.256 DEMOLITION.
   Demolition shall be in accordance with § 108, 110 and 111 of the 2018
International Property Maintenance Code as amended and City Code of Ordinances
Chapter 151 herein.
(Prior Code, § 28-342) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.257 REVOLVING FUND.
   There is hereby created a revolving fund for the purpose of supporting the
cost of repairs or demolition deemed necessary through inspection and
determination made pursuant to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
as amended and City Code of Ordinances
Chapter 151 herein. Into this fund shall be paid:
   (A)   Civil penalties collected for violations of this chapter pursuant
hereto;
   (B)   All license fees collected pursuant to §
151.200;
   (C)   All judgments collected in actions to recover the costs of repair and
demolition, pursuant to §
151.255(C);
   (D)   Such other revenues as the city may from time to time authorize to be
paid into this fund; and
   (E)   All donations and grants designed to promote the purposes of this
chapter, from public or private sources. The Building Inspector is hereby
declared to be the authorized agent of the city to apply for and receive all
grants, loans and gifts of funds to promote the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-343) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
COLLECTION AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION
§ 151.270 AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to collect and disseminate
information concerning techniques of maintenance, repair and sanitation in
housing, and concerning the requirements of this chapter and applicable rules
and regulations issued pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 28-361) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
§ 151.999 PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be fined not more
than $500 and the cost of prosecution, for each offense. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 28-321) (Am. Ord. 4036, § 1, 9-15-2020)
CHAPTER 152: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
Section
Mobile Home Parks
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Permits
   
152.03   Location, space and layout
   
152.04   Service buildings
Statutory reference:
   Uniform Standard Code for Mobile Home Parks, see Neb. RS 71-4621 et seq.
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and
a bath or shower.
   DRIVEWAY. A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile
home lot or used for common access to a small group of lots or facilities.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health authority of the city or his
or her authorized representative.
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath
or shower.
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle, or similar portable structure designed for use as
a conveyance upon highways, having no foundation other than wheels or removable
jacks and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or
sleeping purposes.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground of at least 8 acres upon which mobile
homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE OR LOT. A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designated for the accommodation of 1 mobile home.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men
and women with laundry facilities as may be required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-31)
§ 152.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   Requirements for construction or expansion of park.
      (1)   Required permits; minimum acreage. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct any mobile home park within the limits of the city and in
the 2-mile zone adjacent to the city unless the land is a minimum of 8 acres in
area and zoned R-4, a conditional use permit has been recommended by the
Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Conditional use permits. Before any action shall be taken on a
proposed conditional use permit, an application shall be submitted on forms
approved by the city’s Planning Department, with fees for conditional use
permit in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. All
applications and fees must be filed with the city’s Planning Department 15 days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
      (3)   Expansion of existing park. An existing licensed mobile home park
may be extended or expanded in tracts of less than the 8-acre minimum required
by this subchapter, but in accordance with all of the other minimum
requirements of this subchapter if the following are complied with:
         (a)   A application for a conditional use permit, as specified in
division (A)(2) of this section, is filed and recommended by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council.
         (b)   The total expansion area is zoned R-4.
(Prior Code, § 34-51) (Ord. 3179, § 5, 8-4-1998)
   (B)   Application for conditional use permit; review of application;
construction schedule.
      (1)   All applications for conditional use under this subchapter shall
contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The location and legal description of the mobile home park
development; and
         (c)   A master plan of the total mobile home park development, and
complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park, showing but
not limited to the following:
            1.   The area and dimensions of the total tract of land;
            2.   The number, location and size of all mobile home lots,
together with landscaping, recreational area, community buildings, other uses
that may be allowed, buffer zone plans, parking and the like;
            3.   The location and width of private and public roadways,
walkways, alleys, easements and the like;
            4.   The location, size and type of water system, sanitary sewer
system, storm sewer system, riser pipes and the like;
            5.   Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be
constructed within the mobile home park development; and
            6.   The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
      (2)   The specific improvement plans shall be reviewed by the following
agencies:
         (a)   City Planning Department;
         (b)   City Engineer;
         (c)   Code Enforcement Officer;
         (d)   School District;
         (e)   City Light and Water Department; and
         (f)   Fire Marshal.
      (3)   The owner of a mobile home park development granted a conditional
use permit under this subchapter shall, after receiving the necessary permits,
proceed with all phases of the park plan as enumerated in this section within
the timeframe established by the Planning Commission and City Council when the
conditional use permit is approved.
(Prior Code, § 34-52)
§ 152.03 LOCATION, SPACE AND LAYOUT.
   (A)   General requirements. For every mobile home park, condition of soil,
groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the
property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be
exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and
no portion subject to unpredictable and sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion
shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to
hazards.
(Prior Code, § 34-71)
   (B)   Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone screenings or other solid
material or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing
soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
(Prior Code, § 34-72)
   (C)   Site drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home
park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe,
efficient manner.
(Prior Code, § 34-73)
   (D)   Minimum site area; setback areas. All new mobile home parks shall
contain a minimum of 8 acres and have 20-foot setbacks along all exterior
boundaries. The setback areas shall only contain entrance streets, fencing and
landscaping. Trees and shrubs shall be planted in this area, but not closer
than 25 feet to the intersection of street right-of-way lines at corners. The
following species of shade trees are recommended:
      (1)   Ginkgo;
      (2)   Oak;
      (3)   Cedar;
      (4)   Ash;
      (5)   Locust;
      (6)   Pine;
      (7)   Lindens; and
      (8)   Hackberry.
(Prior Code, § 34-74)
   (E)   Density; mobile home spaces; location of mobile homes.
      (1)   Maximum density for all mobile home parks is 8 units per net acre.
For purposes of this division, net acres means the area remaining after
deduction of the area set forth for setbacks, streets and recreation areas.
      (2)   Every mobile home space shall abut on a driveway or other clear
area with unobstructed access to a public street. The spaces shall be defined.
Mobile homes shall be parked in the spaces so that there will be a minimum of
20 feet between mobile homes and 20 feet from any private right-of-way.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to locate a mobile home less than 5 feet from
any lot line, or so that any part of the mobile homes will obstruct any roadway
or walkway in a mobile home park.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to allow:
         (a)   Any mobile home to be occupied in a mobile home park unless the
mobile home is situated on a mobile home space; or
         (b)   An independent mobile home to be located on a dependent mobile
home space.
(Prior Code, § 34-75)
   (F)   Recreation areas.
      (1)   In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more
mobile homes, there shall be 1 or more recreation areas, which shall be easily
accessible to all park residents.
      (2)   The size of the recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of
100 square feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less
than 2,500 square feet.
      (3)   Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic
hazard and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located.
      (4)   All playground equipment shall be of the construction so as not to
be less than the recommended standards as established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association.
(Prior Code, § 34-76)
   (G)   Vehicular access. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe
and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home lot. The access shall be provided by private streets.
(Prior Code, § 34-77)
   (H)   Park entrance. Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to
minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent
streets. No parking shall be permitted on the park entrance streets.
(Prior Code, § 34-78)
   (I)   Internal streets generally. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate
width to accommodate anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the
following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Surfacing. All street surfacing shall be 30 feet in width. Private
street right-of-way shall be 40 feet.
      (2)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to
500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet.
      (3)   Street names. All internal streets of each mobile home park shall
be named in the following manner:
         (a)   All north and south streets west of Jeffers shall be designated
consecutively as numbered avenues. The first internal street on the east shall
be named “First Avenue”, the next street west shall be named “Second Avenue”
and the like.
         (b)   All north and south streets east of Jeffers shall be designated
consecutively as numbered avenues. The first internal street on the west shall
be named “First Avenue”, the next street east shall be named “Second Avenue”
and the like.
         (c)   All east and west streets south of First Street shall be
designated consecutively as lettered avenues. The first internal street on the
north shall be named “A Avenue”, the next street north shall be named “B
Avenue” and the like.
         (d)   All east and west streets north of A Street shall be designated
consecutively as lettered avenues. The first internal street on the south shall
be named “A Avenue”, the next street north shall be named “B Avenue” and the
like.
      (4)   Street signs. The owner of every mobile home park shall be
responsible for installing 2 street signs at each intersection of streets
within the mobile home park. The street signs shall be identical to city street
signs.
(Prior Code, § 34-79)
   (J)   Parking. Off-street parking areas shall be provided for the use of
mobile home park occupants and guests. The areas shall be furnished at a rate
of at least 2 car spaces for each mobile home lot and located on the lot.
(Prior Code, § 34-80)
   (K)   Illumination of streets. All mobile home parks shall be furnished with
lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at the mounting
heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination
for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
      (1)   All parts of the park street systems: 0.6 footcandle.
      (2)   Potentially hazardous locations, such a major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps: Individually illuminated, with a minimum of 1.0
footcandle.
(Prior Code, § 34-81)
   (L)   Street construction and design standards.
      (1)   Surface. All newly constructed streets shall be hard-surfaced with
a material which shall be durable and well drained, using internal drainage
connected to the city collection system wherever possible. Pavement edges shall
be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the
pavement base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and
other hazards.
      (2)   Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure
adequate surface drainage.
      (3)   Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be
at approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be
maintained between centerlines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of
more than 2 streets at 1 point shall be avoided.
(Prior Code, § 34-82)
   (M)   Pedestrian walks.
      (1)   General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park
streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
      (2)   Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and
maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. The
common walks shall have a minimum width of 4 feet.
      (3)   Individual walks. All mobile home stands shall be connected to a
paved street. The individual walks shall have a minimum width of 4 feet.
(Prior Code, § 34-83)
   (N)   Mobile home stands. The area of a mobile home stand shall be improved
to provide adequate support for the placement and tiedown of the mobile home,
thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and
overturning, by using the following methods:
      (1)   The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns,
such as cast-in-place concrete deadmen, eyelets imbedded in concrete
foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices
securing the stability of the mobile home.
      (2)   Anchors and tiedowns shall be placed at each corner of the mobile
home stand, and four additional ties per side at intermediate points. All
components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of
4,800 pounds.
(Prior Code, § 34-84)
   (O)   Community building.
      (1)   Approval required. A community building is allowed within a mobile
home park if the structure and the location of the structure is approved at the
time the park is approved or within an existing developed mobile home park if
approved under a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Standards. In no case shall a community building be allowed where
it does not meet the following requirements:
         (a)   All ingress and egress shall be from an interior mobile home
park street.
         (b)   The community building is to be located a minimum of 50 feet
from any mobile home space.
         (c)   The community building is to be located as near as possible to
the geographic center of the park.
         (d)   Minimum parking requirements shall be as defined in Chapter 156.
      (3)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed within an
approved community building:
         (a)   Self-service laundry;
         (b)   Postal substation;
         (c)   Swimming pool limited to park occupant use, either within the
structure or lying adjacent to it, except that it cannot be located nearer than
50 feet to any mobile home space and it must meet state Health Department
regulations;
         (d)   Barbershop limited to 1 chair per every 150 occupied park
spaces;
         (e)   Beauty parlor limited to one operator for parks between 100 and
150 occupied spaces, 2 operators for parks between 151 and 300 occupied spaces
and a maximum of 3 operators for parks over 300 spaces;
         (f)   Indoor recreation rooms for the following purposes:
            1.   TV room;
            2.   Meeting room with or without kitchen facilities;
            3.   Pool table;
            4.   Party room with or without kitchen facilities;
            5.   Sauna;
            6.   Handball or paddleball;
            7.   Table tennis;
            8.   Gymnasium-related locker facilities;
            9.   Exercise room;
            10.   Arts and crafts room;
            11.   Reading room; and
            12.   Similar area with the approval of the Development Department.
         (g)   Sale and display of daily need products and prepackaged food
products limited to a maximum area of 200 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 34-85)
   (P)   Other uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses. Other uses may be allowed as a part of a mobile
home court development if there is a minimum of 8 acres zoned R-4 and if a
conditional use permit is approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
Other uses will be restricted to not more than 20% of the ground area of the
development and shall be restricted to the following uses:
         (a)   Miniwarehouses, which will be restricted to residential type
storage such as boats, cars, lawnmowers, garden equipment, household furniture
and the like. All storage shall be in an enclosed building or in an open yard
so screened that the stored items are not visible at human eye level within 300
feet of the property line.
         (b)   Commercial uses which will be restricted to the following:
            1.   Barbershop;
            2.   Beauty shop;
            3.   Drugstore;
            4.   Gift shop;
            5.   Variety shop;
            6.   Self-service laundry;
            7.   Clothing store;
            8.   Package food store; and
            9.   Office buildings as described in regulations for the 0-
1 office district.
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading; landscaping. Off-street parking
regulations, loading regulations and landscaping shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 156 of this code.
      (3)   Location; distance from mobile homes. The uses listed in this
section shall be centrally located within the mobile home court and no mobile
home may be placed closer than 50 feet to the use. The other uses may be
permitted along the edge of a mobile home court if they are contiguous to a
similar zone.
(Prior Code, § 34-86)
§ 152.04 SERVICE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Generally. Each mobile home park that permits dependent mobile homes
shall be provided with at least 1 service building adequately equipped with
flush type toilet fixtures and other sanitary facilities as required by this
subchapter. No service building shall contain less than 1 toilet for females, 1
toilet for males, 1 lavatory and shower for each sex and 1 laundry tray.
Numbers of fixture units shall be as recommended by the current edition of the
city’s Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 34-101)
   (B)   Location and construction. Service buildings shall:
      (1)   Be located 20 feet or more from any mobile home space and, where
dependent mobile homes are accommodated, not more than 200 feet from a
dependent mobile home space;
      (2)   Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted;
      (3)   Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and
cleaning;
      (4)   Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70°F
during cold weather and to supply adequate hot water during time of peak
demand;
      (5)   Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened; and
      (6)   Provide separate compartments for each bathtub or shower and water
closet, and a sound-resistant wall to separate male and female toilet
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 34-102)
   (C)   Laundry facilities.
      (1)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in mobile home parks in the
ratio of 2 laundry units to every 30 mobile home spaces or portion thereof and
shall be in a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a separate
building.
      (2)   A laundry unit shall consist of not less than 1 laundry tray, 1
clothes washing machine and 1 clothes dryer.
(Prior Code, § 34-103)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Lands to which chapter applies
   
153.05   Enforcement official
   
153.06   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
   
153.07   Compliance
   
153.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.09   Interpretation
   
153.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.11   Severability
   
153.12   Appeal
   
153.13   Permit required
   
153.14   Administration
   
153.15   Application for permit
   
153.16   Establishment of zoning districts
   
153.17   Standards for flood plain development
   
153.18   Permitted uses - Flood Fringe Overlay District (including AO and AH
zones)
   
153.19   Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District
   
153.20   Permitted uses - Floodway Overlay District
   
153.21   Standards for the Floodway Overlay District
   
153.22   Variance Procedures
   
153.23   Conditions for variances
   
153.24   Nonconforming use
   
153.25   Amendments
   
153.26   Definitions
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare. The Legislature, in Neb. RS 31-1001
to 31-1022 (as amended), has further assigned the responsibility to adopt,
administer, and enforce flood plain management regulations to the county, city
or village with zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the
City Council of the City of North Platte, Nebraska, ordains as follows.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood hazard
areas of the City of North Platte, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by:
      (1)   The cumulative effect of obstructions in flood plains causing
increases in flood heights and velocities;
      (2)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages.
   (C)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter uses a reasonable
method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated
steps.
      (1)   Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected
frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The
base flood is selected for this chapter. It is representative of large floods
which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this chapter. It is in the general order of a
flood which could be expected to have a 1% chance of occurrence in any 1 year,
as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood Insurance Study,
and illustrative materials dated January 2, 2009, as amended.
      (2)   Calculation of water surface profiles based on an hydraulic
engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas
to convey the base flood.
      (3)   Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
      (4)   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the
floodway profile.
      (5)   Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the
floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the
base flood.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §
153.02(A) by applying the provisions of this chapter to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard;
   (D)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.04 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
North Platte, Nebraska identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
January 2, 2009, as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH
Zones) and within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in §
153.14. In all areas covered by this chapter no development shall be permitted
except upon the issuance of a flood plain permit to develop, granted by the
City Council of the City of North Platte or its duly designated representative
under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the designated
representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the
general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where
specifically noted in §§
153.17, 153.18, 153.19, 153.20 and 153.21.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.05 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Code Enforcement Official of the community is hereby designated as the
community's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.06 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact
location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning
map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the
necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested,
the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood
elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating
the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case
to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so
desires.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.07 COMPLIANCE.
   Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community, no
development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.09 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
floodway and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within
such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the City of North Platte or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.11 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.12 APPEAL.
   Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the Code
Enforcement Official, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance
directly to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.13 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any flood plain development or
substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a
separate permit for development as defined in §
153.17.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.14 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Duties of the Code Enforcement Official shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Review all development permit applications to assure that sites are
reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied;
      (2)   Review applications for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
      (3)   Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine
whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      (4)   Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Department of Natural
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
      (5)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (6)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures in special flood hazard areas;
      (7)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially improved structures
have been floodproofed;
      (8)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the Code
Enforcement Official shall be presented certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.15 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   To obtain a flood plain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such
application shall:
   (A)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the flood plain
development permit;
   (B)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by
lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or
development;
   (C)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended;
   (D)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction;
   (E)   Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required
to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
   (F)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Code
Enforcement Official.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.16 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped flood
plain areas are hereby divided into the two following districts: A floodway
overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in
the Flood Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)]. Within these districts all
uses not meeting the standards of this chapter and those standards of the
underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 153.17 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   No permit for development shall be granted for new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments including the placement of
manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE,
AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.
   (B)   All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to
inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation was not
provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions
of §§
153.18 and
153.19. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall
utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from
federal, state or other sources.
   (C)   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the
applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial
improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated
developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any location as shown on the
Flood Insurance Study.
   (D)   New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements,
prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments
shall require:
      (1)   Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site
waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination;
      (3)   Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing
methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
      (4)   All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or floodproofed up
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (E)   Storage of material and equipment.
      (1)   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited.
      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
   (F)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage;
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
      (4)   Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured
home parks and subdivision) of 5 acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include
within such proposals the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009) Penalty, §
153.99
§ 153.18 PERMITTED USES - FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (INCLUDING AO AND AH
ZONES).
   Any use permitted in §§
153.20 and
153.21 shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be
permitted in the district unless the standards of §
153.17 are met.
(Ord. 3779, passed 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.19 STANDARDS FOR THE FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above 1
foot above the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above 1
foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below that level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the standards of this division are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Official as set
forth in §
153.14(B)(7).
   (C)   Appurtenant structures used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles,
and storage of other items readily removable in the event of a flood warning
may have their lowest floor below 1 foot above the base flood elevation
provided the structure is capable of withstanding hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces caused by the base flood and provided that no utilities are installed in
the structure except elevated or flood proofed electrical fixtures. If the
structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full compliance
with the minimum standards governing such use.
   (D)   Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of
not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than
1 foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
   (E)   Elevated structures. All new construction or substantial improvements
of an existing structure that includes a fully enclosed area located below the
lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be
designed to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall
be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a
professional engineer or meet the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of 2 openings with a total net area of not
less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above
the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the
opening;
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in
both directions without manual intervention.
For crawlspace foundation types, construction must follow the guidelines
contained in FEMA TB 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Structures Located in
Special Flood Hazard Areas: National Flood Insurance Program Interim Guidance;
         (d)   Below grade crawlspaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceed 5 ft/second;
         (e)   Interior grade of the crawlspace below the BFE must not be more
than 2 feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
         (f)   Height of the below grade crawlspace, measured from the lowest
interior grade of the crawlspace to the bottom of the floor joist must not
exceed 4 feet at any point;
         (g)   Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior of the crawlspace.
   (F)   Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (G)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in
accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that
over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific
requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
         (a)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations
and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring 1 additional tie per
side;
         (b)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with 5
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring 4 additional ties per side;
         (c)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
         (d)   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
      (2)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:
         (a)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above 1 foot above the base flood elevation; and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of division (G)(1) above.
      (3)   Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of division (G)(2) above be elevated so that either:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above 1 foot
above the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of division (G)(1)
above.
   (H)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard
areas on the community's official map shall either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes of this chapter. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
   (I)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
153.04 are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO Zones:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as 1 foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number
is specified); or
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as 1 foot above the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification
shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.14(B)(7).
      (3)   Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009; Am. Ord. 3934, § 1, 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.20 PERMITTED USES - FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood
flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they
are not prohibited by any other ordinance. The following are recommended uses
for the Floodway District:
   (A)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries,
forestry;
   (B)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas;
   (C)   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport
landing strips;
   (D)   Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.21 STANDARDS FOR THE FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   New structures for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the
development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along
the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses
are subject to the standards of §§
153.17 and
153.19. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood
elevation and floodway data available through federal, state or other sources
or §
153.17(F)(4), in meeting the standards of this section.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.22 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The North Platte Board of Adjustment as established by this Code of
Ordinances shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Code Enforcement Official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Neb. RS
19-912.
   (D)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
         (a)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
         (b)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009)
§ 153.23 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing items listed in divisions (B) through (F) below
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood
discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (F)   The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of a
community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.24 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Utility
Department shall notify the Code Enforcement Official in writing of instances
of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a
period of 12 months.
      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it
is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the
alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.25 AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any
and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973,
provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public
hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At least
15 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public
hearing. A copy
of such amendments will be provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009)
§ 153.26 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Code Enforcement Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. Appurtenant structures used exclusively for storage
of motor vehicles, and storage of other items readily removable in the event of
a flood warning may have their lowest floor below 1 foot above the base flood
elevation provided the structure is capable of withstanding hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces caused by the base flood and provided that no utilities are
installed in the structure except elevated or flood proofed electrical
fixtures. If the structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into
full compliance with the minimum standards governing such use.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM'S effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date
of the flood plain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That area of the flood plain, outside of the floodway, that on
the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1%
chance of flood occurrence in any 1 year).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on which
the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries and the
zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see also FLOOD or FLOODING).
   FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 1 foot.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of flood plain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For flood plain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION
means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the flood plain management regulation adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of flood plain management regulations adopted by a community.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning
district designation does not change.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the flood plain within a community
subject to 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure
before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
   VARIANCES. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. A failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009; Am. Ord. 3934, § 2, 5-17-2016)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than $500, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Code Enforcement Official
or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 3779, 11-3-2009)
CHAPTER 154: SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title of chapter
   
154.002   Purpose and scope of chapter
   
154.003   Definitions
License, Bond and Permits
   
154.020   License required for sign contractors; fee; expiration
   
154.021   Revocation of license generally
   
154.022   Notice and hearing on revocation of license
   
154.023   Bond
   
154.024   Sign permit required; exceptions
   
154.025   Application for sign permit
   
154.026   Sign permit fee
Enforcement
   
154.040   Duties of Building Inspector
   
154.041   Height limitations
   
154.042   Footings
   
154.043   Identification sticker
   
154.044   Maintenance of signs
   
154.045   Rebuilding, enlargement or relocation of existing signs
   
154.046   Certificate of safety
   
154.047   Authority to order removal of unlawful signs
General Sign Standards; Permitted and Prohibited Signs
   
154.060   Permitted signs by zoning district
   
154.061   Exemptions from permit requirement
   
154.062   Prohibited signs
   
154.063   Banners and flags
   
154.064   Removal of signs on discontinuance of business
   
154.065   Removal or reconstruction of unlawful signs
   
154.066   Removal of signs on public property
   
154.067   Back-to-back or V-shaped signs
   
154.068   Signs along Federal Aid Highways or Federal Aid Projects
   
154.069   Signs along Interstate Highway 80 and State Highways
   
154.070   Signs on a campus
Design and Construction Standards
   
154.085   Generally
   
154.086   Overturning moment and dead-load resisting moment
   
154.087   Wind loads
   
154.088   Allowable stresses
   
154.089   Anchorage
   
154.090   Portable ground signs
   
154.091   Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel
   
154.092   Use of wooden blocks, plugs or anchors
   
154.093   Signs attached to parapet walls
   
154.094   Size, thickness and type of glass panels
   
154.095   Clearance
   
154.096   Interference with fire escape, exit or standpipe
Conflicting Provisions
   
154.110   Sign code to govern in case of conflict
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Sign Ordinance”.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to meet requirements of state and
federal regulations in regulating exterior signs so as to protect values, to
protect the character of various use areas of the city, to protect the health,
safety and public welfare of the citizens of the city and to protect and
promote the aesthetic integrity of the city.
   (B)   The principal features are the restriction of advertising to the
business or use of the premises on which the sign is located unless otherwise
permitted and the restriction of the total sign area permissible per site. Any
sign placed on land or on a building for the purposes of identification or for
advertising a use conducted therein or thereon shall be deemed to be accessory
and incidental to the land, building or use. It is intended that the display of
signs will be appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are
appurtenant and be adequate, but not excessive, for the intended purpose of
identification or advertisement. With respect to signs advertising business
uses, it is specifically intended, among other things, to avoid excessive
competition and clutter among sign displays in their demand for public
attention. It is further intended that in commercial areas now in existence,
and more so in proposed commercial and industrial areas, all signs within 1
complex be coordinated with the architecture in such a manner that the overall
appearance is harmonious in color, form and proportion.
   (C)   It is also intended by this chapter that all temporary signs erected
for directional purposes, for public information, or to call attention to
special events shall be confined to those that are of general public interest
and that the signs shall be limited to the giving of information.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.003 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign utilized to advertise a product or service that is not
produced or conducted on the same property as the sign.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A sign with the capability of content change by manual
means. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually.
   CAMPUS. The grounds and buildings of a university, college or training
facility.
   CANOPY SIGN. Any sign projecting beneath the underside of any balcony,
canopy, awning or other structural overhang or passageway.
   DIGITAL DISPLAY. Those signs that give public service information such as
time, date, temperature or weather or to allow a changeable message.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, relocate,
replace or reconstruct any sign or supporting structure.
   FLASHING SIGN. Animated/digital display signs or animated portions of signs
whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period
of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-
illumination. For the purposes of this chapter, FLASHING will not be defined as
occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds
4 seconds.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is permanent and self-supporting, being non-
dependent for support from a building or other structure.
   I-80 HIGHRISE SIGN. A freestanding on-premise sign that is located on lots
in which any part are within 1,000 feet from U.S. Interstate Highway 80 (I-80)
right-of-way.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that is illuminated with constant intensities of
light of a non-varying nature.
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign that does not conform to this chapter but meets
the requirements of the existing regulations at the date of its erection.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign not located on the site for which it advertises.
   PAINTED SIGN. A sign that is painted directly on the exterior surface of a
building, wall, roof or structure.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is supported by 1 or more uprights or braces
upon the ground and is of portable design.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which is affixed to any building, wall or structure
and extends beyond the building wall more than 15 inches.
   PUBLIC INFORMATION SIGN. Official signs that are required by law or
ordinance or are necessary for public information. Signs giving only
information about public places owned and operated by federal, state or local
governments relating to natural phenomena, historic sites, areas of natural
scenic beauty or areas naturally suited for outdoor recreation.
   PUBLIC SIGN. A sign necessary or convenient for the direction, information
or safety of the public.
   REFACE. To put a new face, facing or surface on the structure. The sign
remains the same, only the facing or message changes.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected, constructed and maintained above the eaves and
attached to the roof of a building.
   SIGN. Any object or device, or part thereof, situated outdoors and which
object or device or the effect produced is used to advertise, announce,
identify, declare, demonstrate, display, instruct, direct  or attract attention
by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, fixtures, colors,
motion, illumination, sound or projecting images.
   SIGN PERMIT. A permit issued for the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, relocation, improvement, reface or conversion of any sign
issued pursuant to the code of the city or this chapter.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any supports, uprights, braces and framework of a sign which
do not include any portion of the sign message.
   SITE. A tract, building lot, parcel or portion or land separated from other
parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey
map or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
   SURFACE AREA OF SIGN. Computed on the basis of all that area within the
outside dimensions of the largest side of the sign containing advertising, but
shall not include the area necessary for supporting structures.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display or
sign constructed of light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plywood, sheet metal,
paper or other light materials, with or without frames, intended or designed to
be displayed for a limited period of time, not to exceed 30 days.
   UNLAWFUL SIGN. Any sign or advertising structure erected in the absence of a
permit required by this chapter, or in violation of any of the limitations,
prohibitions or requirements of this chapter.
   UNSAFE SIGN. Any sign or advertising structure found unsafe or insecure or
creating a hazard or menace to the public safety, health and welfare not
satisfying the standards hereof, relating to design and construction standards.
   WALL SIGN. A sign which is affixed to an exterior surface of any building,
wall or structure and which does not extend more than 15 inches beyond the
building wall.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3700, § 1, 8-7-2007)
LICENSE, BOND AND PERMITS
§ 154.020 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SIGN CONTRACTORS; FEE; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of installing, altering or
repairing any sign within the corporate limits of the city, or within the 2-
mile zone adjacent to the corporate limits of the city, unless they are the
holder of a sign license, except signs exempt from permits.
   (B)   The owner of a business can personally install their own signs without
a sign contractor license.
   (C)   A sign license fee established on the annual city fee schedule shall
be paid to the City Clerk. All sign licenses shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which issued.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.021 REVOCATION OF LICENSE GENERALLY.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have the power to revoke the
license of any holder of a sign license issued pursuant to this subchapter,
upon recommendation of the Building Inspector, if the license was obtained
through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly
incompetent or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of
this chapter. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties
prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.022 NOTICE AND HEARING ON REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Before a license issued pursuant to the subchapter can be revoked, a
licensee shall have notice in writing enumerating the charges against him or
her, and he or she shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Council at
the next regular City Council meeting from the date of receipt of the notice.
   (B)   The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral
or written, and shall have the right of cross examination.
   (C)   All such testimony before the City Council shall be given under oath.
   (D)   The City Council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue
subpoenas and compel the attendance of witnesses in such cases.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.023 BOND.
   (A)   To guarantee the faithful performance and carrying out of the
provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances pertaining to signs, a
licensee under this subchapter shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of
$10,000, signed by 1 or more sufficient sureties, or a bond in the like amount
of some approved corporate surety doing business through a writing agent in the
city.
   (B)   All bonds furnished by a sign license holder in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be conditioned that:
      (1)   The licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city of and from
all accidents, damages, liabilities, claims, judgments, costs or expenses
caused by any negligence arising from a failure to protect work performed by
the licensee, or by any unfinished, unskillful and inadequate work done by the
licensee;
      (2)   The licensee shall be governed by the ordinance of the city
pertaining to signs;
      (3)   The licensee shall pay any fine imposed upon him for violation
thereof; and
      (4)   The licensee will bring the signs to a state of perfection which
will comply with this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
   (C)   The obligee of the bond shall be the city, and action may be
maintained thereon by anyone injured by breach of its conditions for a period
of 1 year after completion of any electrical work.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.024 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No sign shall be displayed out-of-doors in the city limits or the 2-mile
zone of the city until a permit for the sign has been issued by the Building
Inspector or unless it is exempt from a permit in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.025 APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   An application accompanied by a scale drawing for each separate sign
permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on a form approved by him or
her.
   (B)   The applications shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant, the location where the sign is to be erected or located, the name
and address of the owner of the property, the size, height, type and general
description of the proposed sign, including the materials of which it is
constructed, the zone in which it is located, the sign contractor’s name and
address, and such other pertinent information required or deemed necessary by
the Building Inspector to determine the sign’s safety and conformity to this
chapter.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.026 SIGN PERMIT FEE.
   Before any sign can be erected, the owner or occupant of the premises shall
pay to the City Clerk a fee for a sign permit established on the annual fee
schedule.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.040 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement
and administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.041 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   No permit to erect a sign 30 feet high or higher measured from ground level
to the highest point of the sign, shall be issued without first having had
submitted as part of the application for a sign permit a set of drawings
indicating all loads and structural calculations, stamped signed by a licensed
structural engineer, indicating that the engineer is a registered professional
engineer.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.042 FOOTINGS.
   Prior to pouring concrete for footings for any sign, the forms set for the
footings shall be inspected and approved by the Building Inspector or his or
her designee. All inspections shall be scheduled 24 hours in advance.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.043 IDENTIFICATION STICKER.
   Every sign or other advertising structure hereafter erected, except those
exempt from obtaining a permit, shall exhibit language on the sign that can be
read from ground level, indicating the permit number and the voltage of any
electrical apparatus used in connection therewith.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.044 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition so as not
to be distracting, unattractive or a public nuisance, and shall be in good
repair and effectively serve the purpose for which the sign was intended.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.045 REBUILDING, ENLARGEMENT OR RELOCATION OF EXISTING SIGNS.
   No legally existing signs shall be refaced, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or
relocated except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.046 CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY.
   When, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the safety of a proposed or
existing sign structure is questionable, the applicant shall furnish a
certificate from a registered structural and/or electrical engineer certifying
to its safety.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.047 AUTHORITY TO ORDER REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   The Building Inspector may order the removal of any sign that is not erected
or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable per §
154.999.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS; PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED SIGNS
§ 154.060 PERMITTED SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   Permitted signs by zoning district shall be as provided in the following
table. Numbers listed in the table refer to the notes following the table.
Signs A1 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 F1 H1 B1 B2 B3 I-1 I-2
Signs                A1 R-1  R-2  R-3    R-4  F1 H1   B1 B2 B3 I-1 I-2
Digital Display         1(e) 1(e) 1(e)   1(e)    1(e) 1  1
Canopy                                                2  2  2  2   2
Billboard            3                                   3  3  3   3
Bulletin Board       4  5    5    5      5       6    6  6  6  6   6
Flashing (all zones)
Freestanding         7  7f   7f   7f, 7g 7f      7    7  8  7  8   8
I-80 Highrise                                            18    18
 
Signs A1 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 F1 H1 B1 B2 B3 I-1 I-2
Signs          A1 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 F1  H1 B1 B2 B3 I-1 I-2
Illuminated                           9  9  9  9  9   9
Non-conforming 10 10  10  10  10  10     10 10 10 10  10
Painted        11                     11 11 11 11 11  11
Portable                              -  12 12 12 12  12
Projecting     13                     13 13 13 13 13  13
Roof                                  -           14  14
Temporary      15 15  15  15  15  15  15 15 15 15 15  15
Wall           16 16f 16f 16f 16f 16f 16 16 16 16 16  16
Off-premises   17                        17 17    17  17
 
Note 1 (Digital Display)
(a) Shall not be located off the site for which it advertises.
(b) Maximum surface area 150 square feet.
(c) Maximum height 35 feet.
(d) Maximum 1 per site.
(e) Church and schools located in residential zoning districts; 32 square feet,
maximum 15 feet, height with dimming features, and 50% light intensity from 10:
00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m
Note 2 (Canopy)
(a) Maximum area 5 square feet.
(b) Maximum height 12 feet above grade.
(c) Minimum height 7 feet 6 inches above grade.
(d) Maximum 1 per building entrance.
(e) Minimum 10 feet from adjacent sign or 5 feet 6 inches from adjacent
property.
(f) Maximum dimensions one by 5 feet.
(g) In B-3 sign can be placed over right-of-way.
Note 3 (Billboard)
(a) Maximum of 300 square feet per side.
(b) No longer than 3 times the height.
(c) No closer than 1,300 feet to any other billboard.
(d) Setbacks as required for principal structure in Chapter 156.
(e) No closer than 100 feet to an intersection of any other street or roadway,
except in case of a 1-way street, where the Code Enforcement Officer shall
determine the minimum distance from an intersection.
(f) Billboards are allowed in the designated districts if a conditional use
permit is approved.
(g) Existing billboards may be replaced on the same site within 75 feet of the
original location.
(h) A land owner’s lease agreement must accompany sign application for
billboards.
(i) Billboards can be of digital or electronic in nature, but can not be
flashing.
Note 4 (Bulletin Board)
(a) Non-residential use and non-agricultural uses only.
(b) Maximum area 32 square feet.
(c) Maximum height 8 feet.
(d) Maximum 1 per each street frontage.
Note 5 (Bulletin Board)
(a) Non-residential use and multiple-family uses only.
(b) Maximum area 32 square feet.
(c) Maximum height 8 feet.
(d) Maximum 1 per each street frontage.
(e) Illumination of the signs shall be in a manner approved by the Building
Inspector.
 
 
Note 6 (Bulletin Board)
(a) Maximum 32 square feet.
(b) Maximum height 8 feet.
(c) Maximum 1 per street frontage.
 Note 7 (Freestanding)
(a) Maximum height 35 feet.
(b) Must be on site it advertises.
(c) Maximum sign surface 150 square feet and includes all types of signs
(d) Maximum of 1 per street frontage.
(e) Maximum of 2 signs per site except shopping centers of 3 acres or more may add
as many additional signs as necessary to specify the names of firms within the
complex.
(f) Churches, schools and civic organizations may have 1 freestanding sign.
(g) Any approved conditional use listed in an R-3 may have 1 freestanding sign
with a maximum surface area of 20 square feet and height not to exceed 15 feet (R-
3 illumination according to Note 9(b).
Note 8 (Freestanding)
(a) Within 1 mile of the centerline of Interstate Highway 80:
   1. One primary sign only may be a maximum height of 100 feet.
   2. Maximum sign surface of 300 square feet.
   3. A secondary sign may be constructed to a maximum height of 35 feet with a
maximum surface of 150 square feet which includes all types of signs. Primary and
secondary signs may be constructed on the same structure.
    4. Additional signs for the purpose of internal traffic circulation are
allowed to a maximum height of 6 feet and a maximum surface area of 10 square
feet.
(b) For areas further than 1 mile from the centerline of Interstate Highway 80,
see Note 7 of this section.
(c) Additional signs can be placed on the site under the following condition: The
site has to be larger than 9 acres. For every additional 3 acres, an additional
sign can be constructed meeting the requirements of the secondary sign. See Note 8
(a)3.
Note 9 (Illuminated)
(a) Are permitted provided that the light shall be so shaded, shielded or directed
that the light shall not adversely affect surrounding premises or affect safe
vision on public or private roadways, highways or parkway areas.
(b) Light shall not shine or reflect on or into residential structures.
Note 10 (Non-conforming)
(a) The lawful use of a sign existing at the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived may be continued, although such use does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, provided use of the sign is not subject to
removal under the Beautification Act, upon payment of compensation.
(b) Rebuilding, enlargement, relocation, extension, replacement or reconstruction
of a non- conforming sign is not permitted unless the sign is brought into
conformance with this chapter.
(c) If the use of a non-conforming sign is discontinued for a period of 12 months,
the use of the sign shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the zoning
district in which it is located.
(d) A non-conforming sign that is destroyed or damaged more than 50% of the
surface area of the sign, due to natural causes or vandalism may not be
reconstructed except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(e) For every non-conforming use of building or land, one wall sign of not over 20
square feet for identification purposes only will be permitted.
Note 11 (Painted)
(a) All painted signs shall refer to the business, service or major products of
the premises whereon the sign is located.
(b) Painted signs shall not cover more than 45% of the surface of that side of the
building, wall, roof or structure whereon it is painted.
Note 12 (Portable) EXEMPT
(a) Must be on site for which they are advertising.
(b) Maximum surface area of 32 square feet.
(c) Maximum height of 6 feet from ground level.
(d) Maximum of 1 per street frontage.
(e) No limitation for traffic control devices.
 
 
Note 13 (Projecting)
(a) Maximum surface area 150 square feet.
(b) Bottom minimum 10 feet above ground level.
(c) Top no higher than cover of building to which it is affixed.
(d) Maximum projection of 6 feet from building or structure to which
it is affixed, unless the bottom of the sign is minimum of 15 feet
above ground level, in which case the maximum projection shall be 10
feet; however, no sign shall project further than one foot into the
right-of-way of any roadway in the state highway system.
(e) In Zone B3 signs can project over right of way, not to exceed back
of curb.
Note 14 (Roof)
(a) Must pertain to the nature of the business, service or products
within the building whereon it is located.
(b) Maximum surface area of 15% of building in square feet at ground
level.
(c) Maximum height 20 feet above surface to which it is attached.
(d) Shall not project horizontally beyond any of the walls of the
building to which it is attached.
(e) Maximum of 1 sign per structure.
(f) Minimum of 4 feet space between bottom of sign and top of
building.
(g) None allowed on buildings located within 500 feet of a residential
zone.
Note 15 (Temporary) EXEMPT
(a) Construction signs. Also, when the streets adjacent to businesses
are under construction, the businesses may post temporary off-premises
signs advertising their businesses. These signs must be approved by
the City Engineer in regard to their location and size. The approved
signs may not exceed 15 feet in height or 50 square feet in size for a
single advertiser and 100 square feet for multiple advertisers. The
signs must also be approved for safety by the Building Code
Enforcement Office. All signs must be removed within 2 weeks of the
completion of construction.
(b) Political campaign signs shall not be posted any earlier than 45
days prior to election. Political campaign signs will not have a size
limitation, provided that money is deposited with the Building
Inspection Office. The amount deposited shall be determined by the
user fee schedule. The candidate’s deposit will be forfeited if the
signs are not removed from public view within 10 days of the event for
which the sign is displayed. The deposits to be used for the purpose
of the Building Inspector collecting all such signs and destroying
them. Political campaign signs must not be placed on any city, county
or state right-of-way. The Building Inspector will remove political
signs immediately, if placed on city, county or state right- of-way.
(c) For sale or lease signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be
larger than 7 square feet for residential uses and 50 square feet for
commercial and industrial uses, with all types being limited to a
maximum of 1 per street frontage, per lot.
Directional signs to an “open house” shall not exceed 4 in number, not
measuring more than 3 square feet in area, and shall not exceed 3 feet
in height. No such sign shall be placed on any city, county, or state
right-of-way.
(d) Banners utilized for advertising can be a maximum of 64 square
feet per street frontage and must be posted on buildings or attached
to a permanent structure on site. Banners must advertise products or
services that pertain to the business on site.
Note 16 (Wall)
(a) Shall pertain to the nature of the business, service or products
within the building whereon it is located.
(b) Maximum area to be no larger than 3 square feet for every linear
foot of the side of the building to which it is affixed.
(c) May not extend beyond the top of the wall or the side of the wall.
(d) May not extend more than 15 inches beyond the surface of the wall.
(e) In the case where the sign consists entirely of raised letters or
numerals, the surface area shall be computed by creating a rectangle
using the outside dimensions of the raised surface.
(f) See Note 7 (1 wall sign per frontage)
Note 17 (Off Premise)
(a) Must meet regulations as established for the specific type of sign
but in no case is the maximum surface area to exceed 300 square feet,
and the minimum spacing from any other off-premises sign shall not be
less than 900 feet; provided, however, that the spacing restriction
shall not apply within the boundaries of any park owned and operated
by the city.
(b) May not be visible from the main travel way of Interstate Highway
80.
(c) No part of the sign may extend over any street right-of-way.
 
 
Note 18 (I-80 Highrise Sign)
(a) Maximum of 1 on-premise sign per site.
(b) Maximum sign surface area 1,300 square feet.
(c) Maximum sign height 135 feet.
(d) No more than 4 individual faces per sign.
(e) Sign must be located on lots in which any part is within 1,000
feet from the I-80 right-of-way.
(f) If highrise sign is utilized, only 1 other freestanding sign is
allowed on site consisting of a maximum sign surface area of 150
square feet for 1 business display and 100 additional square feet
per business up to 450 square feet or a total of four businesses
per sign and a maximum sign height of 35 feet.
(g) Within 1 mile of the centerline of Interstate Highway 80,
additional signs for the purpose of internal traffic circulation
are allowed to a maximum height of 6 feet and a maximum surface
area of 10 square feet.
(h) Signs must comply with state regulations.
 
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3700, § 2, 8-7-2007; Am. Ord. 3814, § 1, 5-
3-2011; Am. Ord. 3865, passed 1-15-2013)
§ 154.061 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   The following signs are exempt from application for a permit under this
chapter:
   (A)   Any flag, badge, insignia or similar device of any governmental agency
or civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, political, fraternal or similar
non-profit organization may be displayed when it is located on its own premises
or displayed along a route of any parade or in sockets along any street during
a fundraising drive;
   (B)   Any sign required by regulation or statute of the federal, state or
city government or a department, board or commission thereof may be displayed;
   (C)   Not more than 3 directional signs pertaining to the same activity and
facing the same direction of travel may be erected along a single route
approaching the activity:
      (1)   Maximum size 6 square feet in area or, if in combination with
others on 1 structure, a total combined area of 150 square feet.
      (2)   No such sign or combination of signs may exceed 20 feet in length
or height.
      (3)   Outside of the right-of-way line and within ½ mile of the
intersection leading to the activity.
   (D)   Real estate signs may be displayed as follows:
      (1)   Residential real estate signs may be displayed in accordance
herewith.
      (2)   A sign may be erected for the advertising of the prospective sale
or rental of non-residential property on which it is maintained when such sign
conforms hereto.
   (E)   A sign advertising individual rooms for rent within a roominghouse may
be displayed if it does not exceed 2 square feet of display surface and is not
closer than 10 feet to any property line and 25 feet to any street
intersection;
   (F)   A wall sign on a residence building may be displayed stating the name
and profession or occupation of the occupant therein, provided the surface area
does not exceed 2 square feet;
   (G)   Two temporary construction signs that advertise the proposed new use
of the premises or are necessary for safety may be placed on the premises or on
a temporary protective fence around a building being constructed, repaired,
altered or demolished, provided that the area of each sign does not exceed 32
square feet.
   (H)   Temporary signs attached to a door or window announcing special sales
and features may be displayed for a period of 2 weeks in advance and during
such special sales and features;
   (I)   Any sign located inside of a building may be displayed even though it
is visible out-of-doors, and those signs that advertise temporary uses within
residential districts, such as rummage sales and garage sales, may be
displayed;
   (J)   Construction signs, political campaign signs and street banners and
pennants may be displayed in accordance herewith; and
   (K)   Banners, as per Note 16(d).
   (L)   Signs erected on behalf of any government, nonprofit agency or service
organization, for the purpose of announcing its sponsors or special events when
located on its own premises. All such signs must meet the regulations of the
specific types of signs for area and height but may not be a sign prohibited by
§
154.062.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3700, § 3, 8-7-2007; Am. Ord. 3720, § 1, 2-
19-2008)
§ 154.062 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, established or maintained on a corner lot
within a triangular area bounded by the lot lines and a line connecting points
on each lot line 25 feet from the intersection of the lot lines (see clear
vision ordinance). A sign within this area not exceeding 36 inches in height as
measured from the centerline elevation of the street shall not be considered as
an obstruction to vision. In addition, sign projection or overhang into such
area shall be permitted when the bottom of the sign surface is a minimum of 7
feet above ground level as measured at the intersection of the centerlines of
the street. The restrictions set forth in this division (A) shall not apply in
B-3 zones.
   (B)   The following signs are prohibited:
      (1)   Any illuminated sign that is erected in such a location that a
traffic signal light shall be in a direct line between the sign and oncoming
traffic.
      (2)   Any sign employing a lighting or control mechanism which causes
radio, radar or television interference.
      (3)   Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be
attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of egress
or ingress or for firefighting purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any
opening required for light or ventilation.
      (4)   Flashing signs.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to display any sign which is obscene. Obscene
shall mean:
         (a)   That an average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the content of the sign taken as a whole predominantly appeals
to the prurient interest or a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion;
         (b)   The sign depicts or described in a patently offensive way sexual
conduct specifically set out in Neb. RS 28-807 to 28-829; and
         (c)   The content of the sign taken as a whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value.
      (6)   Reserved.
      (7) Unsafe signs.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3734, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 154.063 BANNERS AND FLAGS.
   No person shall over or across any public right-of-way any flag or banner on
any public holiday and no society or organization shall its flag or banner in
connection with the holding of any convention, meeting or public gathering of
the society or organization without prior consent City Council. However, no
flag or banner shall at any time extend over any public right-of-way so that it
comes within 15 feet of the surface of the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.064 REMOVAL OF SIGNS ON DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS.
   Whenever a business, industry or service using an identification sign is
discontinued, the sign shall be removed or obscured by the persons owning the
property within 30 days after the discontinuance of the business, industry or
service.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.065 REMOVAL OR RECONSTRUCTION OF UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   All signs that obstruct clear vision for a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from any street intersection or driveway; and all illuminated signs
that are erected in such a location that a traffic signal light is in a direct
line between the sign and oncoming traffic; and all signs that employ a
lighting or control mechanism which causes radio, radar or television
interference; and any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct
or be attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of
egress or ingress or for firefighting purposes or placed so as to interfere
with any opening required for light or ventilation; and all signs that are
inoperable, unsafe, dilapidated or outdated in terms of the product, use or
business the sign advertises shall within 30 days after the owner of the sign
is notified as to the violation.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.066 REMOVAL OF SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All signs, other than public signs, that are located on public property
shall be removed immediately.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.067 BACK-TO-BACK OR V-SHAPED SIGNS.
   (A)   All signs may be back-to-back or V-shaped, and each side may have a
maximum dimension not to exceed the maximum stated for each respective type
sign herein.
   (B)   Sign messages have to be the same on all sides or each face will be
considered a separate sign.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.068 SIGNS ALONG FEDERAL AID HIGHWAYS OR FEDERAL AID PROJECTS.
   No sign may be erected in violation of state law which governs federal aid
highways. Any sign placed along Federal Aid Highways or Federal Aid Projects
will require a state sign permit and/or a letter from the Nebraska Department
of Roads stating that a permit is not required.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.069 SIGNS ALONG INTERSTATE HIGHWAY 80 AND STATE HIGHWAYS.
   Any sign placed along Interstate Highway 80 or State Highways will require a
state sign permit and/or a letter from the Nebraska Department of Roads stating
that a permit is not required.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.070 SIGNS ON A CAMPUS.
   Additional signs/sizes of signs may be permitted on a campus subject to
approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007; Am. Ord. 3865, passed 1-15-2013)
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 154.085 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist
wind and seismic forces as specified in this subchapter.
   (B)   All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer
lateral forces to the foundations.
   (C)   For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be
transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such
a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.086 OVERTURNING MOMENT AND DEAD-LOAD RESISTING MOMENT.
   (A)   The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case
exceed 2/3 of the dead-load resisting moment.
   (B)   Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper
anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building.
   (C)   The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in
determining the dead-load resisting moment.
   (D)   The earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.087 WIND LOADS.
   Signs shall be constructed to withstand the following wind pressure:
 
Height (Feet) Pounds per Square Foot
Less than 30  20
30—49       25
50—100      30
 
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.088 ALLOWABLE STRESSES.
   The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings on signs shall not
exceed 25% of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.089 ANCHORAGE.
   (A)   Members supporting un-braced signs shall be so proportioned that the
bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical,
shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to
resist the specified wind acting in any direction.
   (B)   (1)   Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on
the soil and for an effective resistance to pullout amounting to a force 25%
greater than the required resistance to overturning.
      (2)   Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground
greater than that of the frost line.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.090 PORTABLE GROUND SIGNS.
   Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to the
base shall be so proportioned that the weight and size of the base will be
adequate to resist the wind pressure specified.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.091 SIGNS ATTACHED TO MASONRY, CONCRETE OR STEEL.
   Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely
fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws
of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.092 USE OF WOODEN BLOCKS, PLUGS OR ANCHORS.
   No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with
screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage for sign, except in the
case of signs attached to wood framing.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.093 SIGNS ATTACHED TO PARAPET WALLS.
   No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to or supported by an
un-braced parapet wall, unless the wall is designed in accordance with the
requirement for parapet walls specified in the most currently adopted version
of the Building Code.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.094 SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS.
   Glass sign surface shall meet the following requirements:
 
Maximum Size of Exposed Glass Panel Minimum Thickness of
Any Dimension  Area (Square Inches) Glass (Inches)       Type of Glass
(Inches)
30             500                  1/8                  Plain, plate or wired
45             700                  3/16                 Plain, plate or wired
144            3,600                1/4                  Plain, plate or wired
Over 144       Over 3,600           1/4                  Wired glass
 
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.095 CLEARANCE.
   Signs shall be located not closer than 6 feet horizontally or 12 feet
vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of
750 volts. The term OVERHEAD CONDUCTORS, as used in this section, means any
electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground,
except the conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering
of equal strength.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.096 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE ESCAPE, EXIT OR STANDPIPE.
   No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion
of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any
fire escape, exit or standpipe.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
§ 154.110 SIGN CODE TO GOVERN IN CASE OF CONFLICT.
   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall prevail in the event of any
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance of the
city heretofore enacted or in the event of any conflict between the provisions
of this chapter and any provision of Chapter 156 of this code.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be
fined.
      (1)   Upon first conviction: minimum of $200; maximum of $500.
      (2)   Upon each subsequent conviction: a minimum of $500.
   (B)   Each sign installed and each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Whenever a violation of this chapter exists, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin the violation, in the manner
provided by law.
   (C)   Whenever in any action it is established that a violation exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 3680, § 1, 3-6-2007)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title of chapter
   
155.002   Purpose and intent of chapter
   
155.003   Territorial jurisdiction
   
155.004   Approval required
   
155.005   Exemption for burial plots
   
155.006   Exemption for land divisions creating parcels over 10 acres in size
   
155.007   Definitions
   
155.008   Amendments
Pre-Plat Investigation
   
155.020   Preliminary determination; required information
   
155.021   Review by Planning Office
   
155.022   Recommendation by Planning Office
   
155.023   Approval by Planning Office
   
155.024   Disapproval by Planning Office; appeal to Planning Commission
   
155.025   Approval by Planning Commission
   
155.026   Disapproval by Planning Commission
   
155.027   Filing of application
Preliminary Plat
   
155.040   Submission to Planning Office
   
155.041   Scale and sheet size
   
155.042   Required information
   
155.043   Review by Planning Office
   
155.044   Recommendation by Planning Office
   
155.045   Approval by Planning Commission; time limit for submission of final
plat
   
155.046   Disapproval by Planning Commission
   
155.047   Filing of application; fee
Final Plat
   
155.060   Preparation; survey
   
155.061   Submission to Planning Office
   
155.062   Scale and sheet size; key map
   
155.063   Required information
   
155.064   Filing of application; fee
   
155.065   Review by Planning Office
   
155.066   Recommendation by Planning Office
   
155.067   Approval by Planning Commission; recording
   
155.068   Certification of payment of special assessments and property taxes
   
155.069   Disapproval by Planning Commission
   
155.070   Administrative subdivision defined
   
155.071   Administrative approval
   
155.072   Application for an administrative subdivision
   
155.073   Administrative action
   
155.074   Administrative certificate approval
   
155.075   Planning Commission and City Council review and action
   
155.076   Approval of administrative subdivision plat filing
Design Standards
   
155.090   Purpose; conformance with other regulations
   
155.091   Hazardous features
   
155.092   Streets
   
155.093   Lots
   
155.094   Public sites and open spaces
   
155.095   Easements
General Requirements
   
155.110   School board recommendation on plats
Required Improvements
   
155.125   Monuments
   
155.126   Subdivisions within corporate limits or abutting corporate limits
   
155.127   Subdivisions in unincorporated area
   
155.128   Specifications for improvements; supervision by city
Plans of Improvements
   
155.140   Authority to require detailed plans
   
155.141   Review by City Engineer
Performance Bonds
   
155.155   Installation of improvements
   
155.156   Acceptable performance bonds
   
155.157   Amount and period of bond
Variances
   
155.170   Generally
   
155.171   Conditions
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Regulations
of the city”.
(Prior Code, § 48-1)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly development of the
city and its 2-mile zone by insuring, through prescribed rules and standards,
functional arrangements of street layouts, open spaces, adequate community
facilities and utilities; to provide for general conditions favorable for the
health, safety and convenience of the community; and to provide for the
citizens by promoting new ideas and effective, efficient and attractive
community design.
(Prior Code, § 48-2)
§ 155.003 TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   All ordinances, rules or regulations of the Mayor and Council pertaining to
subdivisions, zoning, use, area and height of structures, variances, appeals to
the Board of Adjustment, and television antennas presently in force or
hereafter adopted, are hereby extended and made applicable to the area 2 miles
beyond and adjacent to the corporate limits of the city, as such area now
exists or is hereafter altered or changed.
(Prior Code, § 48-3)
§ 155.004 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No subdivision of land shall be permitted within the city or within its
planning area until such time as the subdivision plat is submitted to the
Planning Commission for recommendation and until the subdivision is approved by
the City Council, except that administrative subdivisions shall be approved by
the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 48-4)
§ 155.005 EXEMPTION FOR BURIAL PLOTS.
   This chapter shall not apply to subdivision of burial lots in cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 48-5)
§ 155.006 EXEMPTION FOR LAND DIVISIONS CREATING PARCELS OVER TEN ACRES IN SIZE.
   This chapter shall not apply to a division of land when the smallest parcel
created is more than 10 acres in size.
(Prior Code, § 48-6)
§ 155.007 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular access to
the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   BLOCK. A tract or parcel of land bounded by public streets or land, streams,
railroads, unplatted lands or a combination thereof.
   BUILDING LINE. A line established on a plat as a restrictive covenant,
beyond which no building may be placed. The BUILDING LINES need not correspond
to the front, side or rear yard requirement established in Chapter 156 of this
code, and, where they do not, the most restrictive requirement will control.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having 1 end connecting with a public right-of-way and
being terminated at its other end by a vehicular turnaround.
   DECORATIVE MASONRY WALL. A wall not less than 5 feet or more than 8 feet in
height and not less than 8 inches in thickness.
   DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT. A lot having a frontage on 2 non-intersecting streets,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
   EASEMENT. A right to use a parcel of land granted to the general public, a
utility or a corporation by the property owner.
   FRONTAGE STREET. Minor streets which are parallel to or adjacent to major
streets or highways and provide access to the abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
   LOT. A portion of a platted subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development.
   LOT OF RECORD. A tract of land described as an integral portion of a
subdivision plat which is properly recorded.
   PARCEL. A tract of land described by metes and bounds or any other method
other than a subdivision plat.
   PARCEL OF RECORD. A tract of land described by metes and bounds or any other
method other than a subdivision plat and which is duly approved and recorded
according to the provisions of this chapter.
   PLANTING SCREEN EASEMENT. A planting strip composed of deciduous or
evergreen trees spaced not more than 40 feet apart and not less than 1 row of
shrubs spaced not more than 5 feet apart and which are at least 5 feet or more
in height after 2 full growing seasons.
   PLAT. A map on which the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision is presented
to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval, and which he or she
intends, in final form, to record.
   REPLAT. The act of changing a recorded plat or subdivision by consolidating,
reconfiguring or subdividing 1 or more lots, blocks, parcels, or tracts of
land.
   STREET. A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a primary
means of access. Primary thoroughfares, major thoroughfares, collector streets
and residential streets are so designated by the major thoroughfare plan in the
comprehensive plan for the city.
   STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing or exposed surface of the street right-of-way
used by vehicular traffic. The pavement width is measured from the back of the
curb on 1 side to the curb on the other side.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area measured between property lines, dedicated to
and accepted for public use and providing access to abutting properties.
   SUBDIVIDER. A natural person, firm, partnership, association or any other
group who submits a proposed subdivision for approval.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot or parcel of land into 2 or more lots or
parcels, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
or building development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate
to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST. An administrative list of review statements and
questions that must be completed prior to City Council approval of the final
plat.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or manmade depression in which a current of surface
runoff water flows following precipitation.
(Prior Code, § 48-7) (Am. Ord. 3741, passed 10-7-2008)
§ 155.008 AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council may amend this chapter from time to time; provided,
however, that the amendments shall not become effective until a public hearing
and a recommendation from the Planning Commission is received and a public
hearing by the City Council has been held.
(Prior Code, § 48-261)
PRE-PLAT INVESTIGATION
§ 155.020 PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Before filing a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with
the Planning Office for advice regarding general requirements affecting the
proposed development. If a pre-plat plan is not required the developer may
begin with the requirements hereof.
   (B)   If it is the opinion of the Planning Administrator that a pre-plat
investigation should be completed, the following shall be submitted to the
Planning Office by the subdivider:
      (1)   A general sketch of the property, to scale, showing:
         (a)   General lot layout;
         (b)   Existing and proposed street widths, locations and names;
         (c)   General location, existing and proposed, of sewer lines and
water lines. Developments off of city sewer and water service shall include a
written explanation of the proposal to satisfy these utility needs;
         (d)   General location of utility easements and types of utilities to
be included; and
         (e)   General location of any open space and an explanation of the
type of facilities that will be provided.
      (2)   Written description of the type of housing, commercial, industrial
or public uses to be included in the subdivision.
      (3)   An explanation of what the general character of the area will be
when it is developed and how it will relate to adjacent surrounding areas.
      (4)   If it is the intent to use deed restrictions or any other method of
controlling the character or quality of the area, a brief explanation of what
such deed restrictions or other method might consist of.
(Prior Code, § 48-31)
§ 155.021 REVIEW BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   The Planning Office shall review the proposed plan submitted pursuant to
this chapter within 10 days with various appropriate city departments, as well
as other public officials such as school district officials, and county
officials where the development is located outside the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 48-32)
§ 155.022 RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   After review of the proposed plan as provided in this subchapter, the
Planning Office shall develop a recommendation on the proposed plan, and
forward the recommendation and the proposed plan to the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 48-33)
§ 155.023 APPROVAL BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   If the pre-plat plan is approved by the Planning Office, the subdivider then
may complete a preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 48-34)
§ 155.024 DISAPPROVAL BY PLANNING OFFICE; APPEAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If the pre-plat plan is denied by the Planning Office, the subdivider may
appeal for permission to proceed with the preliminary plat to the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 48-35)
§ 155.025 APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If, on appeal, the Planning Commission approves of the pre-plat plan, the
subdivider then may complete a preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 48-36)
§ 155.026 DISAPPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If, on appeal, the Planning Commission does not approve of the pre-plat
plan, the plan shall be revised, incorporating the recommendations of the
Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 48-37)
§ 155.027 FILING OF APPLICATION.
   The pre-plat procedure does not require a fee, but does require a formal
application to be completed and filed with the Planning Office.
(Prior Code, § 48-38)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 155.040 SUBMISSION TO PLANNING OFFICE.
   The owner of a proposed subdivision shall, at his or her expense, submit 7
prints of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, a completed
application form for the subdivision plan, and preliminary fees to the city’s
Planning Office 18 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which time
approval of the subdivision is asked.
(Prior Code, § 48-61)
§ 155.041 SCALE AND SHEET SIZE.
   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch on
sheets no larger than 24 by 36 inches.
(Prior Code, § 48-62)
§ 155.042 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   The preliminary plat of a subdivision shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
   (A)   Name of addition;
   (B)   Legal description and boundary survey description;
   (C)   North arrow, scale of drawing and date;
   (D)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner and engineer and the
planner or land surveyor;
   (E)   Location, width and names of existing and proposed streets, railroads
and other public easements or properties in the proposed plat;
   (F)   Centerline profile of all proposed streets and alleys drawn to a scale
of 1 inch equals 2 feet vertically and 1 inch equals 50 feet horizontally;
   (G)   Centerline profile of existing streets to the extent that it will be
clearly demonstrated how the proposed streets and alleys will connect with
existing streets and alleys;
   (H)   Location and size of existing utilities (sewer lines, water lines,
fire hydrants, gas lines, electric distribution lines and the like) within 200
feet of the proposed subdivision boundary or within the boundary may be
required by the Planning Administrator;
   (I)   Design statement for proposed water supply and distribution;
   (J)   Design statement and location for proposed storm and sanitary sewer
facilities or private sewer facilities;
   (K)   Proposed installation of other utilities;
   (L)   Proposed overall grading and drainage considerations;
   (M)   Existing ground topography as shown by contours of 1 foot intervals or
elevations at 100 feet center to center if required by the City Engineer;
   (N)   Existing watercourses or drainage courses, bridges and wooded areas;
   (O)   Existing lot lines and buildings in and abutting the plat and within
200 feet of the plat;
   (P)   Location and size of proposed school, park, playground and other
quasi-public areas;
   (Q)   Lot layout, tentative block, lot numbers, and lot dimensions; and
   (R)   Water elevations of adjoining lakes, rivers and streams at date of
survey and their approximate high and low water elevations, if required by the
City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 48-63)
§ 155.043 REVIEW BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   The Planning Office shall review the preliminary plat with various
appropriate city departments, as well as other public officials such as school
district officials, and county officials where the development is located
outside the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 48-64) (Am. Ord. 3756, passed 4-7-2009)
§ 155.044 RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   After review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Office shall develop a
recommendation, based on comments from city departments, and forward the
recommendation and the preliminary plat to the Planning Commission for its
consideration at a regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 48-65)
§ 155.045 APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION; TIME LIMIT FOR SUBMISSION OF FINAL
PLAT.
   (A)   If the Planning Commission approves of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider then may complete a final plat.
   (B)   The final plat must be submitted to the Planning Commission within 12
months from the date the preliminary plat was approved.
   (C)   If more than 12 months elapse after approval of the preliminary plat,
the approval shall be null and void and a new preliminary plat must be filed.
(Prior Code, § 48-66)
§ 155.046 DISAPPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If the Planning Commission does not approve of the preliminary plat, the
plat should be revised, incorporating the recommendations of the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 48-67)
§ 155.047 FILING OF APPLICATION; FEE.
   Before any action shall be taken by the city on a preliminary plat, a person
seeking to file the preliminary plat shall deposit with the City Clerk the, fee
established by resolution of the City Council and a formal application to be
completed and filed with the Planning Office.
(Prior Code, § 48-68) (Ord. 3179, § 3, 8-4-1998)
FINAL PLAT
§ 155.060 PREPARATION; SURVEY.
   After approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the
subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Planning Office a final plat,
prepared by a land surveyor, land planner or engineer. The surveying must be
completed by a registered land surveyor.
(Prior Code, § 48-91)
§ 155.061 SUBMISSION TO PLANNING OFFICE.
   The owner of the proposed subdivision shall, at his or her expense, submit 7
prints of a final plat of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Office
approximately 18 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which approval
of the subdivision is asked.
(Prior Code, § 48-92)
§ 155.062 SCALE AND SHEET SIZE; KEY MAP.
   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to the
inch on sheets not larger than 24 by 36 inches. When more than 1 sheet is used
on the final plat, a key map showing the entire subdivision at a smaller scale
with block numbers and street names shall be shown on 1 of the sheets, or a
separate sheet of the same size.
(Prior Code, § 48-93)
§ 155.063 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall show the following
information:
   (A)   Date, scale and north point;
   (B)   Subdivision name and all street names;
   (C)   Exact location, widths and names of all existing platted or dedicated
streets, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, watercourses,
drainage ditches, permanent buildings and structures within the boundaries of
the land to be subdivided;
   (D)   Water elevations of adjoining lakes, rivers and streams at the date of
the survey and their high and low water elevations;
   (E)   Exact location and width of all streets, angle of intersection, length
of arcs, radii, point of curvature and tangent bearings;
   (F)   Exact location and width of all easements, whether public or private,
and a statement of easement rights;
   (G)   Exact length and bearings of the exterior boundaries of the land being
subdivided;
   (H)   Exact dimensions of all lots;
   (I)   Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents;
   (J)   Exact location and area of all land to be dedicated for public use or
reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property owners, with the
purpose indicated thereon. All lands dedicated for public use, other than
streets, shall be marked “Dedicated to the Public”;
   (K)   Deed restrictions, if any, including the boundaries of each type of
restriction;
   (L)   Accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments;
   (M)   A certificate of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat that
the plat, as presented, fully complies with the requirements of this chapter
and the subdivision laws of the state relative to the surveying, dividing and
mapping of land; that the plat is a correct representation of all boundaries of
the land surveyed; that the plat represents a survey made by him or her; and
that all monuments indicated thereon exist and their location, size and
material are correctly shown;
   (N)   A certificate signed by the City Engineer that all improvements
required by this chapter have been installed to city specifications and plans
for private sewer and water systems have been approved by the appropriate
authorities;
   (O)   A certificate by the owner dedicating to the public for full public
use all streets and street rights-of-way and other lands designated as
dedicated for the public’s use, and the granting of utility easements as shown
on the plat;
   (P)   A certificate of approval by the city’s Planning Commission that will
be signed by the Chairperson of the city’s Planning Commission and a
certificate of approval by the Mayor and City Council that will be signed by
the City Clerk;
   (Q)   A certificate that the County Surveyor has reviewed and approved the
plat; and
   (R)   A title report by an abstract or a title insurance company, or an
attorney’s opinion of title, showing the name of the owner of the land, all
persons who have an interest in, or an encumbrance on the plat, and all
easements. The consent of all such persons shall be shown on the plat.
(Prior Code, § 48-94) (Ord. 3179, § 1, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3386, § 1, 9-4-2001)
§ 155.064 FILING OF APPLICATION; FEE.
   Before any action shall be taken on a final plat, the applicant shall
deposit with the City Clerk a fee established by resolution of the City Council
for filing of final plats. The formal application submitted with the
preliminary plat shall be used for the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 48-95) (Ord. 3179, § 4, 8-4-1998)
§ 155.065 REVIEW BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   The Planning Office shall review the final plat with various appropriate
city departments, as well as other public officials such as school district
officials, and county officials where the development is located outside the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 48-96)
§ 155.066 RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING OFFICE.
   After review of the final plat, the Planning Office shall develop a
recommendation, and forward the recommendation and the final plat to the
Planning Commission for its consideration at a regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 48-97)
§ 155.067 APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION; RECORDING.
   If the city’s Planning Commission approves the final plat, the Planning
Office shall forward the Planning Commission’s recommendation and the final
subdivision plat to the City Council for its consideration. After approval by
the City Council, the final subdivision plat, with all required endorsements,
must be submitted to the city’s Planning Administrator for filing with the
county’s Register of Deeds and all required improvements must be installed to
the city specifications or submit a certified check or surety bond to cover
completion of all improvements. Failure to submit the subdivision plat and
install the improvements within 12 months from the date of approval by the City
Council will cause the subdivision approval to be void, and necessitate the
applicant to resubmit all plans and fees for reconsideration and approval,
except that prior to the 12-month filing date the city’s Planning Administrator
may, if improvements are being installed in accordance with the subdivision
regulations, grant an additional 12-month extension.
(Prior Code, § 48-98) (Ord. 3639, § 1, 12-1-2005)
§ 155.068 CERTIFICATION OF PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AND PROPERTY TAXES.
   Prior to the filing of any final plat with the Register of Deeds at the
County Courthouse, the owner of the property that has been subdivided must
submit a statement certified by the appropriate county officer to the Planning
Office that all special assessments against the property are paid in full and
all property taxes that are due and payable against such property are paid in
full.
(Prior Code, § 48-99)
§ 155.069 DISAPPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If the Planning Commission does not approve the final plat, the plat shall
be revised, incorporating the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 48-100)
§ 155.070 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION DEFINED.
   (A)   The administrative subdivision procedure shall be available to make
minor adjustments to previously platted lots. It shall not be used in any
manner that substitutes for or circumvents compliance with subdivision laws or
regulations. An administrative subdivision may consist of dividing 1 lot into 2
or more parts, combining 2 or more lots (or parts of lots) into 1 parcel, or a
combination thereof. Transactions or conveyances classified as administrative
subdivision are hereby deemed not to constitute “subdivision development”.
   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the subdivider may apply for
subdivision approval as an administrative subdivision if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The administrative subdivision does not contain more than 3 lots,
except as provided for in division (B)(6) below;
      (2)   The administrative subdivision fronts on an existing city street,
does not involve any new street, road or easement, or the extension of
municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements;
      (3)   The administrative subdivision would not require the vacation or
dedication of any easements;
      (4)   The administrative subdivision does not adversely affect the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property;
      (5)   The administrative subdivision is not in conflict with any
provisions of the comprehensive plan, zoning regulations or these regulations;
and
      (6)   The administrative subdivision may contain more than 3 lots with
the agreement of the City Planner, City Engineer and City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 48-101) (Ord. 3648, § 1, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.071 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.
   (A)   The City Administrator or designee shall have the right to approve
administrative subdivision plats as defined herein at §
155.070.
   (B)   The City Administrator or designee may approve an administrative
subdivision plat if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   In the opinion of the City Planner, City Engineer and City
Administrator, the administrative subdivision would not require the dedication
of additional public right-of-way;
      (2)   The proposed subdivision has not been previously denied by the City
Council;
      (3)   A separate site plan has been prepared under supervision of, and
certified by, a registered State of Nebraska Land Surveyor. The site plan shall
be a survey of the lots to be subdivided and abutting lots. It shall show all
lots, blocks, streets, alleys, structures, building setbacks, city sanitary
sewer, city water, street paving, easements, location map, north arrow, scale,
date, legal description and the like in addition to the administrative
subdivision plat;
      (4)   The administrative subdivision plat shall show all lots, blocks,
streets, alleys, easements, certificates, location map, north arrow, scale,
date, legal description and the like.
(Prior Code, § 48-102) (Ord. 3648, § 2, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.072 APPLICATION FOR AN ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   An application for approval of an administrative subdivision shall be
submitted to the Planning Department.
   (B)   The following shall be submitted with the application:
      (1)   Application, copy of deed, title report, site plan, administrative
subdivision plat and fees. Fees will be based on city fee schedule;
      (2)   Five prints of the site survey plat and 1 print of the
administrative subdivision plat. After city departments review, changes shall
be shown on the plats and 1 corrected site survey and one administrative
subdivision will need to be resubmitted; and
      (3)   One final plat after all changes have been made shall be submitted
for filing.
(Prior Code, § 48-103) (Ord. 3648, § 3, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.073 ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.
   The City Administrator or designee shall approve or disapprove the plat. In
the event of disapproval, the City Planner shall give the applicant a written
statement of reasons for the disapproval.
(Prior Code, § 48-104) (Ord. 3648, § 4, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.074 ADMINISTRATIVE CERTIFICATE APPROVAL.
   (A)   Certificates 1 through 3, described below, may be placed on a separate
document and signed by the appropriate individuals and attached to the final
plat for filing or placed on the final plat. Certificates 4 through 6 shall be
placed on the final plat and signed by the appropriate individuals.
   (B)   They are as follows:
      (1)   A certificate signed by the Lincoln County Treasurer that all
property taxes and special assessments on the property are paid in full;
      (2)   Certificate signed and acknowledged by all property owners having
any record title, or other interest in the land subdivided and consenting to
the preparation and recording of the plat;
      (3)   Acknowledgment of a notary public, acknowledging the signatures of
all owners;
      (4)   Certificate signed by the registered State of Nebraska Land
Surveyor preparing the administrative subdivision that the plat as presented
complies with the requirements of the administrative subdivisions;
      (5)   Certificate signed by the City Administrator or designee certifying
that the administrative subdivision has been reviewed by the City Administrator
or designee and is in compliance with the city subdivision regulations; and
      (6)   Certificate signed by the Register of Deeds shall be placed on the
final plat or shall be stamped at the Deeds’s office.
(Prior Code, § 48-105) (Ord. 3648, § 5, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.075 PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION.
   If the plat does not qualify for administrative approval or has been
disapproved by the City Administrator or designee, the application may be
processed by the city as a regular subdivision plat and may be approved or
denied by the city’s Planning Commission and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 48-106) (Ord. 3648, § 6, 5-2-2006)
§ 155.076 APPROVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION PLAT FILING.
   The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Department after all
approvals. The planning staff will have all certificates signed by the
appropriate individuals and taken to the register of deeds for filing, or may
require the applicant to obtain any or all signatures.
(Prior Code, § 48-107) (Ord. 3648, § 7, 5-2-2006)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.090 PURPOSE; CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The subdivision design standards contained in this chapter are intended to
ensure that the style, character and form of new developments will conform to
minimum requirements promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the
public. In addition to this chapter and to ensure that future developments are
consistent with the growth objectives and goals of the community, subdivisions
shall conform to the comprehensive development plan of the city or any part of
the
Chapter 156, pertaining to zoning or any other applicable ordinance of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 48-121)
§ 155.091 HAZARDOUS FEATURES.
   Land within the proposed subdivision which the Planning Commission finds to
be unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding, bad drainage, topographic
features, soil conditions or other features likely to be harmful to the safety,
welfare or general health of any of the residents of the community shall not be
subdivided until the objectionable features have been eliminated or until
adequate safeguards against the hazards are provided.
(Prior Code, § 48-122)
§ 155.092 STREETS.
   The following standards shall apply to all streets in a subdivision:
   (A)   All street grades shall be established or approved by the City
Engineer to ensure continuous drainage from one area to another.
   (B)   The minimum acceptable street right-of-way shall be 80 feet for
arterial streets, 66 feet for collector streets, 60 feet for local streets, 50
feet for cul-de-sac streets and 40 feet for frontage streets.
   (C)   Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than 600 feet in length, measured
from the centerline of the intersection of the cross street to the centerline
of the cul-de-sac, except where the Planning Commission has approved additional
length due to property limitations, with a minimum 55-foot turnaround radius
shall be provided at the closed end with either an off-set or symmetric
circular turnaround having an outside pavement diameter of at least 100 feet.
All lots that are adjacent to the radius of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum
40-foot front lot line measured along the arc of the street right-of-way.
   (D)   The arrangement of major streets shall conform to the comprehensive
plan as nearly as possible.
   (E)   Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to or contains an existing
major or primary thoroughfare, provision shall be made for a frontage road
approximately parallel and adjacent to the right-of-way line, or lots shall
back up to the major street and have access only to the local street.
   (F)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter, or where it is found to be practical to require
the dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided.
   (G)   Under normal conditions streets shall be laid out so as to intersect
as nearly as possible at right angles. More than 4 approaches to any
intersection shall be prohibited.
   (H)   Street jogs at intersections with centerline offsets of less than 150
feet shall be prohibited.
   (I)   There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every
subdivided lot shall be served from a publicly-dedicated street.
   (J)   Where a proposed subdivision fronts on a state or federal highway or a
major thoroughfare, intersections onto the highway or thoroughfare shall be
determined by the City Engineer and State of Nebraska.
   (K)   Where a proposed subdivision fronts on an arterial, intersections onto
the arterial shall be determined by the City Engineer.
   (L)   Curb cuts shall be prohibited within 25 feet of an intersection corner
property line.
   (M)   In general, intersection streets determining block lengths shall be
provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet
existing or future streets. When no existing plats control, the minimum block
length shall be 600 feet.
   (N)   Local streets shall be designed to benefit from the topography, to
discourage through traffic and to provide the minimum amount of streets
necessary for safe access to adjacent properties. The reasonable and
intelligent use of curvilinear and cul-de-sac streets is encouraged wherever
possible.
   (O)   Alleys may be required in all commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where the
commercial or industrial district is designed as a comprehensive unit and
adequate provision for loading space is a part of the overall development plan.
(Prior Code, § 48-123) (Ord. 3455, § 6, 3-4-2003)
§ 155.093 LOTS.
   The following standards shall apply to all lots in a subdivision.
   (A)   Lot dimensions and lot area shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (B)   All rectangular lots and all other lots, so far as practical, shall
have the side lot lines at right angles to the street on which the lot faces.
   (C)   Double-frontage lots shall be avoided when possible, except where they
back up to a major street.
   (D)   The depth of a lot shall be no more than 3 times the width of the lot
at the building line.
   (E)   Every lot shall have access to a street that has been dedicated to the
public in accordance with the right-of-way requirement as provided by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 48-124) (Am. Ord. 3735, passed 9-2-2008)
§ 155.094 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   The following standards shall apply to all public sites and open spaces in a
subdivision.
   (A)   Suitable sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public
requirements shall be carefully considered and indicated on the preliminary
plan, so that they can be compared with the comprehensive plan and it can be
determined which of the sites, if any, should be indicated on the final plat.
   (B)   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use, as
included in the city’s comprehensive plan, is located in whole or in part in a
proposed subdivision, and the park, playground, school or other public use is
not dedicated for public use to the city, the Planning Commission shall require
the subdivider to reserve the sites that are sufficient and in compliance with
the comprehensive plan as determined by the Planning Commission. Reservation of
land for public acquisition shall be for a period not to exceed 1 year from the
date the plat is officially recorded.
(Prior Code, § 48-125)
§ 155.095 EASEMENTS.
   The following standards shall apply to all easements in a subdivision.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse, unless
an alternate drainage plan is approved by the City Engineer. Parallel streets
or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
   (C)   In residential type subdivisions a planting screen easement of at
least 10 feet or a decorative masonry wall may be required in the following
situations: along the line of single- or 2-family lots abutting a commercial or
industrial zone, and across which there shall be no right of access other than
walkways and that which is required by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   In commercial type subdivisions a planting screen easement of at least
10 feet or a decorative masonry wall may be required along property lines
abutting single- or 2-family lots or an industrial zone.
   (E)   In industrial type subdivisions a planting screen easement of at least
10 feet or a decorative masonry wall may be required along property lines
abutting a residential or commercial zone.
(Prior Code, § 48-126)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.110 SCHOOL BOARD RECOMMENDATION ON PLATS.
   Prior to any approval on the preliminary or final plats by the Planning
Commission or City Council, a copy of each preliminary or final plat shall be
submitted to the school district in which the real estate is located for their
consideration and recommendations. The district shall be sent a certificate of
receipt, which shall be returned with no objections or comments in the form of
a recommendation. This recommendation shall be advisory. Failure of the school
district to return a certificate of receipt shall be construed as an approval
of the proposal submitted.
(Prior Code, § 48-151)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.125 MONUMENTS.
   In all subdivisions, monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points and points of curves and at intermediate points as required by the
engineer. The monuments shall be of a material, size and length as required by
the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 48-171)
§ 155.126 SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS OR ABUTTING CORPORATE LIMITS.
   All subdivisions that are within the corporate limits of the city or which
abut the corporate limits or abut a subdivision which is the subject of an
annexation ordinance shall be improved with street grading, a stormwater
drainage system, a public water system, a public sanitary sewer system and an
underground electrical system, except underground electrical systems located in
areas zoned I-1 and 1-2 shall not be required, all interior streets within any
subdivision must be paved, and the developer must petition for the creation of
paving districts for all exterior streets.
(Prior Code, § 48-172)
§ 155.127 SUBDIVISIONS IN UNINCORPORATED AREA.
   All subdivisions that are within the unincorporated area two miles beyond
the city’s corporate boundaries shall be improved with street grading, a
stormwater drainage system, approved water systems, approved sanitary sewer
systems, and underground electrical systems, except underground electrical
systems in areas zoned I-1 and 1-2 shall not be required. All interior streets
within any subdivision must be paved. All exterior streets that are dedicated
for public use and benefit shall be paved except for those exterior streets
existing and improved prior to the subject subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 48-173)
§ 155.128 SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS; SUPERVISION BY CITY.
   All required improvements shall be in accordance with the city’s
specifications and placed under the supervision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 48-174)
PLANS OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.140 AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE DETAILED PLANS.
   In reference to the streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water system or
other drainage improvements in a subdivision, the City Engineer shall call for
any detailed plans that he feels are needed.
(Prior Code, § 48-201)
§ 155.141 REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER.
   Any detailed plans that are called for pursuant to this subchapter shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to the recording of the final
plat with the Register of Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 48-202)
PERFORMANCE BONDS
§ 155.155 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   In the interest of good development and to protect the taxpayers and future
purchasers of residential, commercial and industrial properties, it shall be
the policy of the City Council to require that all required improvements be
improved to the degree stated in this chapter prior to acceptance and recording
of the final plat and the building of structures thereon.
(Prior Code, § 48-221)
§ 155.156 ACCEPTABLE PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The City Council may accept a final plat for recording where the owner of
the platted subdivision furnishes a certified check or surety bond acceptable
to the City Council in sufficient amount to cover the completion of all work to
be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 48-222)
§ 155.157 AMOUNT AND PERIOD OF BOND.
   The amount of the certified check or surety bond acceptable under this
subchapter shall be determined by the City Engineer, and the stipulated period
covered by the bond shall in general be for a period of 1 year. In no case,
however, shall the period of performance bonds exceed 2 years.
(Prior Code, § 48-223)
VARIANCES
§ 155.170 GENERALLY.
   Applications for variances to this chapter shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for recommendation. Upon receipt of a recommendation from
the Planning Commission, the City Council shall either grant or deny the
application for variance.
(Prior Code, § 48-241)
§ 155.171 CONDITIONS.
   The City Council, in passing on applications for variances to this chapter,
will not approve such variance unless it finds that:
   (A)   Strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardship;
   (B)   The hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same
zoning district and the same vicinity;
   (C)   The authorization of the variance will not be a substantial detriment
to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by
the granting of the variance;
   (D)   The granting of the variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and
exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of
convenience, profit or caprice; and
   (E)   The condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended
use of the property is not of so general or reoccurring a nature as to make
reasonably practicable the formulation of a general amendment to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 48-242)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500 per violation. The sale of each and every lot or parcel sold in
violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 48-262)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Purpose and scope of chapter
   
156.002   Title of chapter
   
156.003   Definitions
Districts Generally
   
156.020   Districts enumerated
   
156.021   Districts; boundaries and official zoning map
   
156.022   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries on the official
zoning map
   
156.023   Vacated public ways
   
156.024   Annexed territory
   
156.025   Compliance with district regulations; variances
   
156.026   Moving and relocating buildings
   
156.027   Rear yard setbacks reduction
   
156.028   Side yard setbacks reduction
A-1 Transitional Agricultural District
   
156.040   Generally
   
156.041   Permitted uses
   
156.042   Conditional uses
   
156.043   Accessory uses
   
156.044   Setback, area and height regulations
   
156.045   Parking regulations
R-L Suburban Residential District
   
156.060   Intent
   
156.061   Permitted uses
   
156.062   Conditional uses
   
156.063   Temporary uses
   
156.064   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.065   Height and lot requirements
R-1 Dwelling District
   
156.080   Intent
   
156.081   Permitted uses
   
156.082   Conditional uses
   
156.083   Temporary uses
   
156.084   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.085   Height and lot requirements
R-2 Dwelling District
   
156.100   Intent
   
156.101   Permitted uses
   
156.102   Conditional uses
   
156.103   Temporary uses
   
156.104   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.105   Height and lot requirements
R-3 Dwelling District
   
156.120   Intent
   
156.121   Permitted uses
   
156.122   Conditional uses
   
156.123   Temporary uses
   
156.124   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.125   Height and lot requirements
R-M Mobile Home Park District
   
156.140   Intent
   
156.141   Permitted uses
   
156.142   Temporary uses
   
156.143   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.144   Special design criteria for R-M Mobile Home Park
   
156.145   Height and lot requirements
Permitted, Conditional, Temporary and Accessory Use Table
   
156.150   Residential Use Table
F-1 Floodplain District
   
156.160   Designation
   
156.161   Permitted uses; use regulations
   
156.162   Permitted conditional uses
B-T Neighborhood Transitional District
   
156.165   Generally
   
156.166   Permitted uses
   
156.167   Conditional uses
   
156.168   Accessory uses
   
156.169   Setback and height regulations
   
156.170   Parking regulations
B-1 Neighborhood Commercial Service District
   
156.175   Generally
   
156.176   Permitted uses
   
156.177   Conditional uses
   
156.178   Accessory uses
   
156.179   Setback and height regulations
   
156.180   Parking regulations
B-2 Highway Commercial District
   
156.195   Generally
   
156.196   Permitted uses
   
156.197   Conditional uses
   
156.198   Accessory uses
   
156.199   Setback and height regulations
   
156.200   Parking regulations
B-3 Downtown Commercial District
   
156.215   Generally
   
156.216   Permitted uses
   
156.217   Conditional uses
   
156.218   Accessory uses
   
156.219   Setback and height regulations
   
156.220   Parking regulations
I-1 Light Industrial District
   
156.235   Generally
   
156.236   Permitted uses; use regulations
   
156.237   Conditional uses
   
156.238   Area, setback and height regulations
   
156.239   Parking regulations
Original Town Business Historic District
   
156.240   Generally
   
156.241   Nature of the district
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
   
156.250   Generally
   
156.251   Permitted uses
   
156.252   Conditional uses
   
156.253   Setback, area and height regulations
   
156.254   Parking regulations
Public Power and Irrigation Overlay District
   
156.260   Generally
   
156.261   Designated public power and irrigation overlay districts
H-1 Hospital District
   
156.270   Generally
   
156.271   Permitted uses
   
156.272   Conditional uses
   
156.273   Setback, area and height regulations
   
156.274   Parking and landscaping regulations
AAA Airport Hazard Area Overlay District
   
156.280   Intent
   
156.281   Definitions
   
156.282   Airport zones
   
156.283   Height restrictions
   
156.284   Airport zoning map and location
   
156.285   Permit requirements, exceptions, application forms and fees
   
156.286   Non-conforming structures
   
156.287   Marking of non-conforming structures
   
156.288   Administrative agency; enforcement
   
156.288.1   Variance from regulations
   
156.288.2   Zoning Board of Adjustment
   
156.288.3   Permitted principal uses and structures
   
156.288.4   Conditional uses
   
156.288.5   Accessory structures
   
156.288.6   Conflicting regulations
Supplementary Regulations
   
156.290   Effect
   
156.291   Height of public buildings and institutions
   
156.292   Exemption of certain appurtenances from height limitations
   
156.293   Erection of more than 1 principal structure on lot
   
156.294   Permitted projections from buildings
   
156.295   Parking or storage of unlicensed vehicles in residential districts
   
156.296   Height regulations adjacent to airports
   
156.297   Electric fencing for temporary grazing; temporary buildings and cargo
containers, and emergency management temporary debris holding sites
   
156.298   Miniwarehouses
   
156.299   Home occupations
   
156.300   Uses not allowed under home occupation provisions
   
156.301   Revocation
   
156.302   Periodic review
   
156.303   Legally existing home occupations
   
156.304   Child care facilities
   
156.305   Telecommunications facilities
   
156.306   Manufactured homes
   
156.307   Exception to lot size requirements
   
156.308   Aboveground storage tanks (ASTs)
   
156.309   Small wind energy systems
   
156.310   Special events
   
156.311   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)
   
156.312   Recreational vehicle park development regulations
   
156.313   Commercial solar conversions systems (CSCS) regulations (solar farms)
Conditional Uses
   
156.320   Purpose
   
156.321   Procedure
   
156.322   Standards
Planned Development District
   
156.335   Purpose and intent
   
156.336   Planned residential districts
   
156.337   Variations from regulations
   
156.338   Planned commercial and industrial districts
   
156.339   Procedure for rezoning property to planned development district
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
   
156.350   Intent; general requirements
   
156.351   Required parking and loading spaces
   
156.352   Design standards for parking lots
   
156.353   Design materials and installation standards for landscaping
   
156.354   Modification of requirements
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
   
156.370   Nonconforming, general intent
   
156.371   Conforming lots of record
   
156.372   Nonconforming structures
   
156.373   Nonconforming uses
   
156.374   Repairs and maintenance
   
156.375   Extension of nonconforming uses
Amendments
   
156.390   Authorized
   
156.391   Planning Commission hearing and recommendation required
   
156.392   Fee for application for zoning change or conditional use permit
   
156.393   Procedure
Board of Adjustment
   
156.410   Membership; bond; term of office
   
156.411   Organization; meetings; funding
   
156.412   Powers
   
156.413   Governing body acting as Board of Adjustment
   
156.414   Duties
   
156.415   Restrictions on membership and officers
   
156.416   Procedures for requesting a variance
   
156.417   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.430   Administrative official
   
156.431   Enforcement
 
   
156.999   Penalty; additional remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and
designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic
and other dangers, to promote health and general welfare, to provide adequate
light and air, to prevent the overgrowing of land, to avoid undue concentration
of population, and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
water, sewage facilities, schools, parks and other public requirements. This
chapter has been made with reasonable consideration for the respect of property
owner rights and privileges, and among other things, to the character of the
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the city and the area within 2 miles thereof.
(Prior Code, § 56-1) (Ord. 3640, § 1, 12-1-2005; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.002 TITLE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the
city".
(Prior Code, § 56-2) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.003 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ABUT. To border on, be contiguous with or have common property or district
lines, including property separated by a public street or alley.
   ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A second dwelling unit either in or added to an
existing single-family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure
on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living
facility with provisions within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating,
sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main
dwelling.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING or STRUCTURE. A detached subordinate building or
structure located on the same lot with the principal building or structure, the
use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
Customary ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES include farm buildings, garages,
carports, and storage sheds but not portable storage containers.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A separate, complete housekeeping unit with a
separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom facilities, which
is an attached or detached extension to an existing single-family structure,
also referred to as "granny flats".
   ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS. Living quarters within an accessory building
located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary
guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen
facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly
subordinate to the main use of the lot or building.
   AGRICULTURE. The planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains,
hay or plants, commonly grown in the vicinity. The raising and feeding of
livestock and poultry shall be considered as an AGRICULTURAL venture if the
area in which the livestock or poultry is kept is 10 acres or more in area and
if the raising of livestock and poultry is incidental or supplemental to the
raising of crops.
   ALLEY. A public or private thoroughfare, which affords only a secondary
means of access to property abutting thereon.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification to the construction or
occupancy of an existing structure.
   ANTENNA HEIGHT. The height of an antenna or dish measured vertically from
the highest point of the antenna or dish, when positioned for operation, to the
bottom of the base, which supports the antenna.
   APARTMENT. A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or multiple
family dwelling arranged, intended or designed as a place of residence for a
single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit, including culinary accommodations. Also, see DWELLING UNIT.
   APARTMENT COMPLEX. A building or buildings containing apartments used as a
place of residence for more than 2 households.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.
   BASEMENT. The substructure or foundation of a building; the lowest habitable
story of a building, usually below ground level. A BASEMENT used for
independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the
purposes of height measurement.
   BED AND BREAKFAST GUEST HOME.
      (1)   A dwelling in which no more than 4 rooms or suites of rooms are
made available for use as transient lodging.
      (2)   The remainder of the dwelling is used solely as a principal
residence of the host family, who shall be the owners of the dwelling.
      (3)   Breakfast is the only meal served and it is served only to
overnight guests. Rental of guestrooms is by advance reservations only; no
walk-in guests are permitted.
      (4)   BED AND BREAKFAST GUEST HOMES are allowed as home occupation
conditional uses in the agricultural district (A-1) and all residential
districts (R-1, R-2 and R-3), upon obtaining and possessing the required
permits pursuant hereto.
   BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or
streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or
disconnected, the Building Inspector shall determine the outline of the BLOCK.
   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building, other than a hotel, where, for compensation and
by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are
provided for 3 or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have
been provided.
   BUILDING. Any structure, excluding fences, designed or intended for the
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or
the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   CARGO CONTAINER. A standardized, reusable vessel that is or appears to be
originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the packing,
shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or
commodities; or designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail
car; or designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. A child care center operation licensed by the State of
Nebraska in a provider's place of residence or a site other than the residence
serving 13 or more children at any one time for on the average of less than 24
hours per day, for compensation, either indirect or direct, and on a regular
basis.
   COLUMBARIUM. Structure or vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns.
   CONDOMINIUM. Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of those portions, pursuant to the Nebraska Condominium Act, as
set forth in Neb. RS §§ 76-825 to 76-894 (R.R.S.1997).
   CREMATORY. An establishment with furnace for the cremation of dead animal
bodies or dead human bodies.
   COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, bounded on 3 or more
sides by exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls of a building and
lot lines on which walls are allowable.
   CURB LEVEL. The mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or, in the case
of a comer lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the
highest.
   DISTRICT. A section of the city and the area within 2 miles thereof for
which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of
buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform.
   DISTRICT or ZONE. A section or sections of the Zoning Area for which uniform
regulations governing the use of land, the height, use, area, size, and
intensity of use of buildings, land, and open spaces are established.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment such as a restaurant, financial
institution or product vending enterprise where the patron does not enter and
remain within a building during the transaction of his or her business. Food
vending establishments where the food is not normally consumed within a
building, or where numerous facilities are provided for eating outside a
building, shall be included in this definition.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed and used
exclusively for single-family residential purposes, excluding mobile homes.
   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME (PERMANENT FOUNDATION).
      (1)   A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human
habitation, which bears a label certifying that it was manufactured or
constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, constructed on a permanent chassis
or undercarriage, is not equipped with a permanent hitch or other device
allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. For the purpose
of any of these regulations, a MANUFACTURED HOME shall be considered the same
as a single-family detached dwelling on a permanent foundation, attached to the
foundation with permanent connections.
      (2)   MANUFACTURED HOME intended for permanent set and built in
compliance with the above may be placed in any zoning district where single-
family dwelling units are permitted providing the home meets the standards in
§§
150.007 and
156.306.
   DWELLING, MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME (SKIRTED).
      (1)   A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human
habitation, which bears the label certifying that it was manufactured or
constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development. The home is designed to be
transportable in 1 or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or
undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The MOBILE HOME
shall be no less than 8 feet wide and 40 feet in length.
      (2)   MOBILE HOMES may be placed in an R-M Mobile Home Park District
providing the home meets the standards in §
150.008.
   DWELLING, MODULAR HOME (CONSIDERED A CONVENTIONAL TYPE SINGLE- FAMILY
DWELLING). Any prefabricated structure, used for dwelling purposes, moved on to
a site in an essentially complete constructed condition, in one or more parts,
and when completed is a single family unit on a permanent foundation, attached
to the foundation with permanent connections. A MODULAR HOME shall be
equivalent to or exceed the construction criteria as defined by the Nebraska
State Department of Health and Human Services or the Public Service Commission
under the authority granted by Neb. RS §§ 71-1557 through 71-1567, in addition
to any amendments thereto.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or buildings designed and used for occupancy
by 3 or more families, all living independently of each other, and having
separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
   DWELLING, SEASONAL. A dwelling designed and used as a temporary residence
and occupied less than 6 months in each year.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building having accommodations for or occupied
exclusively by 1 family, which meets all the following standards. This
definition applies to all "double-wide" mobile or manufactured homes that meet
the following standards.
      (1)   The home shall have no less than 800 square feet of floor area,
above grade, for single story construction;
      (2)   The home shall have no less than an 18 feet exterior width;
      (3)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 21/
2 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
      (4)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with existing site-built, single-family residences;
      (5)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock. However, standing seam roofs
are allowable provided it is non-reflective;
      (6)   The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and
have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus
removed;
      (7)   The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are
uniformly applied to all SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS in the zoning district; and
      (8)   The home shall have a permanent foundation, to be constructed from
either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed
a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A portion of a residential building having
accommodations for and occupied exclusively by 1 family, and which is located
on a separate lot of record apart from the remaining portions of the building.
Each such dwelling may be sold independently of other portions.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least 2 such units
in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is
located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by 1
or more vertical wall(s).
   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A building designed or used exclusively for the
occupancy of 2 families living independently of each other and having separate
kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease
on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other
rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.
   DWELLING UNIT, SPECIAL TYPES. Any dwelling type consisting of single-family
detached; single-family attached, multi-family, mobile home that is not meet
the typical construction style of traditional stick framed structures.
      (1)   CARGO CONTAINER DWELLING. A dwelling unit constructed of 1 or more
new or used cargo containers used for multi-modal shipping and meeting the
definition of dwelling unit above.
      (2)   GRAIN BIN DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit constructed of 1 or more
grain bins, new or used meeting the definition of dwelling unit above.
      (3)   QUONSET HOME. A home constructed beneath and in a structure
referred to as a Quonset.
      (4)   SHOUSE. A combination of a dwelling unit and machine shed under a
common or connect roofing system. For purposes of a SHOUSE, these structures
when on a farm, agricultural operation, or acreage shall not be classified as a
farm building. In addition, the residence portion of the facility shall meet
the definition of dwelling unit above.
      (5)   TINY HOUSE. A structure containing living spaces including sleeping
and kitchen areas which measure 500 square feet or less in area. TINY HOUSES
can be either portable, on wheels similar to a recreational vehicle, or on a
permanent foundation.
   EARTH STATION or DISH ANTENNA. A combination of:
      (1)   An antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive
communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other
extraterrestrial sources; and
      (2)   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of
the receiving component and whose purpose is to carry the signals into the
interior of the building.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or
persons for the use of a tract of land for a specific purpose or purposes.
   FAMILY. A single person or a collective number of individuals domiciled
together in 1 dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing non-transient
domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group of students or
other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal
nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or other similar
determinable period.
   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES. A child care operation defined, and controlled by
Nebraska state law and licensed by the state of Nebraska, including a family
child care home I and family child care home II.
      (1)   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I. A child care operation in the provider’s
place of residence, which serves at least 4, but not more than 8, children at
any one time. A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I PROVIDER may be approved by the state
to serve no more than 2 additional school age children during non-school hours.
      (2)   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME II. A child care operation either in the
provider s place of residence or a site other than the residence serving 12 or
fewer children at any one time.
   FLOOR AREA. The area included within surrounding walls of a building.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between 2 intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the property line of the
street, or, if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on 1
side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   FUNERAL HOME or MORTUARY. An establishment with facilities for the
preparation of the dead for burial, for the viewing of the body, and for
funerals.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building
designed or used for the storage of not more than 4 vehicles owned and used by
the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, repairing, hiring, servicing,
selling or storage of vehicles.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for housing more than 4 vehicles.
   GRADE.
      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining 1 street only, the elevation
of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than 1 street, the
average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining
the streets.
      (3)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
      (4)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than 5 feet from a
street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk
exists, the GRADE shall be established by the City Engineer.
   GROUP HOME. A facility in which persons who are unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption reside while receiving therapy, counseling or refuge, but not
including nursing care, for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of
physical disability;
      (2)   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of
emotional or mental disorder, or mental retardation;
      (3)   Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol abuse;
      (4)   Supervision while under a program of alternatives to imprisonment,
including but not limited to prerelease and probationary programs; and
      (5)   Out-of-home placement of youth who have been taken out of their
primary residence to provide a safe, home-like environment in which each
individual can learn or relearn positive interaction skills that will allow the
individual to be reunified with his or her family and become productive within
the community.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity carried on in a dwelling by a
member of the immediate family residing therein, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and
does not change the character thereof. Additional requirements for HOME
OCCUPATIONS are found herein.
   HOSPITAL FOR HUMAN CARE. An institution licensed by the state as a hospital,
having facilities to house inpatients overnight and give around-the-clock care
by licensed physicians, health professionals and their supporting staff,
providing medical and surgical care, with facilities that handle emergency
treatment on a regular basis; and which may include accessory facilities as
described in this chapter.
   HOTEL. A building used as a transient abiding place of more than 20 persons
who are, for compensation, lodged with or without meals.
   INSTITUTION. A use, generally for the public including, but not limited to,
community services, schools, colleges, medical centers, and religious
institutions.
   JUNK YARD or SALVAGE YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged
metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, abandoned
or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof, and other used materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned; and places or yards for the
storage of salvaged metal, materials and equipment; but not including pawn
shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or
trucks presently in operable condition, boats or trailers presently in operable
condition, and used furniture and household equipment in usable condition and
not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged material as part of
manufacturing operations.
   LIVESTOCK COMMERCIAL FEEDING OPERATION. Any building(s), lot(s), pen(s),
pool(s) or pond(s) or other confined spaces, which normally are not used for
raising crops or grazing animals, which are designed and/or used for on-going
confined raising, feeding or management of animals for more than 180
consecutive days.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and
accessible to the vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
Required OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE is not to be included as off-street parking
space in computation of required off-street parking space.
   LODGINGHOUSE. A building or place where lodging is provided (or equipped to
provide lodging regularly) by prearrangement for definite periods, for
compensation, for 3 or more persons, in contradistinction to hotels open to
transients.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. see DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME.
   MAUSOLEUM. A large tomb or building with places for entombment of the dead.
   MINIWAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and
fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual storage cubicles,
compartmentalized stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods or
wares. Additional requirements for these facilities when permitted as a
conditional use are found in §
156.298.
   MOBILE HOME. see DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
   MOBILE HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single
ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured
or mobile home used or to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured
or mobile home spaces are not offered for sale or sold. The terms MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK or MOBILE HOME PARK do not include sales lots on which new or used
manufactured or mobile homes are parked for the purposes of storage,
inspection, or sale.
   MODULAR HOME. see DWELLING, MODULAR and DWELLING, MODULAR (HOME SEAL).
   MOTEL. A building containing 1 or more sleeping rooms to be rented on a
daily basis, primarily to the motoring public, together with any parking area,
and may include recreation space and vending machines, but not including
restaurants, clubs or other retail sales.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING/DEVELOPMENT. A building or portion thereof which was
lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established
zoning or zoning regulations.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision,
or amendment of this chapter but that fails by reason of such adoption,
revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming
characteristics of the lot.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this chapter but that fails by reason of such
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this chapter but that fails by reason of such
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the
zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-
conforming characteristics of the structure.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use existing and lawful at the time of adoption of
these regulations occupying a building, structure or land but is no longer
allowed.
   NURSING HOME and CONVALESCENT HOME. A home for the aged or infirm where
occupants are provided with food, shelter and care for hire or compensation.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street parking space shall consist of a
space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both
sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and
maneuvering room. Required OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS for 3 or more automobiles
shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designated, maintained and
regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any
public street, walk or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and
unparked without moving another. For purposes of computation, an OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE and necessary access maneuvering room may be estimated at 300
square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met
only when actual spaces meeting the requirements in this definition are
provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances
of the case, and in accordance with all ordinances and regulations of the city.
   PRESCHOOL. A business which is educational only for 4 or more children from
at least 2 different families. Such preschool programs will accept a child 3 to
5 years of age for a maximum of 3 hours per session, 1 session per day, 5 days
a week.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The main building or structure on a lot, within which
the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or structure, as distinguished from an
accessory use.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or premises, or
portion thereof, the use of the building or premises being restricted to
members and their guests. The affairs and management of the PRIVATE CLUBS are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food
and meals on the premises, provided adequate dining room space and kitchen
facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their
guests maybe allowed; provided, it is secondary and incidental to the promotion
of some other common objective by the organization, and further provided that
the sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal,
state, county and city laws.
   RECREATION BUILDINGS OR BUILDINGS FOR TRAINING FACILITIES FOR HUMANS AND
ANIMALS. An indoor facility, with or without seating for spectators, and
providing accommodations for a variety of individual, organized or franchised
sports or other recreational activities.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicular unit primarily designed as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use having either
its own power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE includes motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, camping
trailer, and fifth wheel.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK. A tract of land under single ownership upon
which 2 or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or
maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as
temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers,
vacationers, or travelers.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A type of operation in which garbage and refuse or
garbage or refuse is deposited by a plan on a specified portion of land, is
compacted by force applied by mechanical equipment, and then is covered by
suitable covering material compacted to a depth of at least 6 to 12 inches over
individual cells of garbage and refuse or garbage or refuse, which are closed
at the end of each day, and to a depth of at least 24 inches over the finished
landfill. This use is also required to meet all state and federal laws.
   SERVICE STATION.
      (1)   Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories maybe supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where in addition the following services maybe rendered and sales made, and no
other:
         (a)   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and distributors
and distributor parts;
         (b)   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
         (c)   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
         (d)   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
         (e)   Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials;
         (f)   Greasing and lubrication;
         (g)   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines;
         (h)   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
         (i)   Emergency wiring repairs;
         (j)   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
         (k)   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor;
         (l)   Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to
principal operation; and
         (m)   Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers and provision of restroom facilities.
      (2)   Uses permissible at a SERVICE STATION do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in service stations. A SERVICE STATION is not a repair garage or
a body shop.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, semi-nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.
   SHOPPING CENTER. An area of not less than 3 acres in size, not including
dedicated streets, alleys, highways or other public ways or property, whereupon
are located 2 or more retail shops where merchandise is offered for sale.
   STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or, if there is
no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than 3 feet above the top floor level,
and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area is or may be finished
off for use.
   STREET. All property dedicated or intended for public or private vehicular
access, including public or private easement therefor; or a public or private
thoroughfare which affords a means of access to abutting property.
   STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the support members of a building, such
as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof
rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls or similar
components.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is
attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming and
wading pools and covered patios, excepting outdoor areas such as paved areas,
walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
   TEMPORARY BUILDING. Any non-permanent structure, excluding fences, designed
or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons,
animals, chattels or property for a period of time not to exceed 6 months.
   TEMPORARY USE. A use intended for limited duration to be located in a zoning
district not permitting such use.
   TRUCK GARDENS. The growing and sale of agricultural and horticultural
products for local consumption. The products for sale have to be grown on-site.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon
showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified
in the zoning ordinance and authorized by the approving agency.
   VARIANCE. A variance is authorized only for height and area of a structure
and height and area of signs, or for size of lots, yards and open spaces, or
for off-street parking and loading regulations. Establishment or expansion of a
use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by VARIANCE, nor shall a VARIANCE
be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or
uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   YARD. Any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group,
which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the
sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or structures
permitted by this regulation.
   YARD, FRONT. A space between the front yard setback line and the front lot
line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD, REAR. A space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot
line, extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A space extending from the front yard or from the front lot line
where no front yard is required by this regulation, to the rear yard, or rear
lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.
   Example of Different Yard Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
   ZONING DISTRICT. A map or maps officially enacted by the City Council as
part of this chapter showing the boundaries of a zoning district or districts,
a copy or copies of which, certified to have been enacted as provided by law,
is filed in the office of the City Clerk, as an official record of the city.
(Prior Code, § 56-3) (Ord. 3102, § 1, 2-4-1997; Am. Ord. 3175, § 1, 7-7-1998;
Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3414, § 1, 4-2-
2002; Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 3703, § 1,10-2-2007; Am. Ord.
3721, § 1, 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. 3758, 5-5-2009; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
DISTRICTS GENERALLY
§ 156.020 DISTRICTS ENUMERATED.
   In order to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the
size of yards, courts and other open space, the density of population and the
location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry,
residence or other purposes, the city, and the area within 2 miles beyond and
adjacent to the corporate limits thereof, is hereby divided into districts, of
which there shall be 14 in number, known as:
   (A)   A-1 Transitional Agricultural District;
   (B)   R-1 Dwelling District;
   (C)   R-2 Dwelling District;
   (D)   R-3 Dwelling District;
   (E)   R-M Mobile Home Park;
   (F)   F-1 Floodplain District;
   (G)   B-T Business Transitional District;
   (H)   B-1 Neighborhood Commercial Service District;
   (I)   B-2 Highway Commercial District;
   (J)   B-3 Downtown Commercial District;
   (K)   I-1 Light Industrial District;
   (L)   I-2 Heavy Industrial District;
   (M)   H-1 Hospital District;
   (N)   R-L Suburban Residential District.
(Prior Code, § 56-31) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3452, 3-4-2003; Am. Ord.
3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.021 DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of North Platte, Nebraska." Said maps
and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this
chapter as if fully written herein. The Official Zoning District Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. No
changes shall be made on the Zoning District Map except as may be required by
amendments to this chapter. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the
Zoning District Map with the ordinance number, nature of change, and date of
change noted on the map.
(Prior Code, § 56-32) (Ord. 3452, § 1, 3-4-2003; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.022 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ON THE OFFICIAL
ZONING MAP.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines;
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following such city limits;
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks;
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line;
   (F)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines;
   (G)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) to (F) above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map;
   (H)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by divisions (A) to (G) above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries;
   (I)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, The Board of Adjustment may
permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to
exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
   (J)   When a district boundary line splits a lot, tract, or parcel that is
in sole ownership, the zoning district with the most restrictive requirements
may be extended over the entire property without amending the zoning map
through the public hearing process.
   (K)   When a lot, tract, or parcel is bisected by the extraterritorial
jurisdiction boundary line, the jurisdiction with the greatest portion of the
property shall have controlling interest.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.023 VACATED PUBLIC WAYS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action
of the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
(Prior Code, § 56-33) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.024 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Whenever any territory is added to the city limits, plans for the annexation
shall be presented to the city's Planning Commission for land use and zoning
recommendations. The Mayor and Council, in the ordinance providing for its
addition to the city, shall designate the districts in which it is included,
and it shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter governing the
district to which it is attached.
(Prior Code, § 56-34) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.025 COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS; VARIANCES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or reconstructed,
nor shall any building or land be used, except for a purpose permitted in the
district in which the building or land is located;
   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit established in this chapter for
the district in which the building is located;
   (C)   No building shall be erected, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally
altered except in conformity with the area and parking regulations of the
district in which the building is located;
   (D)   The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per
family, required by this chapter for each and every building at the time of the
passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or for any
building thereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as a
yard or open space requirements for any other buildings, nor shall any lot area
be reduced beyond the district requirements of this chapter,
   (E)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as defined in this chapter, and in no case shall there be more
than 1 main building on 1 lot except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and
   (F)   When public water and sanitary sewer are not available, the minimum
lot size shall be 1 acre. The 1-acre minimum lot size shall not apply if the
Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality approves the septic/soil
absorption system and well locations.
(Prior Code, § 56-35) (Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-
2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.026 MOVING AND RELOCATING BUILDINGS.
   No building or structure of any kind shall be moved onto any lot or parcel
of ground in any district without making application to the Building Inspector
and securing a permit to move the building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 56-36) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.027 REAR YARD SETBACKS REDUCTION.
   The rear yard setback may be the lesser of the required setback in a
district or 20% of the depth of the lot.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.028 SIDE YARD SETBACKS REDUCTION.
   The required side yard shall be maintained on each side of a dwelling, but
may be reduced to 10% of the lot width on lots of less than 60 feet in width,
provided, however, no side yard shall be less than 5 feet. No side yard
reduction allowed on street side or corner lots.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
A-1 TRANSITIONAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 156.040 GENERALLY.
   This district is intended for general agricultural purposes within the 2-
mile planning jurisdiction and in limited instances within the corporate limits
of the City of North Platte, Nebraska. The regulations set forth in this
subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this
subchapter, are the district regulations of the A-1 Agricultural District.
(Prior Code, § 56-61) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.041 PERMITTED USES.
   In district A-1, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the following uses:
   (A)   General farming and ranching activities, including the raising of
domestic livestock or animals by a person for his or her own personal use, 4-
H projects or similar family operations, but excluding any expansion of
existing or development of livestock commercial feeding operations, as defined
in §
156.003;
   (B)   Single-family dwellings;
   (C)   Truck gardens;
   (D)   Home occupations;
   (E)   Group homes (as defined in §
156.003); and
   (F)   Temporary structures and uses incidental to construction work, but
only for the period of construction.
(Prior Code, § 56-62) (Ord. 3179, § 6, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3506, § 1, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.042 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The following conditional uses may be located in the A-1 District,
subject to the provisions hereof:
      (1)   Publicly owned or operated properties;
      (2)   Fish hatcheries, apiaries or aviaries;
      (3)   Forests and wildlife reservations or similar conservation projects;
      (4)   Fur farming for the raising of fur-bearing animals;
      (5)   Golf courses and clubhouses customarily accessory thereto,
miniature golf, driving ranges and other similar activities operated as a
business;
      (6)   Amusement parks, community baseball or athletic fields, racetracks,
circus, carnivals or fairgrounds;
      (7)   Aviation fields or airports;
      (8)   Kennels, provided the buildings and pens shall be located not less
than 300 feet from any district boundary;
      (9)   Government and private grain storage bins;
      (10)   Philanthropic or eleemosynary institutions and penal institutions;
      (11)   Public parks and playgrounds, including public recreation or
service buildings, county fairgrounds and police and fire stations;
      (12)   State-approved public elementary or secondary schools; state-
approved private or parochial schools having a curriculum equivalent to public
elementary or secondary schools; postsecondary institutions that grant degrees,
diplomas or certificates; and stadiums and dormitories in conjunction with the
facilities if located on the campus;
      (13)   Railroad rights-of-way and sidings, but not including railroad
yards, public utilities and their rights-of-way;
      (14)   Grain elevators;
      (15)   Mobile home parks, in accordance herewith;
      (16)   Seasonal dwellings;
      (17)   Veterinarian clinic;
      (18)   Livestock and poultry commercial feeding operations. This
subchapter is not intended to prevent raising of domestic livestock or animals
by a person for his or her own personal use, 4-H calf projects or similar
family operations;
      (19)   Bank stabilization projects, sanitary landfills or other solid
waste facilities;
      (20)   Mineral extraction, which shall include the following: oil wells,
sand and gravel extraction, strip mine operations and quarries;
      (21)   Art and ceramic schools;
      (22)   Religious education centers;
      (23)   Recreational vehicle park;
      (24)   Wholesale nurseries and greenhouses with accessory retail outlets;
      (25)   Towers, telecommunication facilities and antennas, subject to the
provisions hereof pertaining to same;
      (26)   Bed and breakfast guest home;
      (27)   Churches;
      (28)   One additional single or 2-family dwelling for the purposes of
housing relatives or permanent agriculture workers;
      (29)   An agricultural dwelling site, public or private utility and
facility site or cemetery site may be no smaller than 1 acre. The 1-acre
minimum lot size shall not apply if the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality approves the septic/soil absorption system and well locations;
      (30)   Cemetery or pet cemetery. A mausoleum, columbarium or crematory
will be an accessory use to a cemetery;
      (31)   Livestock and poultry commercial sales facilities located not less
than ¼ mile from any residential dwelling, whether such residential dwelling is
occupied or not. Keeping of any individual heads of livestock or poultry not to
exceed 30 days;
      (32)   Event center special event venues;
      (33)   Commercial stables located outside the city limits of the City of
North Platte and on a property or parcel consisting of 10.01 acres or more; and
      (34)   Commercial solar conversions systems (solar farms) provided the
project conforms to provisions set forth in §
156.313.
   (B)   The following uses are allowed only in schools and churches as a
conditional use:
      (1)   Two-family dwellings;
      (2)   Multiple dwellings containing more than 2 families in the same
structure;
      (3)   Group housing or apartment projects, which may vary from the strict
requirements of this chapter; provided that, the design is unique as it relates
to the provisions of this chapter, for the type of development intended; and
the design accomplishes the objectives of this chapter in reference to height
and bulk of;
      (4)   Family child care homes;
      (5)   Manufactured homes which comply with the provisions of §
156.306;
      (6)   Elder daycare;
      (7)   Public libraries;
      (8)   Nursing home and convalescent homes;
      (9)   Child care centers or preschools;
      (10)   Medical clinic;
      (11)   Funeral home and mortuaries;
      (12)   Dance schools; and
      (13)   Retail shops, limited to arts, crafts, antiques, souvenirs,
western wear, western goods, neighborhood grocery stores, and hunting and
fishing stores.
(Prior Code, § 56-63) (Ord. 3179, § 7, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3253, § 1, 9-7-1999;
Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 3721, § 2, 3-18-
2008; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 3878, passed 10-1-2013; Am. Ord.
4178, § 1, 10-15-2024; Am. Ord. 4179, § 1, 10-15-2024; Am. Ord. 4181, § 1, 10-
29-2024)
§ 156.043 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Permitted buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses are permitted in the A-1 District:
      (1)   Repair shops, sheds, garages, barns, silos, earth stations or dish
antennas, irrigation wells and pumps and buildings and structures customarily
required for any of such uses.
      (2)   Signs in accordance with
Chapter 154 of this code.
   (B)   Setbacks. Minimum setbacks are as follows:
      (1)   Separation between structures. Structures that are not a part of
the main structure shall have a separation of 5 feet from all inhabitable
structures.
      (2)   Front yard.
         (a)   Structures shall be set back 50 feet from the front lot line,
accessory buildings shall not be permitted in the required front yard.
         (b)   Private garages and carports shall observe the same front yard
setbacks required for the main structure.
         (c)   Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall
be provided on both streets.
      (3)   Side yard.
         (a)   Structures shall be set back 5 feet from any side lot line.
         (b)   The minimum side yard setback for all comer lots adjoining a
side street shall be 10 feet.
      (4)   Rear yard.
         (a)   Structures shall be set back 5 feet from the rear lot line.
         (b)   Garages and carports opening onto an alley shall be at least 10
feet from the alley line.
(Prior Code, § 56-64) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.044 SETBACK, AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Setback for buildings housing livestock. Any building or structure in
the A-1 District used for the housing or shelter of livestock shall be located
at least 300 from the R District boundary.
   (B)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
   (C)   Conformance with master street plan. All proposed construction and
improvements shall not obstruct the future street pattern as indicated on the
master street plan.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks.
      (1)   Separation between structures.  Structures that are not a part of
the main structure shall have a separation of 5 feet from all inhabitable
structures.
      (2)   Front yard.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be 40 feet or in direct conformity
with the majority of similar buildings on the same street in the same block.
         (b)   Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall
be provided on both streets.
         (c)   Where a lot or tract is located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets or roads, there shall be a front yard of 40 feet provided on both
streets or roads.
      (3)   Side yards.
         (a)   The minimum side yard setback is 7 feet.
         (b)   The minimum side yard setback for all comer lots adjoining a
side street shall be 40 feet.
      (4)   Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback is 25 feet.
   (E)   Height. Maximum height is 50 feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 56-65) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.045 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking regulations in the A-1 District shall be the same as required in the
R District regulations, or as shown in §§
156.350 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 56-66) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
R-L SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.060 INTENT.
   The RL Suburban Residential District is established to provide for single-
family residential development at a low density within the city's planning and
zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 56-75) (Ord. 3532, § 1, 4-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.061 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet
the minimum requirements of the district. Permitted uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-76) (Ord. 3532, § 1, 4-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.062 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any
conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground
in the RL District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by
the City Council. Conditional uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-77) (Ord. 3532, § 1, 4-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.063 TEMPORARY USES.
   Temporary uses may be permitted provided a temporary use permit is obtained
and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit (see §
156.297). Temporary uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-78) (Ord. 3532, § 1, 4-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.064 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Refer to the definitions of accessory uses and structures, as well as §
156.150 and the residential zoning sections within this chapter for more
detail.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.065 HEIGHT AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
                        A           B          C                      Max.
Use Lot Area Lot Width  Front Yard  Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Height Building
             (feet)     (feet)      (feet)     (feet)     (feet)      Coverage
                                                                      (%)
                               A       B          C          Max.    Max.
Use         Lot Area Lot Width Front   Rear Yard  Side Yard  Height  Building
                     (feet)    Yard    (feet)     (feet)     (feet)  Coverage
                               (feet)                                (%)
Single-
family
dwelling,
detached    1 acre*  130       255     25 4       10 2       35      55
(private
well,
private
septic)
Single-
family
dwelling,   12,000   80        255     25 4       10 2       35      55
detached    sq. ft.
(public
utilities)
Other
permitted   12,000
uses        sq. ft.  80        255     25 4       10 2       45      55
(public
utilities)
Other
permitted
uses
(private    1 acre*  130       255     25 4       10 2       45      55
well,
private
septic)
Conditional
uses        12,000   100       255     25 4       10 2       45      55
(public     sq. ft.
utilities)
Conditional
uses
(private    1 acre*  150       255     25 4       10 2       45      55
well,
private
septic)
Accessory   -        -         25 1, 3 10 3       10 2, 3    25      55
structures
Notes:
(1)   Provided the accessory use shall not be located closer to the front lot
line than the closest point on the front wall of the dwelling.
(2)   See §
156.027.
(3)   In the case of an accessory building that exceeds 2,400 square feet in
total area, the required front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be doubled
to 50 feet, 20 feet, and 20 feet, respectively.
(4)   See §
156.026.
(5)   On corner lots the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the street side yard setback may conform to existing setbacks
of existing structures along that street. In new developments, the street side
yard setback shall be equal to the front yard setback.
(*)   The minimum 1-acre lot size shall not apply if NDEQ approves the septic/
soil absorption system and well locations.
 
   Example of Different Yard Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 56-79) (Ord. 3532, § 1, 4-6-2C04; Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007;
Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
R-1 DWELLING DISTRICT
§ 156.080 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for residential uses consisting
primarily of single-family dwelling units and accessory structures, but also
including the permitted and conditionally permitted uses set forth in this
district.
(Prior Code, § 56-91) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am.
Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
§ 156.081 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet
the minimum requirements of the district. Permitted uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-92) (Ord. 3179, § 8, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999;
Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.082 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any
conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground
in the R-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by
the City Council. Conditional uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-93) (Ord. 3179, § 9, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3253, § 2, 9-7-1999;
Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.083 TEMPORARY USES.
   Temporary uses may be permitted provided a temporary use permit is obtained
and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit (see §
156.297). Temporary uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-94) (Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord, 3414, § 2, 4-2-2002; Am. Ord. 3424, § 1, 6-4-2002; Am. Ord. 3700, § 4, 8-
7-2007; Am. Ord. 3721, § 3, 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord.
4042, 11-3-2020; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.084 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Refer to the definitions of accessory uses and structures, as well as §
156.150 and the residential zoning sections within this chapter for more
detail.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.085 HEIGHT AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
                                A     B          C          Max.    Max.
Use         Lot Area  Lot Width Front Rear Yard  Side Yard  Height  Building
            (sq. ft.) (feet)    Yard  (feet      (feet)     (feet)  Coverage
                                (feet                               (%)
Single-
family      7,500     65        253   25 2       7 4, 6     35      55
dwelling
detached
Single-
family      4,250/    65 5      253   253        7 4, 6     35      55
attached/   unit
townhouses
Other
permitted   9,000     65        253   253        7 4, 6     35      55
uses
Conditional 9,000     65        253   253        7 4, 6     35      55
uses
Accessory   -         -         253   5 7        7 4, 6     20      55 1
uses 6
Notes:
(1)   The total lot coverage shall not exceed 55%.
(2)   See §
156.026.
(3)   On corner lots, the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the street side yard setback may conform to existing
setbacks of existing single-family structures along that street. In new
developments, the street side yard setback shall be 15 feet for the main
structure and 10 feet for an accessory structure.
(4)   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
(5)   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
(6)   On lots less than 75 feet in width, the side yard setback may be
reduced to 5 feet.
(7)   Accessory structures opening to an alley shall have a 10-foot rear yard
setback.
 
   Example of Different Yard Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
   (B)   Supplemental residential regulations.
      (1)   Single-family attached/townhouses.
         (a)   Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on
the property line separating both dwellings.
         (b)   Each unit is separated by a by a fire rated wall from the lowest
level and continuing to the roof deck. Rating specified in the IRC
(International Residential Code) or IBC (International Building Code)
         (c)   Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
         (d)   When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot
shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
         (e)   The structure shall be limited to a maximum of 4 attached units.
(Prior Code, § 56-95) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3473, § 1, 5-20-2003;
Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
R-2 DWELLING DISTRICT
§ 156.100 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for residential uses consisting
primarily of single- and 2-family dwellings and accessory structures, but also
including the permitted and conditionally permitted uses set forth in this
district. The regulations set forth in this subchapter, or set forth elsewhere
in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter, are the district
regulations in the R-2 Dwelling District.
(Prior Code, § 56-121) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
§ 156.101 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet
the minimum requirements of the district. Permitted uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-122) (Ord. 3179, § 10, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-
1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1,
6-7-2022)
§ 156.102 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any
conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground
in the R-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by
the City Council. Conditional uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-123) (Ord. 3179, § 11, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-
1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1,
6-7-2022)
§ 156.103 TEMPORARY USES.
   Temporary uses may be permitted provided a temporary use permit is obtained
and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit (see §
156.297). Temporary uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-124) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.104 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Refer to the definitions of accessory uses and structures, as well as §
156.150 and the residential zoning sections within this chapter for more
detail.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.105 HEIGHT AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
                         A           B          C                      Max.
Use Lot Area  Lot Width  Front Yard  Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Height Building
    (sq. ft.) (feet)     (feet       (feet)     (feet)     (feet)      Coverage
                                                                       (%)
                                A     B          C          Max.    Max.
Use         Lot Area  Lot Width Front Rear Yard  Side Yard  Height  Building
            (sq. ft.) (feet)    Yard  (feet)     (feet)     (feet)  Coverage
                                (feet                               (%)
Single-
family      5,000     50        25    253        7 2, 4, 8  35      55
dwelling
Single-
family      2,500/    25/unit   25    253        7 1, 2, 7  35      55
attached/   unit
townhouses
Two-family
dwelling/   6,000     50        25    253        7 2, 4, 8  35      55
duplex
Other
permitted   8,000     50        25    253        7 2, 4, 8  35      55
uses
Conditional 8,000     50        25    253        7 2, 4, 8  35      55
uses
Accessory   -         -         25    5          5          17      55 4
uses 6
Notes:
(1)   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
(2)   The side yard setback shall be 10 feet if the structure is over 30
feet in height.
(3)   See §
156.026.
(4)   The total lot coverage shall not exceed 55%.
(5)   On corner lots the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the street side yard setback may conform to existing
setbacks of existing single-family structures, two family structures and
multiple family structures along that street. In new developments, the
street side yard setback shall be equal to the front yard setback.
(6)   The maximum height may be increased through the conditional use permit
process.
(7)   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
(8)   On lots less than 75 feet in width, the side yard setback may be
reduced to 5 feet.
 
   Example of Different Yard Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
   (B)   Supplemental residential regulations.
      (1)   Single-family attached/townhouses.
         (a)   Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on
the property line separating both dwellings.
         (b)   Each unit is separated by a by a fire rated wall from the lowest
level and continuing to the roof deck. Rating specified in the IRC
(International Residential Code) or IBC (International Building Code).
         (c)   Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
         (d)   When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot
shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
         (e)   The structure shall be limited to a maximum of 6 attached units.
(Prior Code, § 56-125) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
R-3 DWELLING DISTRICT
§ 156.120 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for single and multiple-family
residential uses and development of residential dwellings at higher densities.
(Prior Code, § 56-151) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
§ 156.121 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet
the minimum requirements of the district. Permitted uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-152) (Ord. 3179, § 12, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-
1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1,
6-7-2022)
§ 156.122 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Conditional uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as
well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific
tract of ground in the R-3 District as recommended by the Planning Commission
and approved by the City Council. Conditional uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-153) (Ord. 3179, § 13, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3506, § 2,1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3674, § 1, 11-21-2006; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-
3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.123 TEMPORARY USES.
   Temporary uses may be permitted provided a temporary use permit is obtained
and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit (see §
156.297). Temporary uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-154) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.124 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Refer to the definitions of accessory uses and structures, as well as §
156.150 and the residential zoning sections within this chapter for more
detail.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.125 HEIGHT AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
                         A          B          C                      Max.
Use Lot Area  Lot Width  Front Yard Rear Yard  Side Yard  Max. Height Building
    (sq. ft.) (feet)     (feet      (feet)     (feet)     (feet)      Coverage
                                                                      (%)
                                A     B          C          Max.    Max.
Use         Lot Area  Lot Width Front Rear Yard  Side Yard  Height  Building
            (sq. ft.) (feet)    Yard  (feet)     (feet)     (feet)  Coverage
                                (feet                               (%)
Single-                                          7 2, 3, 6,
family      4,000     44        25    25 3       8          50      55
dwelling
Single-
family      2,000/    22/unit   25    25 3       7 1, 3, 6, 50      55
attached/   unit                                 7
townhouses
Two-family                                       7 2, 3, 6,
dwelling/   4,000     44        25    25 3       8          50      55
duplex
Multi-
family/     1,500/                               7 2, 3, 6,
apartments/ unit      44        25    25 3       8          50      55
condomini
ums
Other                                            7 2, 3, 6,
permitted   4,000     44        25    25 3       8          50      55
uses
Conditional 4,000     44        25    25 3       7 2, 3, 6, 50      55
uses                                             8
Accessory   -         -         25    5 9        5 2, 3, 6, 17      55
structures                                       8
Notes:
(1)   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
(2)   The side yard setback shall be 10 feet if the structure is over 30 feet
in height.
(3)   See §
156.026.
(4)   The total lot coverage shall not exceed 55%.
(5)   Exterior lots shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width.
(6)   On corner lots, the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the street side yard setback may conform to existing
setbacks of existing single-family structures and two-family structure
structures along that street. In new developments, the street side yard
setback shall be equal to the front yard setback.
(7)   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
(8)   On lots less than 75 feet in width, the side yard setback may be
reduced to 5 feet.
(9)   Rear yard shall be 10 feet if accessory structure opens to an alley.
 
   Example of Different Yard Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
 
   (B)   Supplemental residential regulations.
      (1)   Single-family attached/townhouses and condominiums.
         (a)   Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on
the property line separating both dwellings.
         (b)   Each unit is separated by a fire rated wall from the lowest
level and continuing to the roof deck. Rating specified in the IRC
(International Residential Code) or IBC (International Building Code)
         (c)   Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
         (d)   When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot
shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
(Prior Code, § 56-155) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
R-M MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
§ 156.140 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for single and multiple-family mobile
homes located in mobile home parks.
(Prior Code, § 56-181) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
§ 156.141 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet
the minimum requirements of the district. Permitted uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-182) (Ord. 3179, § 14, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-
1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1,
6-7-2022)
§ 156.142 TEMPORARY USES.
   Temporary uses may be permitted provided a temporary use permit is obtained
and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit (see §
156.297). Temporary uses are shown in §
156.150.
(Prior Code, § 56-183) (Ord. 3099, § 1, 2-4-1997; Am. Ord. 3179, § 15, 8-4-
1998; Am. Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. 3253, § 3, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of
12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3670, § 1, 10-17-2006; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am.
Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.143 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Refer to the definitions of accessory uses and structures, as well as §
156.150 and the residential zoning sections within this chapter for more
detail.
(Prior Code, § 56-184) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.144 SPECIAL DESIGN CRITERIA FOR R-M MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   A mobile home development shall have a lot area of not less than 4
acres. The setback on all other mobile home park property lines shall be 25
feet with landscaping or a privacy fence with a 10-foot building setback.
   (B)   There shall be a minimum livable floor area of 500 square feet in each
mobile home.
   (C)   Height of buildings shall be;
      (1)   Maximum height for principal uses shall be 16 feet.
      (2)   Maximum height for accessory uses shall be 16 feet.
   (D)   Each lot shall have access to a hard-surfaced drive not less than 22
feet in width, excluding parking.
   (E)   Community water and community sewage disposal facilities shall be
provided with connections to each lot, in accordance with design standards for
the city. The water supply shall be sufficient for domestic use and for life
protection.
   (F)   Service buildings including adequate laundry and drying facilities.
Common toilet facilities for mobile home, which do not have these facilities
within each unit, may be provided.
   (G)   Storm shelters shall be required and shall meet the following
criteria.
      (1)   Shelter space equivalent to two persons per mobile home lot.
      (2)   Designed in conformance with "National Performance Criteria for
Tornado Shelters" by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and any
other referenced material by FEMA.
      (3)   Shelters shall be located in order to provide maximum safe time
frame as directed by FEMA.
   (H)   All trailer pad locations shall meet all HUD requirements.
   (I)   Not less than 10% of the total court area shall be designated and used
for park, playground and recreational purposes.
   (J)   Each mobile home dwelling shall be provided with a paved patio or
equivalent, other than parking spaces, of not less than 64 square feet.
   (K)   All mobile homes shall have skirting which is in good repair, meet
manufacturer standards and is in conformance with the color scheme of the
mobile home.
   (L)   All lots must be platted in accordance with the subdivision
regulations of the City of North Platte and shall also contain the following
information:
      (1)   A complete plan of the mobile home development shall be submitted
showing;
         (a)   A development plan and grading plan of the court;
         (b)   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
         (c)   The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces
(minimum space should be 40 feet by 110 feet with a minimum of 20 feet between
any other mobile homes);
         (d)   The area and dimensions of the park, playground and recreation
areas;
         (e)   The location and width of roadways and walkways;
         (f)   The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures;
         (g)   The location of water and sewer lines and sewage disposal
facilities;
         (h)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home court.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.145 HEIGHT AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
                               Front                        Max.    Max.
Use        Lot Area  Lot Width Yard   Rear Yard  Side Yard  Height  Building
                     (feet)    (feet) (feet )    (feet)     (feet)  Coverage
                                                                    (%)
Mobile     4 acres   -         25 1   25 1       25 1       -       55
home park
Mobile     4,400 sq. 40 2      (2)    (2)        (2)        16      55
home       ft.
Community  -         -         -      -          -          25      55
center
Accessory  -         -         -      -          -          16      55
structures
Notes:
(1)   The setback on all court property lines shall be 25 feet with
landscaping or a privacy fence with a 10-foot building setback.
(2)   The minimum space should be 40 feet by 110 feet with a minimum of 20
feet between any other mobile homes.
 
(Prior Code, § 56-185) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012;
Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6- 7-2022)
PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, TEMPORARY AND ACCESSORY USE TABLE
§ 156.150 RESIDENTIAL USE TABLE.
P = Permitted
C = Conditional use permit
T = Temporary
A = Accessory to permitted use
“-” = Not permitted
Residential Use Table
Use Type Use R-L R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M
P = Permitted
C = Conditional use permit
T = Temporary
A = Accessory to permitted use
“-” = Not permitted
Residential Use Table
Use Type                     Use                            R-L R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M
                             Dwelling, seasonal or cabins   C   -   -   -   -
                             Dwelling, condominiums (max.   -   C   P   P   -
                             of 4 units)
                             Dwelling, condominiums (4      -   -   P   P   -
                             units or more)
                             Dwelling, manufactured home
                             permanent foundation (greater  P   P   P   P   -
                             than 18 ft. wide)
                             Dwelling, manufactured home    -   -   -   -   P
                             (greater than 18 ft. wide)
                             Dwelling, manufactured home    -   -   -   -   P
                             (less than 18 ft. wide)
                             Dwelling, mobile home          -   -   -   -   P
                             Dwelling, modular home         P   P   P   P   -
                             Dwelling, multi-family
                             dwelling (max. of 4 units per  -   -   P   P   -
                             building)
                             Dwelling, multi-family
                             dwelling (more than 5 units    -   -   -   P   -
                             per building)
Residential Uses             RV - recreational vehicle      -   -   -   -   C
                             Dwelling, single-family
                             attached dwelling (max. of 4   -   P   P   P   -
                             units)/townhome
                             Dwelling, single-family
                             attached dwelling (max. of 6   -   -   P   P   -
                             units)/townhome
                             Dwelling, single-family
                             attached dwelling (more than   -   -   -   P   -
                             of 6 units)/townhome
                             Dwelling, single-family        P   P   P   P   -
                             detached dwellings
                             Dwelling, two-family/duplex    -   C   P   P   P
                             Dwelling, upper story housing  -   -   -   P   P
                             Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)  P   P   P   P   -
                             Agricultural barns             A   -   -   -   -
                             Decks, gazebos, patios         A   A   A   A   A
                             (elevated or on-grade)
                             Freestanding canopy            A   A   A   A   A
                             Garages, private               A   A   A   A   A
                             Carports                       A   A   A   A   A
                             Greenhouses, non-commercial    A   A   A   A   A
                             Home occupations               A   A   A   A   A
                             Home-based businesses          A   A   A   A   A
                             Portable on-demand storage     T/P T/P T/P T/P T/P
                             containers
                             Porch, unenclosed              A   A   A   A   A
                             Storage sheds, private         A   A   A   A   A
                             Swimming pools, private        A   A   A   A   A
                             Tennis courts, private         A   A   A   A   A
                             Solar energy systems for use
                             on individual properties or    A   A   A   A   A
Accessory Uses               buildings
                             Wind energy conversion system
                             for use on individual          A   A   A   A   A
                             properties or buildings
                             Adult care homes               P   P   P   P   P
                             Assisted living facilities     C   C   C   C   -
                             Bed and breakfast              C   C   C   C   -
                             Convents/monastery or other    C   C   C   C   -
                             religious group home
                             Emergency residential          C   C   C   C   -
                             services/shelters
                             Group care home                C   C   C   C   -
                             Group home                     C   C   C   C   -
                             Hospice facility/life care     C   C   C   C   -
                             facility
                             Nursing homes                  C   C   C   C   -
                             Retirement homes               C   C   C   C   -
                             Transitional housing           C   C   C   C   -
Residential/                 Community gardens              C   C   C   C   P
Commercial Institutions      Greenhouse, private            P   P   P   P   P
                             Livestock for 4-H purposes as  A   -   -   -   -
                             a secondary use
                             Churches, synagogues, temples  C   C   C   C   C
                             and similar
                             Church, storefront             C   C   C   C   C
                             Community centers and          C   C   C   C   C
                             buildings
Agricultural and             Fire and rescue facilities     C   C   C   C   C
Horticultural Uses           Fraternal organization         C   C   C   C   C
                             Governmental offices and uses  C   C   C   C   C
                             Law enforcement centers        C   C   C   C   C
                             Public libraries and museums   C   C   C   C   C
                             Museums                        C   C   C   C   C
                             Planetariums                   C   C   C   C   C
                             Senior citizen centers         C   C   C   C   C
Community Services/Civic     Community correction centers   C   C   C   C   C
                             Drug and alcohol               C   C   C   C   C
                             rehabilitation centers
                             Halfway houses                 P   P   P   P   P
                             Public detention center        C   C   C   C   C
                             Juvenile detention center      C   C   C   C   C
                             Private prisons                C   C   C   C   C
                             Public prisons                 C   C   C   C   C
                             Adult day care home            A   A   A   A   A
Treatment/                   Child care center              C   -   -   -   C
Rehabilitation/              Child care home                P   P   P   P   P
Incarceration Facilities     Colleges and universities      C   C   C   C   C
                             Day care centers               C   -   -   -   -
                             Family child care home I       A   A   A   A   A
                             Family child care home II      A   A   A   A   A
                             Preschools                     C   C   C   C   C
                             Public and private schools (K- C   C   C   C   C
                             12)
                             Trade, career and technical    C   C   C   C   C
                             schools
                             Arboretums                     C   -   -   -   -
Day Care, Public and Private Athletic fields, as part of a  C   C   C   C   C
Schools                      school, college or university
                             Nature centers                 C   -   -   -   -
                             Parks, trails, picnic areas,   C   C   C   C   A
                             and playgrounds
                             State parks and camp grounds   C   C   C   C   C
                             as part of a state park
                             Public works facilities incl.  C   C   C   C   C
                             storage/maintenance areas
                             Wireless telecommunication     C   C   C   C   C
                             facilities sys. - new tower
                             Wireless telecommunication     P   P   P   P   P
Public Parks and Open Space  facilities sys. - collocated
                             Radio and tower transmitter    C   C   C   C   C
                             (shortwave and ham operations)
                             Roadside produce stands        T   -   -   -   -
                             Commercial stables             C   -   -   -   -
Public/Private Utilities and Riding academies               C   -   -   -   -
Communication Services       Recreational facility, indoor  -   -   -   -   A
                             Recreational facility, outdoor -   -   -   -   A
Food and Beverage Services
Recreational Commercial
 
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
F-1 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
§ 156.160 GENERALLY.
   The F-1 District has been established on the official zoning district map
and official floodway district maps in accordance with Chapter 153 of this
code, creating floodway and floodway fringe districts.
(Prior Code, § 56-211) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.161 PERMITTED USES; USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Only uses having low flood damage potential and not obstructing flood
flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District, to the extent that they
are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require
structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment. No use shall increase
the flood levels of the regulatory flood elevation. These uses are subject to
the standards of §
153.15.
   (B)   Permitted uses are as follows:
      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries and
forest;
      (2)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas;
      (3)   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport
landing strips; and
      (4)   Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, parks and wildlife and nature preserves.
(Prior Code, § 56-212) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.162 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the floodplain overlay
districts, subject to the provisions hereof and subject to the provisions of
this chapter - mineral extraction, which shall include the following: oil
wells, sand and gravel extraction, strip mine operations and quarries.
(Prior Code, § 56-213) (Ord. 3156, § 1, 2-3-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
B-T NEIGHBORHOOD TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
§ 156.165 GENERALLY.
   It is the intent of this district to provide a limited range of retail and
service oriented commercial, and residential uses in traditional residential
areas adjacent to B-1 and B-2 Districts. The regulations set forth in this
subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this
subchapter are the regulations in the B-T Business Transition District.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.166 PERMITTED USES.
   In district B-T, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Receiving store for dry or steam cleaning;
   (B)   Barbershops, beauty parlors and chiropody, massage or similar personal
service shops;
   (C)   Bed and breakfast;
   (D)   Childcare, and preschool;
   (E)   Church;
   (F)   Custom dress making, millinery, tailoring, shoe repairing, or similar
trades;
   (G)   Elder daycare;
   (H)   Family childcare;
   (I)   Group home;
   (J)   Home occupation;
   (K)   Professional offices limited to: accountants, architects and
engineers, brokers, planners, dentists, real estate and insurance, lawyers,
landscape architects, chiropractors, doctors;
   (L)   Public park; and
   (M)   Two-family dwelling.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.167 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the B-T District, subject to
the provisions hereof:
   (A)   Apartments; and
   (B)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305 pertaining to same.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.168 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the B-
T District:
   (A)   Use and structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses are
permitted;
   (B)   Any building used primarily for any of the permitted uses may not have
more than 40% of the floor area devoted to the storage purpose incidental to
the primary use; and
   (C)   Signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 154 of this code;
however, not to exceed 8 square feet in size.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.169 SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Setback and height regulations in the B-T District are as follows:
   (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 25 feet.
   (B)   Side yard.
      (a)   The minimum side yard setback shall be 7 feet for all lots 75 feet
in width or more.
      (b)   The minimum side yard setback shall be 5 feet for all lots less
than 75 feet in width.
      (c)   The minimum side yard setback for all corner lots adjoining a side
street shall be 25 feet except in cases of lot width of less than 66 feet, the
side yard setback shall be 15 feet.
   (C)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except where abutting an A or R
District, where the rear yard shall be no less than 25 feet.
   (D)   Height. Maximum height is 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet above grade.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.170 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking spaces will be provided in the B-T District in accordance
with §§
156.350 et seq.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL SERVICE DISTRICT
§ 156.175 GENERALLY.
   It is the intent of this district to provide a limited range of retail and
service oriented commercial uses in areas located along major and minor
arterial streets generally located within R-1, 2, 3 and 4 Residential
Districts. These neighborhood commercial areas are not associated with B-
2 Highway Commercial Corridors or with the B-3 Downtown Commercial District.
The regulations set forth in this subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the regulations in the B-
1 Business District.
(Prior Code, § 56-271) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.176 PERMITTED USES.
   In district B-l, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Banks;
   (B)   Receiving store for dry or steam cleaning;
   (C)   Barbershops, beauty parlors and chiropody, massage or similar personal
service shops;
   (D)   Business or commercial schools or dancing or music academies;
   (E)   Hospital and clinics for animals, but not open kennels;
   (F)   Self-service laundries and dry cleaners;
   (G)   Messenger and telegraph service stations;
   (H)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, shoe repairing, or similar
trades;
   (I)   Stores or shops used to conduct a retail business, including eating
establishments;
   (J)   Shopping centers, 3 acres. The following businesses are allowed only
in a shopping center complex in a B-l Business District:
      (1)   Service stations;
      (2)   Shops for repair of electrical, radio and television equipment and
other commodities, but not involving manufacturing on the premises;
      (3)   Carwashes;
      (4)   Bowling alleys, miniature golf courses and golf driving ranges; and
      (5)   Restaurants and drive-ins.
   (K)   Private clubs;
   (L)   (1)   Administrative services and offices;
      (2)   Governmental services and offices;
      (3)   Detention facilities and jails;
      (4)   Group care facility;
      (5)   Convalescent services;
      (6)   Educational services;
      (7)   College and university facilities;
      (8)   Religious assembly must comply with off-street parking and loading
regulations;
      (9)   Social clubs;
      (10)   Recreational clubs;
      (11)   Cultural services;
      (12)   Guidance services;
      (13)   Hospital services;
      (14)   Utility services;
      (15)   Postal facilities;
      (16)   Public assembly;
      (17)   Safety services;
      (18)   Theaters;
      (19)   Playhouses; and
      (20)   Convention centers.
   (M)   Banks and detached banking facilities (ATM);
   (N)   Grocery stores;
   (O)   Mini-malls;
   (P)   Convenience store or filling station;
   (Q)   Medical clinic;
   (R)   Office buildings used only for the administration functions of
companies, corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or societies;
   (S)   Professional offices limited to: accountants, architects and
engineer's, brokers, planners, dentists, real estate and insurance, lawyers,
landscape architects, chiropractors, doctors; and
   (T)   Service facilities limited to: mortuaries, photographic studios,
schools, churches, physical therapy, counseling services for rehabilitation,
treatment or therapy, and child care centers or preschools, provided they meet
child care center standards in §
156.304(D)(1) through (14).
(Prior Code, § 56-272) (Ord. 3292, § 5, 6-20-2000; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.177 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the B-l District, subject to
the provisions hereof:
   (A)   Apartments or living quarters situated in an office or business
building;
   (B)   Beer parlors, taverns, bars and nightclubs;
   (C)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305 pertaining to same;
   (D)   Establishments that provide lodging, meals, clinic for health care,
thrift shop, office space, counseling services, emergency housing for short
periods of time and transitional housing for extended periods of time;
   (E)   Clubs, fraternities, lodges and meeting places of a non-commercial
nature;
   (F)   Accessory uses or off-street parking lots that are separated from the
main use by an alley or street; and
   (G)   Crematory; an establishment with furnace for the cremation of dead
animal bodies or dead human bodies.
(Prior Code, § 56-273) (Ord. 3253, § 5, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. 3337, § 1, 3-6-2001;
Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3455, § 5, 3-4-2003; Am. Ord. 3674, §2, 11-21-
2006; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.178 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the B-
l District:
   (A)   Use and structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses are
permitted;
   (B)   Any building used primarily for any of the permitted uses may not have
more than 40% of the floor area devoted to the storage purpose incidental to
the primary use; and
   (C)   Signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 154 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 56-274) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.179 SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Setback and height regulations in the B-l District are as follows:
   (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 20 feet.
   (B)   Side yard. No side yard setback is required, provided, however, that
if a side yard setback is provided it must be no less than 5 feet. If the
property is adjacent to a property whose zoning requires a side yard setback,
then a setback of no less than 5 feet must be provided. When property is
adjacent to a public alley, the setback shall be no less than 5 feet. On the
side of a lot abutting an A or R District or where the side yard adjoins a
street, setbacks shall be no less than 10 feet.
   (C)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except where abutting an A or R
District, where the rear yard shall be no less than 25 feet.
   (D)   Height. Maximum height is 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 56-275) (Ord. 3703, § 2, 10-2-2007; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-
2012)
§ 156.180 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking spaces will be provided in the B-l District in accordance
with §§
156.350 et scq.
(Prior Code, § 56-276) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.195 GENERALLY.
   The B-2 Highway Commercial District is intended for the purpose of servicing
highway travelers and local residents with automotive related uses or
commercial uses at higher densities generally accessed by motor vehicles. The
regulations set forth in this subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the regulations in the B-
2 Business District.
(Prior Code, § 56-301) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.196 PERMITTED USES.
   In District B-2, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the B-l Business District;
   (B)   New and used vehicle dealers, garages or service stations; provided
that, none of the activities of a junk dealer, auto wrecking or salvage shall
be carried on in this classification;
   (C)   Bowling alleys, miniature golf courses or driving ranges;
   (D)   Motels or hotels;
   (E)   Restaurants;
   (F)   Drive-in establishments;
   (G)   Farm and industrial equipment sales and services as an automatically
allowed use in a B-2 zone; provided that none of the activities of a junk
dealer, equipment wrecking or salvage shall be carried on in this
classification;
   (H)   Printing and publishing establishments;
   (I)   Car wash facilities;
   (J)   Commercial operations and businesses, intended for the purpose of
servicing travel and recreational users;
   (K)   Garden centers and landscaping nurseries;
   (L)   Mobile homes sales;
   (M)   Service stations;
   (N)   Shopping centers; and
   (O)   Child care centers or preschools, provided they meet child care center
standards in §
156.304(D)(1) through (14).
(Prior Code, § 56-302) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3791, § 1, 6-1-2010;
Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.197 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The following conditional uses may be located in the B-2 District,
subject to the provisions hereof:
      (1)   Any conditional use permitted in the B-1 Commercial District;
      (2)   Enclosed manufacturing, provided the uses are not obnoxious or
offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise;
      (3)   Lumberyards;
      (4)   Truck terminals and truck wash facilities;
      (5)   Apartments or living quarters situated in an office or business
building;
      (6)   Beer parlors, taverns, bars and nightclubs;
      (7)   Miniwarehouses;
      (8)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305 pertaining to same;
      (9)   Campgrounds and RV parks;
      (10)   Recycling centers, with enclosed storage areas;
      (11)   Cargo containers storage; and
      (12)   Building contractor's office with storage facilities.
      (13)   Aboveground storage of LNG (liquid natural gas), subject to the
provisions of §
156.308(D).
   (B)   In authorizing any of the permitted or conditional uses in this
District, it shall be required that all storage of materials, products or
equipment, except that which is displayed for sale, shall be within an enclosed
building or in an open yard so screened that the stored items are not visible
at human eye level within 300 feet of the property line.
(Prior Code, § 56-303) (Ord. 3253, § 6, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3417, § 1, 6-4-2002; Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 3703, § 3, 10-
2-2007; Am. Ord. 3792, § 1,7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord.
3847, § 1, 6-5-2012)
§ 156.198 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the B-
2 District:
   (A)   Use and structures clearly incidental to the permitted and conditional
uses; and
   (B)   Billboards and advertising signs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 154 of this code.
(Prior Code, §56-304) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.199 SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Setback and height regulations for the B-2 District are as follows:
   (A)   Front yard. The minimum front yard setback shall be no less than 20
feet. Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
   (B)   Side yard. No side yard setback is required, but if a side yard
setback is provided, it must be no less than 5 feet. If the property is
adjacent to a property whose zoning requires a side yard setback, then no less
than a 5-foot setback must be provided. When property is adjacent to a public
alley, the setback shall be 5 feet. The side yard shall be no less than 10 feet
where the side yard adjoins a street.
   (C)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except for a lot abutting an A or
R district, where the rear yard shall be 20 feet.
   (D)   Height. Maximum height is 75 feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 56-305) (Ord. 3703, § 4, 10-2-2007; Am. Ord. 3763, passed 7-7-
2009; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.200 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the B-2 District in
accordance with §§
156.350 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 56-306) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
B-3 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.215GENERALLY.
   This district is designed to provide for a wide range of retail, office,
amusement and service uses normally found in a downtown or central business
district. Commercial use of the highest density and intensity of use are
permitted in this district. The regulations set forth in this subchapter, or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter, are
the district regulations in the B-3 Business District.
(Prior Code, § 56-331) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.216 PERMITTED USES.
   In District B-3, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Any retail business or service establishment supplying commodities or
performing services such as the following:
      (1)   Appliance and television shop;
      (2)   Auto sales and service;
      (3)   Bakery;
      (4)   Barbershop;
      (5)   Banks and detached banking facilities (ATM);
      (6)   Beauty shop;
      (7)   Bowling alley;
      (8)   Cafe, enclosed;
      (9)   Clothing store;
      (10)   Department store;
      (11)   Drugstore;
      (12)   Furniture store;
      (13)   Gift shop;
      (14)   Hardware store;
      (15)   Hotel and motel;
      (16)   Jewelry store;
      (17)   Laundry pickup and delivery station;
      (18)   Parking garage;
      (19)   Parking lots and other off-street parking facilities;
      (20)   Plumbing shop;
      (21)   Restaurant, enclosed;
      (22)   Tavern;
      (23)   Telephone exchange;
      (24)   Variety store;
      (25)   Apartments on floors other than the ground floor of commercial
buildings;
      (26)   Car wash facilities;
      (27)   Detached banking facilities (ATM);
      (28)   Child care centers or preschools, provided they meet child care
center standards in §
156.304(D)(1) through (14);
      (29)   Personal and professional services;
      (30)   Private schools, including but not limited to business or
commercial schools, and dance or music academies;
      (31)   Public and private charitable institutions;
      (32)   Public parks, buildings and grounds;
      (33)   Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural type
including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts,
libraries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and
facilities;
      (34)   Sales and showrooms, including service facilities and rental of
equipment, provided all displays and merchandise are within the enclosure walls
of the buildings; and
      (35)   Stores or shops for the sale of goods at retail and/or wholesale.
   (B)   Any use permitted in the B-2 Business District.
(Prior Code, § 56-332) (Ord. 3253, § 8,9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.217 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the B-3 District, subject to
the provisions hereof:
   (A)   Any conditional use permitted in the B-2 Commercial District;
   (B)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305 pertaining to same; and
   (C)   Enclosed manufacturing, provided it is not obnoxious or offensive by
reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise. In authorizing the
conditional use in the district, it shall be required that all storage of
materials, products or equipment shall be within an enclosed building.
(Prior Code, § 56-333) (Ord. 3253, § 7, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.218 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the B-
3 District: buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted and
conditional uses.
(Prior Code, § 56-334) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.219 SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No building in the B-3 District shall exceed 10 stories or 100
feet in height.
   (B)   Yards. No front, side or rear yard is required in the B-3 Business
District.
(Prior Code, § 56-335) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.220 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   No off-street parking spaces shall be required in the B-3 District.
(Prior Code, § 56-336) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.235 GENERALLY.
   The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed to provide for a variety of
light industrial and related uses. Industrial uses permitted in this district
shall conform to performance standards which are intended to limit potential
impacts to adjacent property by means of smoke, dust, heat, glare, vibration
and noise. The regulations set forth in this subchapter, or set forth elsewhere
in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter, are the district
regulations in the I-1 light industrial district.
(Prior Code, § 56-361) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.236 PERMITTED USES; USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In District I-1, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-3 Business District;
      (2)   Industrial uses, except those specifically permitted in the I-
2 Heavy Industrial District and except those which by reason of the emission of
odor, dust, fumes, smoke, noise and other obnoxious characteristics would be
harmful to the public health, safety and general welfare. No use shall be
permitted or so operated as to produce or emit:
         (a)   Smoke or paniculate matter in accordance with the state ambient
regulations;
         (b)   Dust, fly ash, radiation, gases, heat, glare or other effects
which are obviously injurious to humans or property at the property line;
         (c)   Vibration or concussion perceptible without instruments at the
property line; and
         (d)   The noises shall not exceed 55 dB at any point along the
property line:
 
Octave Band       Sound Level
0 - 75 CPS        55 dB
75 - 1,200 CPS    40 dB
1,200 - 4,800 CPS 25 dB
Above 4,800 CPS   22 dB
 
   (B)   Permitted uses may include uses such as:
      (1)   Assembly of metal products;
      (2)   Building materials, storage and sales;
      (3)   Dyeing and cleaning establishment;
      (4)   Farm and industrial equipment sales;
      (5)   Laboratories;
      (6)   Manufacture and assembly of electrical and electronic appliances;
      (7)   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials such a bone, cloth,
aluminum, cork, fiber, leather, glass, plastic, paper, stones, tin, rubber and
paint;
      (8)   Manufacturing of light sheetmetal products, including heating and
ventilation equipment;
      (9)   Machine shop or other metalworking, excluding drop hammers and
other noise-producing tools;
      (10)   Grain storage bins;
      (11)   Stone and monument works;
      (12)   Storage of farm agricultural products;
      (13)   Truck and freight terminals;
      (14)   Utility substations and pumping stations;
      (15)   Warehouses and wholesale businesses;
      (16)   Building contractors office and storage facilities;
      (17)   Cement batch plants, but not including asphalt batch plants;
      (18)   Recreation buildings or buildings for training facilities for
humans and animals. No permanent outside kennels, pens, corrals or other
enclosures will be allowed to house animals except pursuant to a temporary
permit to house animals not to exceed 7 days, which maybe issued by the city;
      (19)   Sexually oriented businesses, provided, however, that the business
is operated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 117 of this code of
ordinances;
      (20)   Crematory;
      (21)   Cargo containers;
      (22)   Miniwarehouses, subject to the provisions of §
156.298.
   (C)   Living quarters used by watchpersons or custodians of the industrially
used property are permitted.
   (D)   All storage of materials, products or equipment, except that which is
displayed for sale, shall be within an enclosed building or in an open yard so
screened that the stored items are not visible at human eye level within 300
feet of the property line.
   (E)   Industrial wastes shall be of a quantity and nature as not to
overburden the public sewage disposal facilities, or to raise odor and
unsanitary effects beyond the property line.
(Prior Code, § 56-362) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3506, § 3, 1-6-2004; Am
Ord. 3674, 11-21-2006; Am. Ord. 3689, § 1, 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 3703, § 5,10-2-
2007; Am. Ord. 3729, 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. 3758, 5-5-2009; Am. Ord. 3784, § 1,
2-2-2010; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.237 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the I-1 Light Industrial
District, subject hereto:
   (A)   Any conditional use permitted in the B-3 Commercial District;
   (B)   Racetracks;
   (C)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305;
   (D)   Livestock and poultry commercial sales facilities located not less
than ¼ mile from any residential dwelling, whether such residential dwelling is
occupied or not. Keeping of any individual heads of livestock or poultry not to
exceed 30 days.
   (E)   Commercial solar conversions systems (solar farms) provided the
project conforms to provisions set forth in §
156.313.
(Prior Code, § 56-363) (Ord. 3169, § 1, 6-2-1998; Am. Ord. 3253, § 9, 9-7-1999;
Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 3878, passed 10-
1-2013; Am. Ord. 4181, § 1, 10-29-2024)
§ 156.238 AREA, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Area, setback and height regulations in the I-1 District are as follows:
   (A)   Lot area. No minimum lot area is required.
   (B)   Front yard. A 25-foot front yard is required, except where the front
yard abuts a residential district, or is located across a public right-of-way
from a residential district, the front yard shall be 30 feet with screening.
   (C)   Side yard. A 10-foot side yard is required, except where the side yard
abuts a residential district, where the side yard shall be 25 feet with
screening from residential districts.
   (D)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except along the rear of a lot
abutting a residential district, where the rear yard shall be 25 feet.
   (E)   Height. Maximum height is 6 stories or 90 feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 56-364) (Ord. 3169, § 1, 6-2-1998; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.239 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking regulations in the I-1 District shall be in accordance with §§
156.350 at seq.
(Prior Code, § 56-365) (Ord. 3169, § 1, 6-2-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
ORIGINAL TOWN BUSINESS HISTORIC DISTRICT
§ 156.240 GENERALLY.
   The area included shall be that area generally referred to as the Original
Town of North Platte, bordered on the south by A Street, to the north by Front
Street, from Vine Street to Chestnut Street, including the areas around the
Lincoln County Courthouse and Downtown North Platte, more particularly
described within Attachment "A" set forth on the following page, a map of the
Original Town Business Historic District outlined within the red boundary lines
and dated July, 2017, is hereby designated as the City of North Platte Original
Town Business Historic District under § 33.07 (H) of this Code.
(Ord. 3969, passed 10-3-2017)
   ATTACHMENT A:
   Map of Original Town Business Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2610.png]
§ 156.241 NATURE OF THE DISTRICT.
   The City of North Platte Original Town Business Historic District consists
of a plat of the Original Town of North Platte which was first established in
1867 by General Dodge of the Union Pacific Railroad. Original Town connected
residential to the Original Town Business district, which include the Lincoln
County Courthouse, the Post Office /Federal Building, the Carnegie Library and
the Historic Lincoln Highway. There are numerous commercial and residential
buildings that continue to maintain historical significance. The historic
district contains a collection of late nineteenth and early twentieth century
commercial and residential buildings that represent the architectural and
cultural legacy of North Platte, Lincoln County, Nebraska. The architectural
and historic characteristics of the City of North Platte Original Town Business
Historic District are hereby deemed significant and worthy of preservation.
(Ord. 3969, passed 10-3-2017)
I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.250 GENERALLY.
   The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is intended to accommodate industrial uses
that by their nature, exceed the industrial performance standards established
in the I-1 Light Industrial District. The regulations set foith in this
subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this
subchapter, are the district regulations in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District,
(Prior Code, § 56-391) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.251 PERMITTED USES.
   In District I-2, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the I-1 District;
   (B)   Any other industrial, manufacturing or commercial agriculture use,
except those uses specifically permitted as a conditional use in this district;
and
   (C)   Living quarters used by watchpersons or custodians of the industrially
used property.
   (D)   The noises shall not exceed 65 dB at any point along the property
line.
(Prior Code, § 56-392) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.252 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The following conditional uses maybe located in the I-2 District,
subject to the provisions hereof:
      (1)   Any conditional use permitted in the I-1 Industrial District;
      (2)   Abattoirs;
      (3)   Alfalfa dehydrating plants;
      (4)   Acetylene gas manufacturing or storage;
      (5)   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;
      (6)   Asphalt manufacturing or refining;
      (7)   Burlap manufacture;
      (8)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture;
      (9)   Disinfectants manufacture;
      (10)   Exterminator and insect poison manufacture;
      (11)   Fertilizer manufacturing and bone grinding;
      (12)   Forage plant;
      (13)   Auto wrecking yard or junkyard only when located inside a building
or when wholly enclosed by a well-maintained wooden fence not less than 8 feet
in height and in which the openings or cracks are less than 15% of the total
area;
      (14)   Oiled, rubber or leather goods manufacture;
      (15)   Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture;
      (16)   Printing ink manufacture;
      (17)   Sanitary landfills or other solid waste facilities;
      (18)   Racetracks;
      (19)   Storage or baling of scrap paper, iron, bottles, rags or junk;
      (20)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions hereof pertaining to same;
      (21)   Police motor vehicle impound yard;
      (22)   Outdoor gun range;
      (23)   Asphalt batch plants; and
      (24)   Aboveground storage of hazardous, flammable, or explosive
materials. Refer to §
158.308.
   (B)   In authorizing any of the uses listed in this section, there maybe
imposed such reasonable requirements as to the landscaping, screening and other
features of the development as maybe deemed necessary to protect adjacent
property and prevent objectionable or hazardous conditions.
(Prior Code, § 56-393) (Ord. 3253, § 10, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3506, § 4, 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.253 SETBACK, AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Setback, area and height regulations in the I-2 district are as follows:
   (A)   Lot area. No minimum lot area is required.
   (B)   Lot width. No minimum lot width is required.
   (C)   Front yard. A 25-foot front yard is required, except where the front
yard abuts a residential district, or is located across a public right-of-way
from a residential district, the front yard shall be 30 feet with screening.
   (D)   Side yard. A 10-foot side yard is required, except where the side yard
abuts a residential district, where the side yard shall be 25 feet with
screening from residential districts.
   (E)   Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except where the side yard abuts
an A or R District, where the rear yard shall be 35 feet.
   (F)   Height.  Maximum height is 6 stories or 90 feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 56-394) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.254 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the I-2 District in
accordance with §§
156.350 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 56-395) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
PUBLIC POWER AND IRRIGATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 156.260 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Intent. The Public Power and Irrigation Overlay District is an overlay
district designed to provide public power and irrigation districts with basic
guidelines that would allow for normal and regular operations of the district
to function in areas that may conflict with existing regulations. When there is
a conflict, these overlay districts supersede other city regulations set forth
in the City of North Platte Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Public Power and Irrigation District is defined in Neb. RS 70-601 as:
      (1)   DISTRICT means a public power district, public irrigation district,
or public power and irrigation district, organized under Neb. RS Chapter 70,
Article 6, either as originally organized or as the same may from time to time
be altered or extended, and includes, when applicable, rural public power
districts organized under Neb. RS Chapter 70, Article 8, and subject to Neb. RS
Chapter 70, Article 6;
      (2)   MUNICIPALITY, when used in relation to the organization or charter
of a public power district or to the election of successors to the board of
directors of a public power district, means any county, city, incorporated
village, or voting precinct in this state;
      (3)   GOVERNING BODY, whenever used in relation to any municipality,
means the duly constituted legislative body or authority within and for such
municipality as a public corporation and governmental subdivision. When used
with reference to a voting precinct, GOVERNING BODY means the county board of
the county in which the precinct is located;
      (4)   IRRIGATION WORKS means any and all sites, dams, dikes, abutments,
reservoirs, canals, flumes, ditches, head gates, machinery, equipment,
materials, apparatus, and all other property used or useful for the storage,
diversion, damming, distribution, sale, or furnishing of water supply or
storage of water for irrigation purposes or for flood control, or used or
useful for flood control, whether such works be operated in conjunction with or
separately from electric light and power plants or systems;
      (5)   POWER includes any and all electrical energy and capacity
generated, produced, transmitted, distributed, bought, or sold, hydrogen
produced, stored, or distributed, and ethanol produced for purposes of
lighting, heating, power, and any and every other useful purpose whatsoever;
      (6)   PLANT or SYSTEM includes any and all property owned, used,
operated, or useful for operation in the district's business, including the
generation by means of water power, steam, or other means or in the
transmission, distribution, sale, or purchase of electrical energy, hydrogen,
or ethanol for any and every useful purpose, including any and all irrigation
works which may be owned, used, or operated in conjunction with such power
plant or system;
      (7)   ENERGY EQUIPMENT includes, but is not limited to, equipment or
facilities used or useful to generate, produce, transmit, or distribute power,
heated or chilled water, or steam for use by the district or the district's
commercial and industrial customers; and
      (8)   PUBLIC POWER INDUSTRY means public power districts, public power
and irrigation districts, municipalities, registered groups of municipalities,
electric cooperatives, electric membership associations, joint entities formed
under the Interlocal Cooperation Act, joint public agencies formed under the
Joint Public Agency Act, agencies formed under the Municipal Cooperative
Financing Act, and any other governmental entities providing electric service.
(Ord. 4091, § 1, 3-15-2022)
§ 156.261 DESIGNATED PUBLIC POWER AND IRRIGATION OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   The area, as shown on the official zoning map of the city, encompassing
approximately 86.32 acres and more specifically delineated by the map prepared
by the City of North Platte Planning Department entitled "Public Power and
Irrigation Overlay".
   (A)   Hunting is permitted by the Public Power and Irrigation District and
regulated by the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission and any other governmental
agencies charged with enforcing hunting regulations in the State of Nebraska.
   (B)   Structures may be built if those structures are necessary for
operations. Storage of supplies and equipment or any other operations are also
permitted providing they adhere to any requirements of other governmental
agencies charged with enforcing regulations located in or around the flood
plain and river channel.
   (C)   The Public Power and Irrigation District owner or occupant shall keep
the property well maintained, however, are considered exempt from North Platte
Code of Ordinances §§
95.02 and
95.03 regarding height of vegetation, tree piles and stagnant water, provided
that trees, shrubs, vines or flowers growing upon or near any public road or
public road right-of-way be maintained in such a fashion as to not cause an
obstruction or impede public travel.
(Ord. 4091, § 1, 3-15-2022)
H-1 HOSPITAL DISTRICT
§ 156.270 GENERALLY.
   This district is designed to accommodate medical facilities including
hospitals, clinics, doctor's offices, office buildings and associated uses. The
regulations set forth in this subchapter, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter, are the district regulations in
the H-1 Hospital District.
(Prior Code, § 56-411) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.271 PERMITTED USES.
   In District H-1, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for 1 or more of the
following uses:
   (A)   Hospitals for human care; and
   (B)   The following accessory hospital facilities, buildings and uses:
      (1)   Home health agencies;
      (2)   Hospice;
      (3)   Medical, dental and related offices;
      (4)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (5)   Outpatient care facilities;
      (6)   Medical testing and laboratory facilities;
      (7)   Educational and conference facilities;
      (8)   Medical research and diagnostic facilities;
      (9)   Acute and chronic care facilities;
      (10)   Treatment for drug and alcohol addiction;
      (11)   Treatment for contagious diseases and mental illness;
      (12)   Ambulatory and special care facilities;
      (13)   Red Cross facilities, and helicopter landing areas;
      (14)   Pharmacies, drug stores, gift shop and laundry facilities;
      (15)   Recreational and daycare facilities;
      (16)   Place of worship, minor banking facilities and travel agencies;
      (17)   Cafeterias, restaurants and vending areas;
      (18)   Barber and beauty shops;
      (19)   Apartments and dorms that are hospital related;
      (20)   Rest homes, convalescent homes, mortuaries, cremation facilities;
and
      (21)   Medical, dental and nursing schools.
(Prior Code, § 56-412) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.272 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses maybe located in the hospital district,
subject to the provisions hereof:
   (A)   Towers, telecommunication facilities, antennas, subject to the
provisions of §
156.305; and
   (B)   Professional offices, as defined in §
156.176.
(Prior Code, § 56-415) (Ord. 3253, § 11, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. 3506, § 5, 1-6-
2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.273 SETBACK, AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Minimum setbacks. Minimum setbacks in the H-1 district are as follows:
      (1)   Front yard.  The front yard setback shall be 25 feet.
      (2)   Side yard. Side yard setback shall be 25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   (B)   Height. Seventy-five feet maximum above grade. Height may exceed 75
feet if the structure is located on a medical campus where the maximum height
may be allowed at 150 feet above grade subject to compliance with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations.
   (C)   Minimum area of district. The minimum area zoned H-1 Hospital District
shall be 10 acres. An area less than 10 acres may be rezoned if it is an
extension of an existing H-1 District and the total area is 10 acres or
greater, the extension of the district may include areas separated by streets
and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 56-413) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3513, § 1, 2-17-2004;
Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 3866, passed 1-15-2013)
§ 156.274 PARKING AND LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with §§
156.350 et seq. Twenty percent of all yards shall be landscaped.
(Prior Code, § 56-414) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
AAA AIRPORT HAZARD AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 156.280 INTENT.
   The intent of this district is to protect the safe use of public airports
and their airport hazard area, within the City of North Platte, Nebraska and
its extraterritorial jurisdiction, by limiting the location and height of
structures within the operation, approach, transition and turning zones around
airports which are registered with the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics, as
designated on the Official Zoning Map of North Platte, Nebraska.
   (A)   Designated public airport. The designated public airport for which
these regulations have been prepared is the North Platte Regional Airport
located in Sections 5 and 6 Township 13 N Range 29 W, Lincoln County, Nebraska.
   (B)   Airport hazard area description. In accordance with Neb. RS 3-303,
every political subdivision that has adopted a comprehensive plan and zoning
regulations, and has an airport hazard area within the area of its zoning
jurisdiction, must adopt, administer, and enforce the regulations in this
section for such airport hazard area.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.281 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water designed and set aside that is used or
intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and utilized or to
be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes; includes any
related buildings and facilities. AIRPORT includes only public-use airports
with state or federally approved airport layout plans and military airports
with military service-approved military layout plans.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft;
that penetrates any approach, operation, transition, or turning zone.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided in the act, but such area
shall not extend in any direction a distance in excess of 3 miles from the
adjacent boundary of an airport; the limits provided for approach, operation,
transition, and turning zones.
   AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN. A scaled drawing of existing and proposed land,
buildings, and facilities necessary for the operation and development of an
airport prepared in accordance with state rules and regulations and federal
regulations and guidelines.
   APPROACH ZONE. A zone that extends from the end of each operation zone and
is centered along the extended runway centerlines.
   ELECTRIC FACILITY. An overhead electrical line, including poles or other
supporting structures, owned or operated by an electric supplier as defined in
Neb. RS 70-1001.01, for the transmission or distribution of electrical power to
the electric supplier's customers.
   EXISTING RUNWAY. An instrument runway or a visual runway that is paved or
made of turf that has been constructed or is under construction.
   INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. An existing runway with precision or non-precision
instrument approaches as developed and published by the Federal Aviation
Administration or an existing or proposed runway with future precision or non-
precision instrument approaches reflected on the airport layout plan. After the
effective date of this act, an airport shall not designate an existing or
proposed runway as an instrument runway if the runway was not previously
designated as such without the approval of the airport's governing body after a
public hearing on such designation.
   OPERATION ZONE. A zone that is longitudinally centered on each existing or
proposed runway.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or body politic and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative
thereof.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any municipality, city, village, or county.
   PROPOSED RUNWAY. An instrument runway or a visual runway that has not been
constructed and is not under construction but that is depicted on the airport
layout plan that has been conditionally or unconditionally approved by, or has
been submitted for approval to, the Federal Aviation Administration.
   RUNWAY. A defined area at an airport that is prepared for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed or installed by man, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission
or distribution lines.
   TRANSITION ZONE. A zone that extends outward at a right angle to the runway
centerline and upward at a rate of 1 foot vertically for every 7 feet
horizontally. The height limit of a transition zone begins at the height limit
of the adjacent approach zone or operation zone and ends at a height of 150
feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   TURNING ZONE'S OUTER LIMIT. The area located at a distance of 3 miles as a
radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting
adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone,
operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zone is 150
feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an airport layout plan approved by
the Federal Aviation Administration, a military service-approved military
layout plan, or any planning documents submitted to the Federal Aviation
Administration by a competent authority.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.282 AIRPORT ZONES.
   The following are intended for use with this specific overlay zoning
district.
   (A)   Airport hazard area consists of operation zones, approach zones,
turning zones, and transition zones.
   (B)   Approach zones extend from the end of each operation zone and are
centered along the extended runway centerlines. The zones dimensions are:
      (1)   Instrument runways:
         (a)   Length and width: The approach zones extend from the operation
zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the extended runway
centerline. The approach zones are 1,000 feet wide at the end nearest the
runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway
centerline 10 miles from the operation zone where it is 16,840 feet wide.
         (b)   Height limit: The height limit of the approach zones begins at
the elevation of the operation zone and rises 1 foot vertically for every 50
feet horizontally (50:1) up to a maximum of 150 feet above the nearest existing
or proposed runway end. At 3 miles from such operation zone, the height limit
resumes sloping 1 foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally and continues
to the 10-mile limit.
      (2)   Visual runways:
         (a)   Length and width: The approach zones extend from the operation
zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the extended runway
centerline. The approach zones are 500 feet wide at the end nearest the runway
and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway centerline 3
miles from the operation zone, the approach zone is 3,700 feet wide.
         (b)   Height limit: The height limit of the approach zones begins at
the elevation of the operation zone and rises 1 foot vertically for every 40
feet horizontally (40:1) up to a maximum of 150 feet above the nearest existing
or proposed runway end.
   (C)   Operation zones are longitudinally centered on each existing or
proposed runway:
      (1)   Length:
         (a)   For existing and proposed paved runways, the operation zones
begin and end 200 feet beyond the end of each runway.
         (b)   For existing and proposed turf runways, the operation zones
begin and end at the runway ends.
         (c)   For existing and proposed instrument runways, the operation zone
is 1,000 feet wide, with 500 hundred feet on either side of the runway
centerline.
         (d)   For all other existing and proposed runways, the operation zone
is 500 feet wide, with 250 feet on either side of the runway centerline.
      (2)   Height limit: The height limit of the operation zones is the same
as the nearest point on an existing or proposed runway or the surface of the
ground, whichever is higher.
   (D)   Transition zones extend outward at right angles to the runway
centerline and upward at a rate of 1 foot vertically for every seven feet
horizontally (7:1). The height limit of these zones begins at the height limit
of the adjacent operation zones or approach zones. The transition zones end at
a height of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
   (E)   Turning zones extend three miles as a radius from the corners of the
operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines,
excluding any area within the approach zone, operation zone, or transition
zone. The height limit of the turning zones is 150 feet above the nearest
existing or proposed runway end.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.283 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   No building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other
structure or appurtenance of any kind or character shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, repaired, or established, nor shall any tree or other object of
natural growth be allowed to grow, above the heights described in §
156.282 above.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.284 AIRPORT ZONING MAP AND LOCATION.
   The boundaries, operation zones, approach zones, transition zones, and
turning zones of the airport are indicated on the Airport Zoning Map, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. A copy of the Airport
Zoning Regulations and Airport Zoning Map shall at all times be on file in the
office of the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.285 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, APPLICATION FORMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Anyone wishing to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair, or establish
any building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tower, smokestack,
chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or
character; or to plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth
which, when mature, would violate the requirements of §
156.282 above, within the Airport Hazard Area must first obtain a permit from
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Exception. Within the turning zones, no permit shall be required for
any construction, reconstruction, repair, or planting of anything which, when
completed, or, in the case of natural growth, when mature, does not exceed 75
feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
   (C)   Application form. Application for a permit as required under these
regulations shall be made on a form to be available in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall indicate the approximate location, ground elevation
with reference to the end of the nearest runway or landing strip and height of
the proposed structure or planting (mean sea level elevation).
   (D)   Permit fee. The fee for each permit issued shall be established by the
City Council as indicated on the fee schedule annually adopted by the City
Council.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.286 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Within the Airport Hazard Area, no non-conforming building,
transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or
appurtenance of any kind or character or object of natural growth, and no such
structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have
deteriorated or decayed to an extent of 50% or more of their original
condition, or abandoned for a period of 12 months or more, shall hereafter be
replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered, replanted, or allowed
to grow, as the case may be, to a height above the heights permitted by these
regulations. Transmission lines and other communication lines shall be
interpreted as all poles, wires, guys and all other equipment necessary for the
operation and maintenance of same within the regulated zone.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below for certain electric
facilities, all such airport zoning regulations adopted under the act shall
provide that before any non-conforming structure or tree may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or
replanted, a permit authorizing any replacement, alteration, repair,
reconstruction, growth, or replanting must be secured from the administrative
agency authorized to administer and enforce the regulations. A permit shall be
granted under this division if the applicant shows that the replacement,
alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting of the non-conforming
structure, tree, or non-conforming use would not result in an increase in
height or a greater hazard to air navigation than the condition that existed
when the applicable regulation was adopted. For non-conforming structures other
than electric facilities, no permit under this division shall be required for
repairs necessitated by fire, explosion, act of God, or the common enemy or for
repairs which do not involve expenditures exceeding more than 60% of the fair
market value of the non-conforming structure, so long as the height of the non-
conforming structure is not increased over its preexisting height.
   (C)   An electric supplier owning or operating an electric facility made
non-conforming by the adoption of airport zoning regulations under the Airport
Zoning Act may, without a permit or other approval by the political subdivision
adopting such regulations, repair, reconstruct, or replace such electric
facility if the height of such electric facility is not increased over its
preexisting height. Any construction, repair, reconstruction, or replacement of
an electric facility, the height of which will exceed the preexisting height of
such electric facility, shall require a permit from the political subdivision
adopting such regulations. The permit shall be granted only upon a showing that
the excess height of the electric facility will not establish or create an
airport hazard or become a greater hazard to air navigation than the electric
facility that previously existed.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.287 MARKING OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a specific structure or
object in the Airport Hazard Area exceeds the height restrictions and existed
prior to the promulgation of these regulations, the owner(s) and/or the lessor
(s) of the premises on which the structure or object is located shall be
notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator. The owner(s) and lessor(s)
shall, within a reasonable time, permit the marking and lighting of the
structure or object. The Zoning Administrator shall specify the required
marking and lighting, consistent with these regulations entitled "Marking and
Lighting of Structures". The cost of marking or lighting shall not be assessed
against the owner or lessor of said premises.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY; ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce these regulations and
shall be the administrative agency provided for in Neb. RS 3-319, and shall
have all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as
provided in the Airport Zoning Act.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.1 VARIANCE FROM REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to erect any structure, increase the height of any
structure, permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her property
in a manner inconsistent with the airport zoning regulations adopted under this
regulation may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from the zoning
regulations in question. Such variances shall be allowed only if the Board of
Adjustment makes the same findings for the granting of variances generally as
set forth in Neb. RS 19-907 through 19-912.01, except that if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed structure or alteration of a structure does not
require any modification or revision to any approach or approach procedure as
approved or written by the Federal Aviation Administration on either an
existing or proposed runway and the applicant provides signed documentation
from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed structure or
alteration of the structure will not require any modification or revision of
any airport minimums, such documentation may constitute evidence of undue
hardship and the Board of Adjustment may grant the requested variance without
such findings. Any variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions
that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this regulation.
   (B)   In granting any permit under or variance from any airport zoning
regulation adopted under this regulation, the administrative agency or Board of
Adjustment may, if it deems such action is advisable to effectuate the purposes
of the regulation and reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such permit
or variance as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to
permit the political subdivision, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to
flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.2 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The City of North Platte Board of Adjustment shall be the Board of
Adjustment with respect to these regulations. Said Board shall have and
exercise the powers conferred by Neb. RS 3-320 et. seq. and such other powers
and duties as are conferred and imposed by law.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.3 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Any use or structure that is permitted in the primary zoning district where
this district is overlain, provided all buildings, structures and other
obstacles comply with the height restrictions established in §
156.282 above.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.4 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Any conditional use that is permitted in the primary zoning district where
this district is overlain where such conditional use has been duly authorized
by the City Council in accordance with the requirements and procedures
specified in this regulation, provided all buildings, structures and other
obstacles comply with the height restrictions set forth in §
156.282 above.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.5 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Any accessory use or structure that is permitted in the primary zoning
district where this district is overlain, provided all buildings, structures
and other obstacles comply with the height restrictions established in §
156.282 above.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 156.288.6 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between any airport zoning regulations adopted
under this regulation and any other regulations applicable to the same area,
whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the
use of land, or any other matter, and whether such other regulations were
adopted by the political subdivision which adopted the airport zoning
regulations or by some other political subdivision, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 3887, passed 1-21-2014)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 156.290 EFFECT.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 56-421) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.291 HEIGHT OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   Public, semi-public or public service buildings, institutions or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding
60 feet.
   (B)   Churches and temples may be erected to height not exceeding 75 feet if
the building setback from each lot line is at least 1 foot for each 2 feet of
additional height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is located.
(Prior Code, § 56-422) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.292 EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN APPURTENANCES FROM HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   The height limitations contained in the district regulations in this chapter
do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators,
chimneys, grain elevators or other appurtenances usually required to be placed
above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 56-423) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.293 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON LOT.
   In commercial and industrial districts, more than 1 structure housing a
permitted use or permissible use may be erected on a single lot; provided that,
yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as
though it were on an individual lot.
(Prior Code, § 56-424) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.294 PERMITTED PROJECTIONS FROM BUILDINGS.
   Cornices, belt courses, sills, ornamental features and other similar
architectural features may project no more than 2 feet into any required yard
or into any required open space.
(Prior Code, § 56-425) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.295 PARKING OR STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license
plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other
than in completely enclosed buildings.
(Prior Code, § 56-426) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.296 HEIGHT REGULATIONS ADJACENT TO AIRPORTS.
   (A)   Within the area of an approach zone of a runway of an airport or
landing field, no building, utility line, pole, smokestack, chimney, wires,
tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, repaired or established, nor shall any tree or other
object of natural growth be allowed to grow, to exceed a height that would
interfere with the takeoff or landing of a plane with a glide angle of 1 foot
vertical for every 40 feet horizontal, such glide to be computed as beginning
200 feet from the end of the runway. Beyond the glide path and within the
approach zone, no obstruction shall exceed a height of 150 feet.
   (B)   An approach zone is located at each end of each runway, landing strip
or other portion of the airfield used regularly for landing or taking off of
airplanes. The approach zones are 500 feet in width at each end of each runway
or landing strip, and all approach zones expand uniformly to a width of 1,500
feet at a distance of 5,000 feet from the ends of the respective runways or
landing strips. The outer boundary line of each approach zone shall be a
straight line perpendicular to, and bisected by, the extended centerline of its
respective runway or landing strip.
(Prior Code, § 56-427) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.297 ELECTRIC FENCING FOR TEMPORARY GRAZING; TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND CARGO
CONTAINERS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT TEMPORARY DEBRIS HOLDING SITES.
   (A)   The temporary grazing of livestock with use of electric fences in all
zoning districts within the city and the city's 2-mile zoning jurisdiction
maybe allowed with special permission from the City Administrator. An
application shall be filed with the City Administrator. The livestock and
electric fences shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any residential
dwelling. Permission shall be granted for a period of 90 days within 1 year.
Failure to maintain the electric fence in good repair shall result in
revocation of the permit. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to allow
commercial feeding operations.
   (B)   Temporary building, non-permanent structure and cargo containers shall
be allowed as follows:
      (1)   Temporary building, non-permanent structures, and cargo containers
maybe allowed in all zoning districts within the city and the city's 2-mile
zoning jurisdiction, except where otherwise stated in this chapter, and maybe
allowed with a permit from the City Planner or his/her designee.
      (2)   Application for a permit for a temporary building, non-permanent
structure or cargo container will be made to the City Planner or his/her
designee.
         (a)   The City Planner or his/her designee shall authorize temporary
use only if he/she determines that:
            1.   The use will not impair the normal operation of present or
future use of the site;
            2.   The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not
adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
         (b)   The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the
permit and shall not exceed 6 months. The applicant may apply for an extension,
which shall be granted, or not, at the discretion of the City Planner or his/
her designee.
         (c)   Emergency management temporary debris holding site. Temporary
debris holding site maybe permitted in any city zoning district subject to the
following guidelines:
            1.   In the event of a declared emergency, a local, state or
federal office of emergency management may apply for a temporary permit to
allow a debris holding site on any city or county owned property. The permit is
issued by the Planning Administrator or his/her designee at his/her discretion
and will be valid for a maximum period of 6 months from date of issue.
            2.   If the debris holding site is needed for longer than a period
of 6 months, the applicant may reapply for a temporary permit which may be
issued at the discretion of the Planning Administrator or his/her designee.
(Prior Code, § 56-428) (Am. Ord. 3670, § 2, 10-17-2006; Am. Ord. 3703, § 6, 10-
2-2007; Am. Ord. 3740, passed 10-7-2008; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.298 MINIWAREHOUSES.
   (A)   Limitation on activities. Activities in miniwarehouse facilities shall
be subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   No activity other than the rental of storage cubicles and the
administration of the facility shall be permitted within the facility.
      (2)   Prohibited uses include but are not limited to the following:
garage sales or miscellaneous sales; servicing or repair of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, lawn mowers and other similar equipment; and transfer and
storage firms.
   (B)   Access to building.
      (1)   No storage buildings may open into required yards.
      (2)   Only 1 entrance and exit shall be allowed per street frontage.
   (C)   On-site circulation and driveway widths.
      (1)   All 1-way driveways shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and
1 15-foot travel lane. Traffic direction and parking shall be designated by
signing or painting.
      (2)   All 2-way driveways shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and
2 12-foot travel lanes.
      (3)   The parking lanes maybe eliminated when the driveway does not serve
storage cubicles.
   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking requirements are as follows:
      (1)   One space for each 10 storage cubicles, equally distributed
throughout the storage area. This parking requirement can be accomplished with
the parking lanes as set forth in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Two spaces for the manager's quarters; and
      (3)   One space for every 25 storage cubicles, to be located convenient
to the project office, for the use of prospective clients.
   (E)   Landscaping.
      (1)   A landscaping strip, 20 feet in width, shall be provided along all
street frontages and along borders where the subject property abuts any
residential zoning district.
      (2)   Interior landscaped areas shall also be shown on the development
plan.
   (F)   Fencing and screening.
      (1)   Fencing shall be required around the perimeter of the project
behind any landscaping strips required by division (E)(1) of this section.
      (2)   The fence shall be a minimum of 6 to 8 feet in height and
constructed of materials approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (G)   Storage restrictions.
      (1)   All storage on the facility site must be within enclosed buildings.
      (2)   Storage of hazardous materials as identified by the city's Fire
Marshal is prohibited anywhere on these sites.
      (3)   Records showing no evidence of infestation shall be available at
the business office. Pest control inspections will be made once every 2 years
by a professional exterminator.
   (H)   Height limits of structures and maximum dimensions of storage
cubicles.
      (1)   The maximum height for any structure within the facility shall be
20 feet.
      (2)   The dimensions of any storage cubicle or interconnected cubicles
shall not exceed 22 feet in width or 36 feet in depth.
   (I)   Application for conditional use or special use permit.  Any
conditional use or special use permit application shall include the following
information, in addition to that required by other sections of this chapter:
      (1)   A development plan, showing the location, design and layout of
buildings, parking areas, circulation routes, fences and screen walls,
lighting, signage, existing and proposed contours, and drainage and solid waste
disposal facilities; and
      (2)   Architectural elevations of all buildings, specifying height and
construction materials.
   (J)   Required notices to customers.
      (1)   Notice of the requirements under divisions (A) and (G) of this
section will be handed in written form to all customers of the facility.
      (2)   A written notice of the requirements of divisions (A) and (G) of
this section must be posted in each cubicle.
(Prior Code, § 56-429) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.299 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose of standards. Recognizing that unrestricted use of residential
properties for purposes of an occupational nature other than that normally
associated with home living has a detrimental effect on both the residential
area in which the occupations are conducted and the areas properly designated
for such uses and further recognizing that this detrimental effect results in
the depreciation of values, welfare, happiness and morale of the entire
community, it is the purpose of this section to eliminate this detrimental
effect by creating performance standards for the establishment and conditions
for the operation and continuance of home occupations.
(Prior Code, § 56-430)
   (B)   Definition.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity carried on in a dwelling by a
member of the immediate family residing therein, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and
does not change the character thereof. No outside storage, buying or selling of
a commodity on the premises will be permitted. In connection with a home
occupation, no sign or display other than a nameplate not more than 2 square
feet in area shall be used to indicate from the exterior that the building is
being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. Uses that
generate traffic or parking problems or that would change the residential
character of the immediate neighborhood shall not be deemed to be suitable for
home occupation permits.
(Prior Code, § 56-431)
   (C)   Application. An application for a home occupation shall be made to the
city's Development Department on a form provided and approved by the
Development Director or his or her designee. The application shall set forth
the name of the property owner, name of the occupant if different, their
addresses, phone numbers, the location of the home occupation, identification
of area where the occupation will occur, a description of the home occupation,
number of persons employed, hours of operation, materials produced, used on the
occupation and types and sizes of vehicles used on the home occupation
including the area for parking, signature of owner/operator of the home
occupation agreeing to comply with the city home occupation performance
standards and such other pertinent information required or deemed necessary by
the Director of Development or his or her designee to determine the applicant's
conformance to the home occupation performance standards.
(Prior Code, § 56-432)
   (D)   Filing fee. A fee prescribed in the City Council's annual resolution
of service charges shall be paid to the Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 56-433)
   (E)   Permit application approval. No home occupation shall be conducted in
a residential zoning district until the Development Director or his or her
authorized agent has approved the home occupation permit application and found
all compliance with the home occupation performance standards identified in
division (F) below. A home occupation application is valid for 5 years from the
date of approval.
(Prior Code, § 56-434)
   (F)   Performance standards. The performance standards for a home occupation
are as follows:
      (1)   No employment outside the immediate family;
      (2)   Incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes;
      (3)   Does not change the residential character of the home or
neighborhood;
      (4)   No storage outside;
      (5)   No signage except a 2 square feet or smaller nameplate at the
entrance to the home;
      (6)   The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic beyond the normal to the district in which it is located. Normal is 4
trips per day;
      (7)   No parking problems;
      (8)   Limited to use of the main building only;
      (9)   Limited to use of normal residential vehicles. No commercial rated
vehicles except for delivery step van vehicles (see § 76.16);
      (10)   No unusual sounds/noises beyond those normally found in a
residential area;
      (11)   No noxious odors annoying to a person of average sensibilities
residing in a residential zone; and
      (12)   Buying or selling of a commodity on the premises is limited to
incidental sales totaling no more than 10% of total gross income generated by
the use.
(Prior Code, § 56-435)
(Ord. 3175, § 2, 7-7-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.300 USES NOT ALLOWED UNDER HOME OCCUPATION PROVISIONS.
   The following uses are examples of uses that are not allowed under home
occupation provisions, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Auto repair/service;
   (B)   Appliance repair/service;
   (C)   Vehicle painting/service;
   (D)   Sport utility service/repair;
   (E)   Furniture manufacturing; and
   (F)   Auto parts/salvage.
(Prior Code, § 56-436) (Ord. 3175, § 2, 7-7-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.301 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Conditions. A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter may be terminated if the Director of Development
or his or her designee makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   That any condition of the home occupation permit has been violated;
      (2)   That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety
or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
      (3)   That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
      (4)   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has
been suspended for 6 consecutive months or more; and
      (5)   That the condition of the premises, or of the district of which it
is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the
purpose and intent of this section.
   (B)   Appeal. Within 5 working days of a revocation, an appeal may be made
to the City Council, through the Development Director or his or her designee.
The Director of Development or his or her designee within 10 working days of
the receipt of an appeal of his or her revocation action shall report his or
her findings of fact and decision to the City Council. The City Council shall
determine the facts and may revoke, modify or allow to remain unchanged the
home occupation permit in accordance with the Council's final determination.
   (C)   Non-transferable. A home occupation permit granted in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter shall not be transferred, assigned, nor used
by any person other than the permittee, nor shall the permit authorize the home
occupation at any location other than the 1 for which the permit is granted.
(Prior Code, § 56-437) (Ord. 3175, § 2, 7-7-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.302 PERIODIC REVIEW.
   The Development Department may conduct annual and/or periodic review of home
occupations to ensure compliance to all home occupation provisions.
(Prior Code, § 56-438) (Ord. 3175, § 2, 7-7-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.303 LEGALLY EXISTING HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Any home occupation previously approved by the city pursuant to a
conditional use permit shall continue to be a legally approved home occupation
until expiration of its 5-year approval period. All home occupations within
these parameters must re-apply for a home occupation permit 6 months prior to
the expiration date of the last approved conditional use approval.
(Prior Code, § 56-439) (Ord. 3175, § 2, 7-7-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.304 CHILD CARE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Definitions.
      CHILD CARE CENTER.
         (a)   A child care center operation licensed by the State of Nebraska,
in a provider's place of residence or a site other than the residence serving
13 or more children at any 1 time for on the average of less than 24 hours per
day, for compensation, either indirect or direct, and on a regular basis.
         (b)   All child care centers and family child care homes shall be
operated in full compliance with all of the applicable laws and regulations of
the state pertaining to child care, whether the laws and regulations exist at
the time of the passage of this chapter or are hereafter adopted. Child care
centers and family child care homes do not include preschools and nursery
schools.
         (c)   A child care center and preschool as an accessory use. A child
care center, if sited on the premises of an operating community service center
such as, but not limited to, a private or public school, place of worship,
community center, hospital or library and associated with that activity, shall
be considered accessory to the principal use of the property in which the child
care center is located.
      FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES. A child care operation defined by Nebraska State
Law and licensed by the State of Nebraska, including a family child care home I
and family child care home II.
         (a)   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I. A child care operation in the
provider's place of residence which serves at least 4 ,but not more than 8
children at any one time. A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I provider may be approved
by the state to serve no more than 2 additional school age children during non-
school hours.
         (b)   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME II. A child care operation either in the
provider's place of residence or a site other than the residence serving 12 or
fewer children at anyone time.
(Prior Code, § 56-440)
   (B)   Intent. The city recognizes that there is a continued and growing need
for quality child care programs and facilities and there is a need to establish
and maintain licensure of providers by the state of all such programs to insure
that providers are competent and are using safe and adequate facilities. The
city finds and declares that the siting, development and supervision of child
care programs, all sizes, are a matter of statute and local concerns and should
be dealt with uniformly on the state and local levels, at the same time,
insuring the siting of the facilities meet community zoning standards. It is
the intent and purpose of this chapter to make it easier to set up and operate
child care program facilities by setting pre-described standards and by
simplifying the review and approval process. At the same time, these standards
are intended to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods.
(Prior Code, § 56-441)
   (C)   Family child care home. A family child care home shall be permitted by
right in all zoning districts permitting residences providing that:
      (1)   State licensing standards and requirements are met, including those
pertaining to building, fire and health codes;
      (2)   Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage shall conform to
those applicable to the zoning district;
      (3)   One off-street parking space is provided for each non-resident or
non-family member employee in addition to the 2 spaces per single family or
duplex unit required. The residential driveway is acceptable for this purpose;
      (4)   If located on an arterial street, an off-street drop-off/pick-up
area must be provided;
      (5)   Signage. A maximum of 1 6-square foot freestanding or wall mounted
sign maybe used. Only indirect illumination is allowed. If a freestanding sign
is used, it must be located 15 feet from the front lot line, placed in the
front yard area only, and may not exceed 5 feet in height;
      (6)   Alley usage. Use of the public alleys by child care facilities is
discouraged due to impact on neighboring residences;
      (7)   Playground equipment must be located in a secured area by a 3-foot
high fence in the rear yard;
      (8)   No structured area for active play or play structures may be
located in the front yard or within 10 feet of a side or rear lot line;
      (9)   The site must be landscaped and maintained in a manner compatible
with adjacent and neighboring residences;
      (10)   No structural or decorative alteration that will alter the
residential character of an existing residential structure used for a family
child care home is permitted. Any new or remodeled structure must be designed
to be compatible with the residential character of the surrounding
neighborhood; and
      (11)   A copy of the approved state child care facility license shall be
filed with the city's Department of Development.
(Prior Code, § 56-442)
   (D)   Child care centers in residential districts. A child care center may
be allowed in the following zoning districts: R-2 Single-Family and Duplex, R-
3 Multiple-Family and R-4 Single-Family, mobile homes and sectional homes,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. In reviewing, approving and
issuing a conditional use permit for any child care center, the following
standards must be complied with, unless specifically modified by the city:
      (1)   State licensing standards and requirements are met, including those
pertaining to building, fire and health codes;
      (2)   Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage shall conform to
those applicable to the zoning district;
      (3)   One off-street parking space is provided for each 1-1/2 employee on
duty at any one time and 1 space per child care center vehicle owned (if any).
Shift changes are recognized;
      (4)   If located on an arterial street, an off-street drop-off/pick-up
area must be provided;
      (5)   Signage. A maximum of one 6-square foot freestanding or wall sign
may be used. Only indirect illumination is allowed. If a freestanding sign is
used, it must be located 15 feet from the front lot line, placed in the front
yard area only, and may not exceed 5 feet in height. If the center is located
in a non-residential zoning district, the sign may be increased to 20 square
feet, not exceeding 8 feet in height;
      (6)   Alley usage.  Use of the public alley by the child care facility is
discouraged due to impact on neighboring residences;
      (7)   Playground equipment must be located in a secured area by a 6-foot
high fence in the rear yard;
      (8)   No structured area for active play or play structures may be
located in the front yard or within 10 feet of a side or rear lot line;
      (9)   The site must be landscaped and maintained in a manner compatible
with adjacent and neighboring residences;
      (10)   No structural or decorative alteration that will alter the
residential character of an existing residential structure used for a child
care center is permitted. Any new or remodeled structure must be designed to be
compatible with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood;
      (11)   A child care center shall not be located within 300 feet measured
along the shortest street-travel distance of another child care center,
excluding any child care center that is an accessory use in a community service
facility;
      (12)   Street location.  In a residential zone, no child care center
shall be located along any dead-end or cul-de-sac street;
      (13)   A copy of the approved state child care facility license shall be
filed with the city's Development Office; and
      (14)   A certificate of occupancy must be approved and issued by the
city's Development Office prior to the occupancy of any child care center.
(Prior Code, § 56-443)
   (E)   Continued authorization of existing lawfully licensed and operating
family child care home and child care center.
      (1)   Any family child care home, child care center, including those
classified as an accessory use, lawfully licensed by the state and operating
prior to the adoption of this chapter shall have the right to continue
operating. Any change in use, requiring an amendment to its current state
license, or should cease to operate for 1 year, a conditional use permit must
be applied for and granted by the city authorizing the use. This does not
include change in ownership only.
      (2)   Any and all family child care homes or child care centers in this
category must submit a copy of its state license within 60 days of the adoption
of this chapter to the city's Development Department. Thereafter, any and all
family child care homes or child care centers shall submit a copy of its state
license to the city's Development Department within 30 days of receipt from the
state.
(Prior Code, § 56-444)
   (F)   Revocation of conditional use permit.
      (1)   The Planning Commission on its own motion may and, upon direction
of the City Council, shall hold a public hearing upon the question of the
revocation of a conditional use permit granted under or pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Notification of the public hearing shall be given in accordance
herewith; provided, however, the owner of the subject property, the owner of
the child care facility and the state's Health and Human Services System, Child
Care Licensing Division, shall have his or her notice mailed by registered
mail, postage paid, return receipt requested.
         (3)   (a)   A conditional use permit granted pursuant to a hearing
maybe revoked and the child care facility use maybe terminated if the Planning
Commission and City Council make any of the following findings:
               1.   That any condition of a conditional use permit or an
amended conditional use permit has not been complied with or has been violated;
               2.   That the child care facility use is detrimental to the
public health, safety or is a public nuisance;
               3.   That the conditional use permit was obtained by fraud;
               4.   That the use for which the permit was granted is not being
exercised; or
               5.   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or
been suspended for 1 year or more.
            (b)   After a public hearing upon the revocation of a conditional
use permit, the Planning Commission shall report its findings of fact and
recommendations to the City Council and, upon receipt of such recommendations,
the City Council shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify or allow to
remain unchanged the conditional use permit in accordance with the City
Council's final determination in such matters.
(Prior Code, § 56-445)
(Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.305 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose of provisions. The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by
the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over certain aspects of
telecommunications services. This section is intended to regulate towers,
telecommunications facilities and antennas in the city zoning jurisdiction in
conformance with the Act without prohibiting or tending to prohibit any person
from providing wireless telecommunications services. Telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas in the city zoning jurisdiction, to protect
residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of installation
of towers, telecommunication facilities and antennas through careful design,
siting and camouflaging, to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of
towers and other antenna support structures rather than the construction of
additional single use towers, to avoid potential damage to property caused by
towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas by ensuring such structures
are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, repaired
and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound
and to ensure that towers, telecommunication facilities, and antennas are
compatible with surrounding land uses.
(Prior Code, § 56-446)
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   As used in this subchapter, the following terms mean:
         ANTENNA. A device, designed and intended for transmitting or receiving
television, radio or microwave signals, direct satellite service (including
direct-to-home satellite service) and/or video programming services via
multipoint distribution services.
         ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure other than a
tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
         APPLICANT. Any person that applies for a conditional use permit to
install a tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna.
         APPLICATION. A process by which the owner of a tract of land within
the zoning jurisdiction of the city submits a request to develop, construct,
modify or operate a tower upon such tract of land. The term APPLICATION
includes all written documents, verbal statements and representations, in
whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning the
request.
         CONFORMING COMMERCIAL EARTH STATION. A satellite dish which is 2
meters or less in diameter and is located in an area where commercial or
industrial uses are generally permitted under this code.
         ENGINEER. Any engineer qualified and licensed by any state or
territory of the United States of America.
         OWNER. Any person with fee simple title or a leasehold exceeding 10
years in duration to any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the
city who desires to develop, construct, modify or operate a tower upon the
tract of land.
         PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or other legal entity, private or public, whether for
profit or not for profit.
         SATELLITE DISH.  An antenna consisting of a radiation element intended
for transmitting or receiving television, radio, microwave or radiation signals
and supported by a structure with or without a reflective component to the
radiating dish, usually circular in shape.
         STEALTH. Any telecommunications facility, tower or antenna which is
designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not
limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated
into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a
tower such as light poles, power poles and trees.
         TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Any cables, wires, lines, waive guides,
antennas or any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission
or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed
upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES shall not include:
            1.   Any conforming commercial earth station antenna 2 meters in
diameter or less which is located in the city's commercial or industrial zones.
            2.   Any earth station antenna 1 meter or less in diameter,
regardless of the zoning applicable to the location of the antenna.
         TOWER.  A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure
constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term
TOWER shall not include amateur radio operator's equipment as licensed by the
FCC.
         TOWER OWNER.  Any person with an ownership interest of any nature in a
proposed or existing tower following the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      (2)   All terms in this subchapter which are not specifically defined
herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934,
the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Rules and Regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
(Prior Code, § 56-447)
   (C)   Location of towers, telecommunication facilities and antennas.
      (1)   Towers, telecommunication facilities and antennas shall be
permitted conditional uses in all zoning districts, except F-1 (Floodplain
District).
      (2)   No person shall develop, construct, modify or operate a tower,
telecommunication facilities or antennas upon any tract of land within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city prior to approval of its application for a
conditional use permit by the Mayor and City Council and issuance of the
building permit by the city. Applicants shall submit their application for a
building permit to the Development Department.
      (3)   All towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas constructed
within the zoning jurisdiction of the city after approval and adoption of this
chapter shall conform to the Building Code and all other construction standards
set forth in the city code, federal and state law, and applicable American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards. Upon completion of construction
of a tower, telecommunication facilities or antennas and prior to the
commencement of use, an engineer's certification that the tower is structurally
sound and in conformance with all of the aforementioned applicable regulatory
standards shall be filed with the Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 56-448)
   (D)   Application to develop a tower, telecommunication facilities or
antenna. Prior to commencement of development or construction of a tower,
telecommunication facilities or antenna, an application shall be submitted to
the city's Development Department for a conditional use permit and shall
include the following in addition to the requirements herein:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and if
applicable, the lessee of the tract of land upon which the tower,
telecommunication facilities or antenna is to be located. Applicants shall
include the owner of the tract of land and all persons having an ownership
interest in the proposed tower, telecommunication facilities or antennas. The
application shall be executed by all applicants.
      (2)   The legal description and address of the tract of land on which the
tower is to be located.
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other
towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas, or useable antenna support
structures within a 1/4 mile radius of the location of the proposed tower,
telecommtrnication facilities or antenna, including publicly and privately
owned towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas, or structures.
      (4)   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has made
diligent, but unsuccessful efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate
the applicant's telecommunications facilities on a tower or useable antenna
support structure with a 1/4 mile radius of the proposed tower location or
written technical evidence from an engineer that the applicant's
telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or co-located on another
support structure within a 1/4 mile radius of the proposed location.
      (5)   Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
tower, telecommunication facilities or antennas will meet the Building Code,
all other construction standards set forth by the city code and federal and
state law and applicable ANSI standards.
      (6)   Color photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower,
telecommunication facilities or antenna with a photo-realistic representation
of the proposed tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna as it would
appear viewed from the nearest residential zoned property and nearest roadway,
street or highway.
      (7)   Descriptions and diagrams of the proposed tower, telecommunications
facilities and/or antenna, manufacturer's literature, appurtenances such as
buildings, driveway, parking area and fences or other security enclosures with
sufficient detail to allow persons reviewing the application to understand the
kind and nature of the proposed facilities.
      (8)   After the conditional use permit is approved, an application for a
building permit shall be submitted.
(Prior Code, § 56-449)
      (E)   Conditional use permit; procedure. The procedure for acquiring a
conditional use permit shall be the procedure set forth hereat.
(Prior Code, § 56-450)
   (F)   Setbacks and separation or buffer requirements; illumination.
      (1)   All towers, telecommunication facilities, or antennas up to 55 feet
in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying
setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers,
telecommunication facilities or antennas in excess of 55 feet in height shall
be set back 1 additional foot for each foot of tower height in excess of 55
feet. The height of a tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna shall be
measured from the grade at the foot of the base pad to the top of any such
tower, telecommunications facilities or antennas attached thereto. Setback
requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower, telecommunication
facilities or antenna to the property line of the tract of land on which it is
located.
      (2)   Towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas exceeding 100 feet
in height may not be located in any residential zoned district and must be
separated from all residential zoned land by a minimum of 200 feet or 100% of
the height of proposed tower, whichever is greater.
      (3)   Towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas of 100 feet or
less in height maybe located in residential zoned districts; provided, the
tower, telecommunication facilities or antennas is separated from any
residential structure, school or church by a minimum of 100% of the height of
proposed tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna.
      (4)   Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from
other towers:
         (a)   Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other
towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice or guyed, by a minimum of 750
feet.
         (b)   Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from
all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet.
      (5)   Towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas shall not be
artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). In cases where there are residential zoned properties located within a
distance of 300% of the height of the tower, any tower, telecommunication
facilities or antenna subject to this subchapter shall be equipped with dual
mode lighting.
(Prior Code, § 56-451)
   (G)   Security and fences. All self-supporting lattice or guyed towers,
telecommunication facilities or antennas shall be enclosed within a security
fence or other structure designed to preclude unauthorized access. Monopole
towers shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will preclude to the
extent practical, unauthorized climbing of the structure.
(Prior Code, § 56-452)
   (H)   Exterior finish. Towers, telecommunication facilities or antennas not
requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances
compatibility with adjacent land uses, subject to review and approval by the
City Council as pan of the application approval process. All towers,
telecommunication facilities or antennas which must be approved as a
conditional use shall be of stealth design unless stealth features are
impractical or the cost of the features represents an undue burden on the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 56-453)
   (I)   Landscaping. All tracts of land on which towers, antenna support
structures, telecommunications facilities and/or antennas are located shall be
subject to the landscaping requirements of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 56-454)
   (J)   Maintenance, repair or modification of existing towers.  All towers,
telecommunication facilities or antennas constructed or under construction on
date of adoption of this chapter may continue in existence as a non-conforming
structure and maybe maintained or repaired without complying with any of the
requirements of this subchapter. Nonconforming structures or uses may not be
enlarged or the degree of non-conformance increased without complying with this
subchapter, including applying for and obtaining a conditional use permit. Any
modification or reconstruction of a tower constructed or under construction on
date of adoption of this chapter shall require compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter including applying for and obtaining a conditional use
permit. The application shall describe and specify all items which do not
comply with diis subchapter and may request, subject to approval by the Mayor
and City Council, an exemption from compliance as a condition of the
conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 56-455)
   (K)   Inspections. The city reserves the right to conduct an inspection of
towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and antennas
upon reasonable notice to the owner or operator to determine compliance with
this subchapter and to prevent structural and equipment failures and accidents
which may cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Inspections may be
made to determine compliance with the Building Code and any other construction
standards set forth in the city code, federal and state law or applicable ANSI
standards.
(Prior Code, § 56-456)
   (L)   Maintenance. The towers, antenna support structures,
telecommunications facilities and antennas shall, at all times, be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same does not
constitute to or a danger to the life or property of any person or the public.
(Prior Code, § 56-457)
   (M)   Abandonment. If any tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna
shall cease to be used for a period of 1 year, the Development Department shall
notify the owner that the site will be subject to a determination by the
Development Department Director or his or her designee that the site has been
abandoned. Upon issuance of a notice to show cause by the Development
Department Director, the owner shall have 30 days to show by a preponderance of
the evidence that the tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna has been
in use or under repair during the period of apparent abandonment. In the event
the tower owner fails to show that the tower, telecommunication facilities or
antenna has been in use or under repair during the relevant period, the
Development Department Director or his or her designee shall issue a final
determination of abandonment of the site and the owner shall have 75 days
thereafter to dismantle and move the tower, telecommunication facilities or
antenna. In the event the tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna is not
dismantled and removed, the tower, telecommunication facilities or antenna
shall be declared a public nuisance by the Development Department Director or
his or her designee and a written request shall be directed to the City
Attorney to proceed to abate the public nuisance pursuant to the city code, and
charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the tower is located
or the owner of record of the real estate.
(Prior Code, § 56-458)
(Ord. 3253, § 12, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.306 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   A manufactured home shall be located and installed according to the
same standards for foundation system, permanent utility connections, setback
and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family
dwelling on the same lot.
   (B)   All manufactured homes located outside of mobile home parks shall have
upon it any required seal as set forth in Neb. RS 71-1555 et seq., and be in
conformance with the following.
      (1)   The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   The home shall have no less than an 18-foot exterior width.
      (3)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2-1/
2 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run.
      (4)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single-family
construction.
      (5)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock.
      (6)   The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and
removable towing apparatus removed.
      (7)   The home must bear a label certifying that is was built to
compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards,
24 C.F.R. §§ 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, or a modular housing unit, as defined in Neb. RS
71-1557, bearing the seal of the Department of Health and Human Service System.
(Prior Code, § 56-459) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.307 EXCEPTION TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
   If, at the time of passage of this subchapter, a lot or the aggregate of
contiguous lots or land parcels held in a single ownership, has an area or
dimension which does not meet the lot size requirements of the district in
which the property is located, the lot or aggregate holdings maybe occupied by
any use permitted outright in the district subject to the other requirements of
the district.
(Prior Code, § 56-460) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.308 ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANKS (ASTs).
   (A)   All aboveground storage tanks (ASTs) shall comply with the following
requirements.
      (1)   All ASTs must comply with conditional use regulations as stated in
§§
156.320 through
156.322.
      (2)   All ASTs shall be on a minimum site of 10 acres of land. Maximum
fuel land density is 1,000 gallons per acre.
      (3)   All ASTs shall comply with all requirements of the Nebraska State
Fire Marshal's Office and the City of North Platte Fire Marshal's Office (if
within city limits) and proof of said compliance is required to be filed with
the Development Department prior to operating said location.
      (4)   All ASTs shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any right-of-
way.
      (5)   All ASTs shall have a minimum separation distance of 300 feet from
any structure not on the applicant's property or development.
      (6)   All sites with ASTs shall have 2 separate and distinct ingress and
egress points to the site. All entry points shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide
unobstructed, and a 20-foot wide fire lane shall be provided to the tank
location, and shall be reviewed and signed off on, as to location, by the
County Highway Superintendent in the case of a county road and/or NDOR in the
case of a state or federal highway and/or City of North Platte in case of a
city road. Proof of said compliance is required to be filed with the
Development Department prior to operating said location.
      (7)   All ASTs shall provide specific list and data to the local fire
departments regarding the materials stored on the site.
      (8)   An AST that is established as a fuel depot may be required to
conduct a traffic study to determine traffic impacts of the site on the
surrounding transportation system.
      (9)   An AST may be required to have available and stored on site any
equipment and/or supplies needed to contain any spill, leak, fire or disaster
as deemed necessary by the local Fire Department and/or State Fire Marshal as
stated in §
94.056.
      (10)   An AST shall be required to allow for and comply with annual
inspections by the local and/or State Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Revocation of an AST conditional use permit.
      (1)   A conditional use permit for an AST site granted pursuant to a
hearing may be revoked and the AST site/facility may be terminated if the
Planning Commission and City Council make any of the following findings:
         (a)   That any condition of a conditional use permit or an amended
conditional use permit has not been complied with or has been violated;
         (b)   That the AST is detrimental to the public health, safety or is a
public nuisance;
         (c)   That the conditional use permit was obtained by fraud;
         (d)   That the use for which the permit was granted is not being
exercised; and
         (e)   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or been
suspended.
   (C)   No variances are permitted for this use.
   (D)   Aboveground storage of liquid natural gas (LNG).
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section:
         (a)   Storage of LNG must comply with conditional use regulations as
provided in §§
156.320 through
156.322.
         (b)   All LNG containers shall be on a minimum site of 5 acres of land
located in conjunction with a truck plaza.
         (c)   Property line setbacks shall be at a minimum equal to the height
of the storage container from all property lines.
         (d)   No LNG storage container shall exceed the maximum height allowed
in the B-2 Commercial District.
         (e)   All LNG containers must comply with local fire code regulations
as provided in Natural Fire Protection Association 52, Vehicular Gaseous Fuel
Systems Code.
         (f)   An LNG site shall be subject to annual inspections by the local
and/or State Fire Marshal.
      (2)   The provisions of division (B) above shall apply to the revocation
of a conditional use permit relating to the storage of LNG.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 3847, § 2, 6-5-2012)
§ 156.309 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce
the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
   (B)   Definitions. The following are defined for the specific use of this
section.
      ROTOR DIAMETER. The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor
blades.
      SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which
has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to primarily
reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
      STRUCTURALLY MOUNTED SYSTEM. A small wind energy system that mounted on a
building including residential dwellings.
      TOTAL HEIGHT. The highest point, above ground level, reached by a rotor
tip or any other part of the wind energy conversion system.
      TOWER HEIGHT. The height above grade of the first fixed portion or stub
portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
   (C)   Requirements. Certain requirements as set forth below shall be met:
      (1)   Tower height.
         (a)   For property sizes between 1/2 acre and 1 acre the tower height
shall be limited to 80 feet.
         (b)   For property sizes of 1 acre or more, there is no limitation on
tower height, except as imposed by FAA regulations.
      (2)   Setbacks. No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire
anchors, may extend closer than accessory building setbacks of the appropriate
zoning district to the property lines of the installation site.
      (3)   Noise.
         (a)   Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 50 dBA, as measured
at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.
         (b)   The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as
utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
      (4)   Approved wind turbines. Small wind turbines must have been approved
under the Emerging Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or
any other small wind certification program recognized by the American Wind
Energy Association.
      (5)   Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes.
         (a)   Applications for small wind energy systems shall be accomplished
by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base,
and footings.
         (b)   An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with
official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska
certified by a professional engineer licensed and certified in Nebraska shall
also be submitted.
         (c)   The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
         (d)   Wet stamps shall not be required.
      (6)   Compliance with FAA and NDA Regulations. Small wind energy systems
must comply with applicable FAA and NDA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
      (7)   Compliance with National Electrical Code.
         (a)   Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code.
         (b)   The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
      (8)   Utility notification.
         (a)   No small wind energy system shall he installed until evidence
has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
         (b)   Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
 Wind Turbine - Non-commercial Meteorological Towers
                          Wind Turbine - Non-        Meteorological Towers
                          commercial
Property lines (other     One times the total height One times the total height
than right angle corners
Neighboring dwelling      One times the total height One times the total height
units*
Road rights-of-way**      One times the total height One times the total height
Other rights-of-way       One times the total height One times the total height
Public conservation lands
including wildlife        N/A                        600 feet
management areas and
state recreation areas
Wetlands, USFW types III, N/A                        600 feet
IV, and V
Other structures not on   N/A                        One times the total height
the applicant's site
River bluffs over 15 feet N/A                        One times the total height
*   The setback for dwelling units shall be reciprocal in that no dwelling unit
shall be constructed within the same distance required for a non-commercial
wind turbine.
**   The setback shall be measured from any future rights-of-way if a planned
change or expanded right-of-way is known.
 
   (D)   Commercial/utility grade wind energy systems.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of commercial/utility grade wind energy systems
within North Platte.
   (E)   Definitions. The following are defined for the specific use of this
section.
      AGGREGATE PROJECT. Projects that are developed and operated in a
coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or
more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated
infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility
maybe owned by a separate entity but are also part of the aggregated project.
      COMMERCIAL WECS. A wind energy conversion system of equal to or greater
than 100 kW in total name plate generating capacity.
      FAIL ZONE. The area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower
base, in which a guyed tower will collapse in the event of a structural
failure. This area is less than the total height of the structure.
      METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. A tower which is erected primarily to measure wind
speed and directions plus other data relevant to siting a wind energy
conversion system. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment
used by airports, the NDOR, or other applications to monitor weather
conditions.
      ROTOR DIAMETER. The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor
blades.
      TOTAL HEIGHT. The highest point, above ground level, reached by a rotor
tip or any other part of the wind energy conversion system.
      TOWER. The vertical structures that support the electrical, rotor blades,
or meteorological equipment.
      TOWER HEIGHT. The height above grade of the first fixed portion or stub
portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
      WIND ENERGY CONSERVATION SYSTEM (WECS). An electrical generating facility
comprised of 1 or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but
not limited to: power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological
towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid.
      WIND TURBINES. Any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts
the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy using airfoils or
similar devices to capture the wind.
   (F)   Requirements. Commercial/utility grade wind energy systems shall be
permitted as a conditional use in the A-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2 Districts.
Permanent meteorological towers shall be considered part of the system.
Temporary meteorological towers may be permitted by a zoning (building) permit
and limited to two years or less. The following requirements and information
shall be met and supplied:
      (1)   The name(s) of project applicant;
      (2)   The name of the project owner;
      (3)   The legal description and address of the project;
      (4)   A description of the project of the project including; Number,
type, name plate generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total
height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the feeder lines;
      (5)   Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind
turbines, electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. This site
layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale;
      (6)   Engineer's certification;
      (7)   Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property;
      (8)   The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines;
      (9)   A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property
and surrounding area, including any other WECS not owned by the applicant,
within 10 rotor distances of the proposed WECS;
      (10)   Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas (including bluffs)
within 1,320 feet of the proposed WECS;
      (11)   An acoustical analysis that certifies that the noise requirements
within this regulation can be met;
      (12)   FAA and NDA review and permit;
      (13)   Location of all known communication towers within 2 miles of the
proposed WECS;
      (14)   Decommissioning plan including the financial means to implement
the plan;\
      (15)   Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind resources
on adjacent properties not owned by the applicant.
   (G)   Aggregated projects.
      (1)   Aggregated projects may jointly submit a single application and be
reviewed under joint proceedings, including notices, public hearings, reviews
and as appropriate approvals.
      (2)   Permits maybe issued and recorded separately.
      (3)   Joint projects will be assessed fees as 1 project.
      (4)   Setbacks to property lines, not road rights-of way, may be less
when adjoining property owners are within the same aggregate project.
   (H)   Setbacks. All towers shall adhere to the setbacks as measured from the
hub established in the following table:
 WECS Wind Turbine -     Meteorological Towers
 Commercial/Utility WECS
                          WECS Wind Turbine -        Meteorological Towers
                          Commercial/Utility WECS
                          Diameter plus applicable
                          building setback; however,
Property lines            setback may be less when 2 One times the total height
                          adjoining property owners
                          are within the aggregate
                          project
Neighboring dwelling      2,000 feet                 One times the total height
units*
Road rights-of-way**      One times the total height One times the total height
Other rights-of-way       One times the total height One times the total height
Public conservation lands                            600 feet or a distance
including wildlife        One times the total height established by any state
management areas and                                 or federal agency
state recreation areas
Wetlands, USFW types III, 600 feet or a distance     600 feet or a distance
IV, and V                 established by any state   established by any state
                          or federal agency          or federal agency
Other structures not on   One times the total height One times the total height
the applicant's site
River bluffs over 15 feet One times the total height One times the total height
*   The setback for dwelling units shall be reciprocal in that no dwelling unit
shall be constructed within the same distance required for a commercial/utility
wind energy conversion system.
**   The setback shall be measured from any future rights-of-way if a planned
change or expanded right-of-way is known.
 
   (I)   Special safety and design standards. All towers shall adhere to the
following safety and design standards:
      (1)   Clearance of rotor blades or airfoils must maintain a minimum of 12
feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
      (2)   All commercial/utility WECS shall have a sign or signs posted on
the tower, transformer and substation, warning of high voltage. Other signs
shall be posted at the entrance to the site with the 911 address and emergency
contact information.
      (3)   All wind turbines, which are a part of a commercial/utility WECS,
shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.
      (4)   Consideration shall be given to painted aviation warnings on all
towers less than 200 feet.
      (5)   Color and finish.  All wind turbines and towers that are part of a
commercial/utility WECS shall be white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color.
Blades may be black in order to facilitate deicing; Finishes shall be matte or
non-reflective.
      (6)   Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of
strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA and
NDA permits and regulations. Red strobe lights shall be used during nighttime
ulumination to reduce impacts on neighboring uses and migratory birds. Red
pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.
      (7)   Other signage. All other signage shall comply with the sign
regulations found in these regulations.
      (8)   Feeder lines. All communications and feeder lines installed as part
of a WECS shall be buried, where feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a
WECS shall not be considered an essential service.
      (9)   Waste disposal. Solid and hazardous wastes, including but not
limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used
oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal rules and regulations.
      (10)   Discontinuation and decommissioning.  
         (a)   A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use after 1 year
without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the
Planning Administrator outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS
to service. All WECS and accessory facilities shall be removed to 4 feet below
ground level within 180 days of the discontinuation of use. This period may be
extended by the Planning Administrator following a written request by an agent
of the owner of the WECS.
         (b)   Each WECS project under this section shall have a
decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS
at the end of their serviceable life or upon being discontinued use. The cost
estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a professional engineer,
a contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or
experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial
resources that will be available to pay for decommissioning and removal of the
WECS and accessory facilities.
      (11)   Noise. No commercial/utility WECS shall exceed 50 dBA at the
nearest structure occupied by humans. Exception: a commercial/utility WECS may
exceed 50 dBA during periods of severe weather as defined by the US Weather
Service.
      (12)   Interference. The applicant shall rninimize or mitigate
interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone,
microwaves, or television signals caused by any WECS. The applicant shall
notify all communication tower operators within 5 miles of the proposed WECS
location upon application to the city for permits.
      (13)   Roads. In regard to roads applicants shall:
         (a)   Identify all county, municipal or township roads to be used for
the purpose of transporting WECS, substation parts, cement, and/or equipment
for construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS and obtain applicable
weight and size permits from the impacted jurisdictions prior to construction.
         (b)   Conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the
appropriate jurisdictions to determine existing road conditions. The survey
shall include photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of
the public facility.
         (c)   Be responsible for restoring the road(s) and bridges to pre
construction conditions.
      (14)   Drainage system. The applicant shall be responsible for immediate
repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction,
operation or maintenance of the WECS.
      (15)   Permit fees. Applicant shall remit an application fee set by the
Board of Cornmissioners.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.310 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Special events requirements.
      (1)   Intent. These requirements are focused on special events that
typically do not fall into specific criteria and are temporary in nature. These
events may include large numbers of people as well as vehicular traffic
(including recreational vehicles). These events are limited uses in the nature
of an amusement or attraction. Contemplated uses of this nature are:
         (a)   Tractor pulls; races;
         (b)   Festivals; concerts;
         (c)   Motorcycle or similar rallies;
         (d)   Fireworks displays;
         (e)   Sports events;
         (f)   Fairs and carnivals;
         (g)   Large, single event auctions.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   The Planning Administrator, if he/she determines that the use is a
one time, occasional, or annual event, under the control of a reliable sponsor,
may issue a letter of "Special Events Permit" and allow the activity to
proceed.
      (2)   Any special event where alcoholic beverages will be sold, allowed
and/or consumed shall require permit approval by the Planning Commission and
City Council as a conditional use permit, following all prescribed procedures
for said permit.
      (3)   If the Planning Administrator determines that the use will be
conducted occasionally (as opposed to a single event), or that the activity is
likely to be associated with site impacts (traffic, dust, noise and activity),
he/she may refer the matter to the Planning Commission and City Council.
      (4)   The Planning Commission and City Council, after an examination of
all facts and circumstances, and the imposition of appropriate conditions, may
allow the use on an occasional basis, as a conditional use permit or a
temporary permit.
   (D)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   Special events permit requirements shall include, but are not
limited to:
         (a)   Establish appropriate time limits for operation, if necessary;
         (b)   Establish necessary mitigation procedures that will need to be
undertaken to minimize traffic impacts;
         (c)   Establish the number of times the activity may operate;
         (d)   Establish the beginning and ending dates of said special event;
         (e)   Access;
         (f)   Set conditions as operating principles, including the advice and
approval of the North Platte Emergency Manager;
         (g)   Incorporate rules and conditions established by the Nebraska
State Fire Marshal, the Nebraska Liquor Commission, Nebraska State Patrol or
other Nebraska state agency and any resolutions established by North Platte;
      (2)   The special permit is a license to operate an activity. It maybe
revoked for failure to operate within the established conditions, and shall not
run from operator to operator.
      (3)   The special permit shall be signed by both the property owner and
the operator.
      (4)   Any special permit approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council shall also be countersigned by the Planning Administrator.
(Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.311 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUS).
   The main use of a lot for a single-family dwelling and an accessory dwelling
is allowed in the R-L, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Dwelling Districts under
the following conditions:
   (A)   The area of the lot must meet the required minimum lot area per family
for 2-family dwellings as set forth in the zoning district the lot is located
in (R-L, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts).
   (B)   The ADU shall comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   The total square footage of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed
the lesser of 40% of the total square footage of the main building or 800
square feet.
      (2)   The cumulative area of a detached accessory dwelling and any other
accessory building on the lot shall not exceed more than 55% of the total lot
area.
      (3)   The ADU shall have no more than 1 bedroom.
   (C)   The owner of the lot is required to live on the property but may
reside in either the main building or in the ADU.
   (D)   The ADU shall share utility connections with the main building.
   (E)   The ADU shall comply with the height regulations of the district the
dwelling is located in, provided that such ADU shall be no taller than the main
building.
   (F)   The ADU shall meet the required setbacks for the main building,
provided that any detached ADU shall be setback at least 50 feet beyond the
front lot line, except for corner lots where side lot line setbacks for the
side lot line abutting the street is determined by the building inspector based
on the setback requirements of the district.
   (G)   One parking stall is required for the ADU in addition to the required
parking for the single-family dwelling use of the main building.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.312 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of the recreational vehicle (RV) park development
regulations is to enable the orderly, safe, and nuisance-free development and
use of RV parks. It is the intent of these regulations to preserve the
integrity and attractiveness of the city and to maintain its orderly
appearance.
   (B)   Permitted zoning districts for recreational vehicle parks.
Recreational vehicle parks as regulated herein shall be permitted only after
approval of a conditional use permit within the Transitional Agricultural
District (TA), Highway Commercial District (B-2) Light Industrial District (I-
1), Heavy Industrial District (I-2) and Special Events District (S-1),
Residential Mobile Home District (R-M) by conditional use.
   (C)   Special design criteria for recreational vehicle parks. Ongoing
operations shall remain in conformance with the following guidelines, except as
otherwise modified by the conditional use permit granted for the facility:
      (1)   Minimum spacing. An RV park shall provide spaces to accommodate
various types of RVs. The minimum buffer area to be provided around each RV
space shall be 10 feet from side to side, 8 feet from rear to rear or front to
rear. A minimum of 5 feet shall be provided between RV patios and any adjacent
RV space. A minimum of 6 feet shall be provided between the appurtenant
structures attached to an RV and any adjacent RV space. No restroom shall be
closer than 25 feet to, nor further than 400 feet from, an RV space. Other
permanent buildings shall be set back at least 10 feet from any RV space.
      (2)   Landscaping/visual screening. All RV developments shall provide a
minimum setback on park property lines of 25 feet with landscaping or a privacy
fence with a 10-foot improvement setback.
      (3)   Recreation facilities. Recreational facilities include indoor rooms
with table games as well as pools, clubhouses, common barbecue/picnic areas,
and ball fields and playgrounds with swings, slides, sandboxes, and similar
recreational equipment. A variety of recreational facilities shall be provided
at a minimum of 25 square feet per RV space. Perimeter landscaping and
landscaping between RV spaces shall not be counted as a recreational amenity.
      (4)   Parking. A minimum of 1 guest parking space shall be provided for
every 10 RV spaces. One parking space shall be provided for each shift employee
and shall be conspicuously labeled as such. One covered parking space shall be
provided for a caretaker's residence, where applicable. Every RV must maintain
the ability to be pulled or moved at all times.
      (5)   Lot size. A recreational vehicle park shall be a minimum of lot
size of no less than 1 acre.
   (D)   Nonconformance to criteria. Recreational vehicle parks shall
continuously conform to the criteria set forth in this section and to the
conditions of the conditional use permit. Any recreational vehicle park which
fails to conform to these criteria shall be subject to review and possible
amendment or revocation of the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.313 COMMERCIAL SOLAR CONVERSIONS SYSTEMS (CSCS) REGULATIONS (SOLAR
FARMS).
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to provide standards for fixed-
panel photovoltaic solar farms or CSCS consisting of ground-mounted solar
panels capturing energy from the sun and converting it to electricity. The
provisions of this section are based on a ground-mounted photovoltaic facility
using a rammed post construction technique and panels that support the flow of
rainwater between each module and the growth of vegetation beneath the arrays
and limiting the impacts of stormwater runoff. The rammed post-construction
technique allows for minimal disturbance to the existing ground and grading of
the site. Based on the assumed solar farm design, the use should be low
intensity with minimal trip generation, low amounts of impervious cover, and
low emission thus the use is compatible in urbanized, non-urbanized, or low-
density areas with other uses.
   (B)   Permitted by conditional use in the following zoning districts: I-
2 Heavy Industrial, I-1 Light Industrial, A-1 Transitional Agricultural.
   (C)   Site development standards.
      (1)   Lot coverage. No more than 1% of the gross site area shall be
occupied by enclosed buildings and structures.
      (2)   Setbacks. Will adhere to setbacks of that zoning district.
      (3)   Height. The average height of the solar panel arrays shall not
exceed 12 feet.
      (4)   Landscaping buffer. The primary use of the property shall determine
the buffer requirement. Where a ground-mounted photovoltaic solar farm is the
primary use the property shall be considered industrial or agricultural for the
purposes of buffer requirements, there are no requirements for screening from
public streets.
      (5)   Stormwater management plan. Must be submitted as part of the
application process.
      (6)   Decommissioning plan. A decommissioning plan shall be required to
ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life.
Decommissioning of solar panels must occur in the event they are not in use for
12 consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for removal of all
structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan
ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the site.
The City of North Platte reserves the right to require the posting of a bond,
letter of credit or establishment of an escrow account to ensure proper
decommissioning.
   (D)   Solar farm or CSCS must meet all other federal, state, or local
regulations applicable to construction.
(Ord. 4180, § 1, 10-29-2024)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 156.320 PURPOSE.
   In order to provide for the most appropriate use of land throughout the
district and giving the maximum consideration to the character of the district
and its peculiar suitability for particular uses in the area affected by this
chapter, special exceptions in the form of conditional uses are hereby
established.
(Prior Code, § 56-461) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.321 PROCEDURE.
   The City Council may, by special permit, after referral to and
recommendation from the Planning Commission and public hearing, authorize the
establishment of special exceptions in the form of conditional uses designated
in the district regulations if it is found that the location and
characteristics of the use will not be injurious to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the area. An application for a special use permit which
has been denied cannot be resubmitted for 2 years.
(Prior Code, § 56-462) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.322 STANDARDS.
   (A)   Conditional uses shall conform to the intent and purpose of this
chapter and the following requirements.
      (1)   The use shall conform to all other applicable ordinances, laws and
regulations of any governmental jurisdiction.
      (2)   The use shall have adequate water, sewer and drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion in the public streets.
      (4)   The use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (5)   The use shall be in harmony with the character of the area and the
most appropriate use of the land.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and the City Council, in considering an
application for a conditional use, may consider, among other things, the most
appropriate use of land, the conservation and stabilization of the value of
property, adequate open space for light and air, concentration of population,
congestion of public streets and the promotion of public safety, health,
convenience and comfort. The City Council may stipulate and require such
conditions and restrictions upon the conditional use and operation deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 56-463) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 156.335 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   All the districts except the A and F Districts shall have a separate and
distinct counterpart referred to as planned residential districts, planned
business districts, and planned industrial parks. The purpose of a planned
district shall be to permit and regulate the uses permitted under this chapter
in the equivalent district, and to further provide for and encourage
flexibility in the location of buildings, structures, roads and drives,
variations in yards, and open spaces, subsequent to plan approval by the
Planning Commission, Mayor and City Council. It is the intent to allow the
development of tracts of land to their fullest extent, observing the general
intent and spirit of this chapter. Along the periphery of the planned
developments, yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the
district in which the development is located.
(Prior Code, § 56-491) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.336 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Planned residential districts may be permitted as follows:
 
Planned District Equivalent District
PR-1             R-1
PR-2             R-2
PR-3             R-3
PR-4             R-4
PR-L             R-L
 
   (B)   The height and bulk of buildings, total area, amount of open space,
light and air, the density of population and the parking requirements shall be
equal to those in the equivalent district. The uses permitted shall be the same
as in the equivalent district, except that there may be, in part of the area of
the development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations in which
the development is located, provided that the Planning Commission shall find
that:
      (1)   The uses permitted by the exception are necessary or desirable and
are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
      (2)   The uses permitted by the exception are not of such a nature or so
located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood;
and
      (3)   Not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area of
the development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the exception.
(Prior Code, § 56-492) (Ord. 3531, § 1, 4-6-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.337 VARIATIONS FROM REGULATIONS.
   Variations and departures from normal practice may be permitted under this
subchapter. Each building need not face on a public street and more than 1
building may be located on a lot. Buildings maybe constructed on platted tracts
which are smaller than the minimum lot size requirements where other adjacent
permanent open space is provided. Buildings maybe served by private drives in
lieu of public streets. Buildings maybe located closer to lot lines than
otherwise permitted; provided, the buildings are architecturally suitable for
such a relationship to adjoining buildings and property. Any building or
portion thereof maybe owned in condominium ownership under applicable state
laws governing condominiums. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot
area per dwelling unit required by the district in which the area is located
and increasing the resulting figure by 15%. Net development area shall be
determined by subtracting the area set aside for non-residential uses from the
gross development area and deducting 10% of the remainder for streets,
regardless of the amount of land actually required for streets. The area of
land set aside for common open space or recreational use may be included in
determining the number of dwelling units permitted. However, no variations will
be permitted for above ground storage tanks.
(Prior Code, § 56-493) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.338 PLANNED COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Planned commercial and industrial districts may be permitted as
follows:
 
Planned District Equivalent District
PB-1             B-1
PB-2             B-2
PB-3             B-3
PI-1             I-1
PI-2             I-2
PH-1             H-1
 
   (B)   The height and bulk of buildings, the amount of open space, and the
parking and loading requirements shall be equal to those in the equivalent
districts, except that off-street parking and setback requirements in the PB-
3 District shall be the same as in the B-2 District. The uses permitted and the
performance standards shall be the same as in the equivalent district, except
that there maybe, in part of the area of the development, specified uses not
permitted by the use regulations in which the development is located; provided
that the Planning Commission shall find that:
      (1)   The uses permitted by the exception are necessary or desirable and
are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
      (2)   The uses permitted by the exception are not of such a nature or so
located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood;
and
      (3)   Not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area of
the development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the exception.
   (C)   This district may be used to provide for and encourage the grouping of
businesses into centers in keeping with modern concepts of office center,
service center, shopping center or industrial park design. The further intent
and purpose shall be to reduce the need for strips of commercial uses and
clusters offering the equivalent in goods and services.
(Prior Code, § 56-494) (Ord. 3516, § 1, 2-17-2004; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-
2012)
§ 156.339 PROCEDURE FOR REZONING PROPERTY TO PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   (1)   A tract of land of at least 8 acres for residential, 10 acres
for industrial and 5 acres for commercial development maybe zoned to a planned
district only upon application by the owner or his or her agent and only upon
approval of a development plan for the tract prepared by a registered
architect, engineer or landscape architect. The proponents of a planned
development shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission a preliminary
development plan containing the following elements:
         (a)   The boundaries of the tract to be developed and the area
adjacent for a distance of not less than 300 feet;
         (b)   The existing topography of the tract;
         (c)   The proposed location and arrangement of buildings, structures,
parking areas, existing and proposed streets, drives and other public ways,
land to be preserved as permanent common open space, drainage, screening,
landscaping, and other features of the proposed development;
         (d)   Sufficient approximate dimensions to indicate the relationship
between buildings, streets, drives and property lines;
         (e)   Preliminary elevations and plan drawings of proposed buildings,
prepared by a registered architect or engineer;
         (f)   A draft of the proposed protective covenants whereby the owner
proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development;
and
         (g)   A draft of any proposed incorporation agreement and a draft of
any bylaws or easement declarations concerning maintenance of recreational and
other common facilities.
      (2)   In the case of rezoning applications for purposes of constructing
centers having an ultimate floor area of 60,000 square feet or more, a current
market analysis of the trade area, prepared by competent and experienced
analysts, shall be submitted in support of the application. The analysis shall
show plainly and accurately the role that the proposed center will play in the
retail economy.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall advertise and hold a public hearing on
the application and plan for changes and amendments. If the development plan is
found to be in accordance with the comprehensive land use plan and the best
interests of the city and is acceptable to the Planning Commission, in plan and
supporting data, the plan shall be approved, properly endorsed and identified,
and sent on to the Mayor and City Council for action.
   (C)   Upon final approval of the preliminary development plan, and rezoning
of the land, construction may proceed, and conformance with the plan and all
supporting documentation is mandatory. All final plans shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission and approved as to compliance with the preliminary
development plan prior to the issuance of a building permit. All decisions of
the Planning Commission maybe appealed to the Mayor and City Council, who may
reverse or affirm the decision.
(Prior Code, § 56-495) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 156.350 INTENT; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this subchapter that all buildings,
structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space
in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land
and that the parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are readily
usable for the purpose.
   (B)   Additions to existing buildings. No addition to an existing building
shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area or usability of
existing parking or loading space unless the building and its addition conform
with the regulations for parking and loading contained in this subchapter.
Building additions of 10% or less of existing building square footage shall not
require any additional parking spaces except for additions to places of
assembly.
   (C)   Required facilities. The uses listed in §
156.351 shall provide parking and loading in the amounts specified and at
locations specified for the group in which the use falls.
   (D)   Multiple uses.  If several uses occupy a single building or parcel of
land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the
requirements of the separate uses computed separately.
   (E)   Completion of improvements. No final inspection by the Development
Department shall be approved unless either all the improvements required by
this subchapter are completed and in place or an acceptable cash bond or
corporate surety bond written by a corporate surety doing business through an
agent in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvements has been approved
by and deposited with the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 56-521) (Ord. 3543, § 1, 5-4-2004; Am. Ord. 3640, § 2,12-1-2005;
Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.351 REQUIRED PARKING AND LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   Group A. All uses of land and buildings enumerated in this subchapter
shall provide all required off-street parking and loading space on the same lot
as the use or building, except for parking in the B-3 District:
      (1)   Doctor s offices, medical and dental clinics and veterinary
clinics: 8 parking spaces for each practitioner.
      (2)   Restaurants, beer parlors, taverns, bars and nightclubs: 1 parking
space for each 3.5 seats and 1 loading space.
      (3)   Retail stores and shops: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet
of floor area and 1 loading space for the first 5,000 square feet, plus 1 for
each additional 30,000 square feet or major fraction thereof.
      (4)   Furniture and appliance sales and furniture and appliance repair: 1
parking space for each 500 square feet of gross sales space and repair space
and 1 loading space for the first 5,000 square feet, plus 1 for each additional
20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof.
      (5)   Funeral homes and mortuaries: 1 parking space for each 3 seats in
chapels or 1 for each 50 square feet of public area, whichever is greater, and
1 loading space for each hearse, ambulance or other non-passenger vehicle.
      (6)   Real estate sales offices: 2 parking spaces for the first 200
square feet, plus 1 for each 100 square feet of office and public space.
      (7)   Small item service and repair shops: 1 parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area and 1 loading space for the first 400 square
feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each additional 5,000 square feet or
major fraction thereof.
      (8)   Beauty shops and barbershops: 3 parking spaces for each operator or
1 space per occupant at maximum capacity, whichever is less.
      (9)   Automotive or machinery sales and service garages: 1 parking space
for each 400 square feet of floor area and 1 loading space for each 5,000
square feet of gross floor area.
      (10)   Bowling alleys: 5 parking spaces for each alley. No loading space
is required unless a beer parlor or restaurant is attached, then 1 space is
required.
      (11)   Roller and ice rinks, intensive sports and recreation
establishments and dance halls: 1 parking space for each 3 fixed seats or 1 for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area of public space as appropriate.
      (12)   Banks, professional offices and general offices: 1 parking space
for each 300 square feet of floor area.
      (13)   Shopping center: 5-1/2 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area, plus additional parking for theaters as stated in this
chapter.
      (14)   Hotel, apartment hotel or motel: 1 parking space for each unit,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the largest shift, and 1 loading space for
the first 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, plus 1 space
for each additional 150,000 square feet of floor area or major fraction
thereof.
      (15)   Wholesale stores with stock of goods (without stock, see general
offices): 1 parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area (at
least half of this requirement shall be on-site) and 1 loading space for the
first 6,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each additional
20,000 square feet of gross floor area or major fraction thereof.
      (16)   Warehouses: 4 parking spaces for the first 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 additional space for each additional 5,000 square feet
or major fraction thereof and 2 loading spaces for the first 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each additional 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area or major fraction thereof.
      (17)   Single-occupancy office buildings of 10,000 square feet or over
(if less than 10,000 square feet, see general offices): 1 parking space for
each 500 square feet of gross floor area on-site, plus 1 space for each
additional 600 square feet and 1 loading space for the first 10,000 square
feet, plus 1 space for each additional 40,000 square feet of gross floor area
or major fraction thereof.
      (18)   Manufacturing or freight terminals: 4 parking spaces for each
10,000 square feet of gross floor area or major fraction thereof, plus 1 space
for each employee on the largest shift, and sufficient loading space to allow
for completely off-street loading operations but in no event less than required
in this section for a warehouse.
      (19)   Family child care home: 1 off-street parking space for each non-
resident or non-family member employee in addition to the 2 spaces per single-
family or duplex unit required. The residential driveway is acceptable for this
purpose.
      (20)   Child care center: 1 off-street parking space for each 1-1/
2 employees on duty at any 1 time and 1 space per child care center vehicle, if
any. Shift changes are recognized.
      (21)   Building contractor office and storage building/yard: 4 parking
spaces for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 additional
space for each additional 5,000 square feet or major fraction thereof and 1
parking stall for each 2 employees.
      (22)   Truck washes: 1 vehicle space for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area (minimum 5 parking spaces) and 1 truck space for each wash or
service bay.
   (B)   Group B. All uses of land and buildings enumerated in this division
shall provide off-street parking and loading on the same lot as the building or
use for all customers or patrons. That portion of the parking requirement that
is attributed to employees maybe provided within 300 feet of the use or
building.
      (1)   Hospitals: 1 parking space for each 2 beds, plus 1 space for each 2
staff physicians and 1 for each 2 employees of all classes on the largest shift
and 1 loading space for the first 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof, plus 1 space for each additional 150,000 square feet of floor area or
major fraction thereof.
      (2)   Assisted living facilities:
         (a)   Elderly housing, congregate care facilities: 1 space per every 2
congregate units, plus 1 additional space per 2 employees or staff members.
         (b)   Elderly housing, life care continuing care: 1 space per each 5
beds, plus 2 spaces for each 3 employees, plus 1 for each doctor assigned to
the staff.
         (c)   Group resident (living): 1 space per 4 residents.
         (d)   Elderly housing, independent living: 1 space per unit.
         (e)   Severely mentally ill assisted living: 1 space per 8 units, plus
1 space for each 3 employees on site during the shift that has maximum
staffing, plus 1 space for each facility vehicle.
      (3)   Mental health facilities: 1 space per 6 beds, plus 1 space for each
3 employees on site during the shift that has a maximum staffing, plus 1 space
for each facility vehicle.
      (4)   Homeless shelters:
         (a)   General: 1 space for each 4 residents, plus 1 space per 2
employees/volunteers on site during shift that has maximum staffing, plus 1
space for each facility vehicle.
         (b)   Transitional housing: 1 space for each 4 dwelling units and 1
space for each 5 rooming units, plus 1 space for each 3 employees on site
during the shift that has maximum staffing, plus 1 space for each facility
vehicle.
         (c)   Single room occupancy facilities: 1 space per 40 beds, plus 1
space for each 3 employees on site during the shift that has maximum staffing,
plus 1 space for each facility vehicle.
      (5)   Motel extended stay, 15 days or more: 1 space per guest room, plus
1 space per 2 employees, plus required parking for accessory uses.
      (6)   Nursing home/rest home: 1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space per
employee on site during the shift that has maximum staffing, plus 1 space for
each doctor assigned to the staff, plus 1 space for each facility vehicle.
      (7)   Auditoriums, stadiums (except schools), theaters, community centers
and similar places of public assembly: 1 parking space for each 5 seats in the
main assembly area, or, where no fixed seats are provided, 1 space for each 50
square feet of main assembly area.
      (8)   Churches: 1 parking space for each 4 fixed seats in the largest
assembly area or 1 space for each 50 square feet in the largest assembly area,
whichever has the greatest parking requirements.
      (9)   Libraries, museums and similar uses: 1 parking space for each 400
square feet of gross space to which the public has access and 1 loading space
for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus an additional 1 space
for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or major fraction
thereof.
      (10)   Junior high schools and elementary schools (including public,
parochial and private schools): 1 parking space for each classroom or 1 space
for each 6 seats in the auditorium, whichever is greatest.
      (11)   Senior high schools: 1 parking space for each 2 students.
      (12)   Multiple-use recreation buildings: The greater of:
         (a)   1 parking space for each 5 seats available for normal use of the
public.
         (b)   Parking requirements based on one parking stall for each 200
square feet of building area.
      (13)   Private clubs: 1 parking space for each 4 fixed seats in the
largest assembly area or 1 parking space for each 50 square feet in the largest
assembly area, whichever has the greatest parking requirements. In additional
to the regular parking requirements, 1 parking space for each 2-1/2 seats and 1
loading space will be required for private clubs that have restaurants, beer
parlors, taverns, bars or nightclubs, and if living quarters are situated in
the private club, used by watchpersons or custodians 2 additional parking
spaces will be required.
(Prior Code, § 56-522) (Ord. 3247, § 1, 9-7-1999; Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am.
Ord. 3483, § 1, 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 3543, § 2, 5-4-2004; Am. Ord. 3674, § 4, 11-
21-2006; Am. Ord. 3703, § 7, 10-2-2007; Am. Ord. 3744, passed 10-7-2008; Am.
Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.352 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   General. This standard shall apply to all parking lots located within
the zoning jurisdiction of the City of North Platte. Title 28 CF.R. part 36
(ADA Accessibility Guidelines), Title 156, Nebraska Administrative Code -
Nebraska Accessibility Requirements; and the City of North Platte, Nebraska
Design Standards for Screening and Landscaping; generally apply to the design
of parking lots in the City of North Platte.
(Prior Code, § 56-524)
   (B)   Policies. All plans for the construction of parking lots shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department of Engineering and landscape design
shall be reviewed and approved by the city's Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 56-525)
   (C)   Design.
      (1)   Layout.
         (a)   The size, location and orientation of the parking spaces and
aisles shall conform to the details shown in Figure PL-1. Barriers and islands
should generally conform to the details shown on Figure PL-2.
         (b)   Required accessible parking spaces, including van-accessible
spaces, shall be located, designed, marked and signed in conformance with the
requirements of 28 CF.R. part 36 (ADA Accessibility Guidelines) and Title 156,
Nebraska Administrative Code - Nebraska Accessibility Requirements.
         (c)   Upon completion of construction of the parking lot, the required
parking spaces shall be marked on the parking lot surface with paint formulated
for that purpose and in accordance with the approved layout. Parking spaces
provided in excess of the number required under this code or as required by
conditions of a special permit need not be marked, or they may be marked to
lesser standards.
      (2)   Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches shall conform to the
requirements of this code.
      (3)   Parking barriers.
         (a)   Parking barriers must be provided around parking lots to prevent
the parked vehicles from overhanging the required yards where parking is
prohibited, sidewalk space, public streets, public alleys or other public or
private property and to protect any required landscaping or landscape screen
planting. Approved barriers include the following types:
            1.   Poured concrete curb, nominal 6 inches by 6 inches (152 x 152
mm) exposed;
            2.   Fence, minimum 30 inches (762 mm) height, wire fabric, solid
wood, post and rail and the like;
            3.   Masonry, modular segmental block or concrete wall, minimum 30
inches (762 mm) height;
            4.   Beam guardrail;
            5.   Post and cable guardrail; and
            6.   Precast concrete wheel stop, firmly and permanently anchored.
         (b)   Other barriers, which fulfill the required function, maybe
permitted, subject to approval by the Engineering Department. Barriers must be
located to contain the parking within the approved parking lot. When a concrete
curb or precast wheel stop is used as a barrier for perpendicular or angle
parking, it must be offset at least 2 feet (0.6 m) from the edge of the parking
lot to allow for the front overhang of the vehicle.
      (4)   Drainage.
         (a)   Parking lots shall be designed to properly manage the surface
drainage accumulating on and flowing onto the site.
         (b)   For new parking lots containing 6,000 square feet (557 square
meters) or more and which are located within 150 feet (45.7 m) of, or
reasonably accessible to, an existing storm sewer or other drainage way,
including open channels and creeks, but excluding roadway gutters, the parking
lot must be graded and surfaced such that stormwater runoff from the site is
not allowed to discharge through the driveway approaches onto the public street
or other property, but is collected on the site by an internal drainage system
located on the site and carried to that existing storm sewer. Use of parking
lot surfaces and surrounding landscaped areas to provide stormwater detention
is encouraged.
         (c)   Parking lot drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be
designed and constructed in conformance with the requirements of this code.
      (5)   Surfacing.
         (a)   All new parking lots created after January 1, 2002, shall be
designed/developed and surfaced with portland cement concrete pavement,
asphaltic concrete pavement, brick or modular pavers, open landscaping paving
blocks, pervious asphalt surfaces with subdrains or other permanent surfacing
approved by the Engineering Department. In parking lots and drive areas where
moderate to heavy truck traffic is anticipated, the structural capacity of the
surfacing should be analyzed by the design engineer and property owner and the
pavement structure designed accordingly. The instances may require thicker or
reinforced sections and special subgrade treatments.
         (b)   Non-permanent parking lots maybe graveled as approved by the
city and shall be maintained in a dust-free condition during the period they
are permitted.
      (6)   Lighting and lighting performance standards.
         (a)   The purpose of parking lot lighting is to provide adequate
visibility within the parking lot and to enhance the security and safety of the
lot users. It should not cause interference to traffic on public thoroughfares
or encroach on the visual privacy of adjacent residents.
         (b)   All exterior lights shall be designed, located, installed and
directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light trespass and glare
across the property lines and/or disability glare at any location on or off the
property.
         (c)   All parking area lighting shall be full cut-off type fixtures.
         (d)   All building lighting for security shall be full cut-off type or
a shielded type, not allowing any upward distribution of light. Flood lighting
is discouraged and, if used, must be shielded.
         (e)   Outdoor non-residential lighting adjacent to residential
property shall be installed to ensure that no direct light source shall be
visible at the property line at ground level or above.
         (f)   Area lighting shall be conducted so that the light source is
directed away from areas in residential use or shall be controlled so that
candlepower per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 50 lamp lumens
(5%) above the vertical angle of 78 degrees above nadir; or emit more than 150
foot-candles per unit projected surface area of the luminaire above a 78 degree
vertical angle.
         (g)   Illumination resulting from outdoor lighting shall be conducted
so that direct or indirect illumination does not exceed 1.0 horizontal foot
candles at a boundary line with an adjacent residential zoning district.
         (h)   Measurements shall be made with a cosine corrected photoelectric
photometer having a spectral response corrected to fit the luminous efficiency
curve established by the International Commission on Illumination.
         (i)   In areas where non-residential development abuts residential
development, site lighting plans shall be submitted to the city which include:
            1.   Site plan showing foot candle lighting on the site and across
property lines. Fixture type and location shall be shown on the plan; and
            2.   A COMCheck, as required by the State of Nebraska Energy shall
be provided.
         (j)   Any variation to the above lighting and light performance
standards shall be reviewed and may be approved at the discretion of the City
Engineer, City Planner and City Administrator.
      (7)   Sidewalks. A pedestrian walkway maybe required across or through
parking lots by the city's Engineering Department to provide for pedestrian
circulation along a direct route to an adjacent sidewalk system. Barrier-free
access should also be provided across parking lots and between adjacent
pedestrian generators such as commercial or public buildings. Barrier-free
access may include providing ramps at curbs, clear walkways between precast
wheel stops, and clearly delineated walkways on the parking lot surface. Where
the most direct pedestrian route between 2 pedestrian traffic generators is
parallel to an internal roadway having a projected average daily traffic volume
(ADT) of more than 2,000 vehicles, a separate pedestrian walkway may be
required by the city's Engineering Department.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2549.jpg]
 
         (a)   The minimum stall width for all lots shall be 8.5 feet (2.6m).
                     Aisle      Typical
Angle  Stall  Stall  Width      Module (D) Interlock Curb   Rear      Front
(0)    Width  Depth  Long Short Long Short Reduction Length Extension Extension
       (A)    (B)    Term Term  Term Term  (E)*      (F)*   (G)*      (H)*
                  Aisle Width Typical
Angle Stall Stall             Module (D)   Interlock Curb   Rear      Front
(0)   Width Depth Long  Short Long  Short  Reduction Length Extension Extension
      (A)   (B)   Term  Term  Term  Term   (E)*      (F)*   (G)*      (H)*

      8.5'  14.0' 10.0' 11.0' 40.0' 41.0'            17.0'
      (2.5  (4.3  (3.0  (3.4  (12.2 (12.5  3.7' (1.1 (5.2   15.2'
30'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     m)        m)     (4.6 m)   4.3' (1.3
      9.0'  15.0' 10.0' 10.0' 40.0' 40.0'  3.8' (1.2 18.0'  15.2'     m)
      (2.7  (4.6  (3.0  (3.0  (12.2 (12.0  m)        (5.5   (4.6 m)
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
      8.5'  17.0' 11.0' 12.0' 45.0' 46.0'            12.0'
      (2.5  (5.2  (3.4  (3.7  (13.7 (14.0  3.0' (0.9 (3.6   12.4'     6.0' (1.8
45'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     m)        m)     (3.8 m)   m)
      9.0'  17.0' 10.0' 11.0' 44.0' 45.0'  3.2' (1.0 12.7'  12.4'     6.4' (1.9
      (2.7  (5.2  (3.0  (3.4  (13.4 (13.7  m)        (3.9   (3.8 m)   m)
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
      8.5'  17.7' 12.0' 13.0' 47.4' 48.4'            11.1'
      (2.5  (5.4  (3.7  (4.0  (14.1 (14.6  2.7' (0.8 (3.4   11.3'     6.5' (2.0
50'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     m)        m)     (3.4 m)   m)
      9.0'  17.7' 11.0' 12.0' 48.4' 47.4'  2.9' (0.9 11.7'  11.3'     6.9' (2.1
      (2.7  (5.4  (3.4  (3.7  (14.6 (14.1  m)        (3.8   (3.4 m)   m)
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
      8.5'  18.5' 14.0' 15.0' 51.0' 52.0'            17.0'
      (2.5  (5.6  (4.3  (4.6  (15.5 (15.8  2.1' (0.6 (5.2   8.8' (2.7 7.4' (2.3
60'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     m)        m)     m)        m)
      9.0'  18.5' 13.0' 14.0' 50.0' 51.0'  2.3' (0.7 18.0'  8.8' (2.7 7.8' (2.4
      (2.7  (5.6  (4.0  (4.3  (15.2 (15.5  m)        (5.5   m)        m)
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
      8.5'  18.8' 19.0' 20.0' 56.6' 57.6'            9.1'
      (2.5  (5.7  (5.8  (6.1  (17.3 (17.6  1.5' (0.4 (2.8   6.0' (1.8 8.0' (2.4
70'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     m)        m)     m)        m)
      9.0'  18.8' 18.0' 19.0' 55.6' 58.6'  1.5' (0.5 9.6'   6.0' (1.8 8.5' (2.6
      (2.7  (5.7  (5.5  (5.8  (16.9 (17.3  m)        (2.9   m)        m)
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
      8.5'  17.5' 23.0' 24.0' 58.0' 59.0'            8.5'
      (2.5  (5.3  (7.0  (7.3  (17.7 (18.0            (2.6
90'   m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)     0         m)     0         0
      9.0'  17.5' 22.0' 23.0' 57.0  58.0'  0         9.0'   0         0
      (2.7  (5.3  (6.7  (7.0  (17.4 (17.7            (2.7
      m)    m)    m)    m)    m)    m)               m)
 
         (b)   For perpendicular (90 degree) parking, stall adjacent to closed
end of the aisle shall be a minimum of 10 feet (3.0m) wide.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/957ab4993977f62f6d43864cb755b9db48340c0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2547.jpg]
 
(Prior Code, § 56-526)
   (D)   Parking lot permit application.
      (1)   Three copies of the drawings and required documentation containing
the information described herein and in the appropriate design standards and
all other applicable ordinances, resolutions and special permits shall be
submitted with the permit application to the Development Department for review
and approval by the city. The Development Department shall serve as the
coordinating agency for the reviews and approvals required by the various
departments hereunder.
      (2)   Included in the submittal shall be a detailed scale drawing of the
site showing the location, orientation and dimensions of existing and proposed
parking spaces, aisles, barriers, driveway approaches, buildings, property
lines, adjacent streets and roadways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways and drainage
facilities. A detailed landscape plan showing the required landscaping and all
information required in the design standards for landscaping.
(Prior Code, § 56-527)
(Ord. 3640, § 3, 12-1-2005; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.353 DESIGN, MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Objective. To achieve a desirable and a permanent landscape which
will, with a minimum amount of maintenance, provide a buffer to minimize the
visual effect of adjacent land uses and similar land uses of different
character, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
      (2)   Depth of landscaping. Landscaping shall be required adjacent to all
street property lines or street right-of-way lines and shall extend from the
street property lines or street right-of-way lines to a minimum depth inward of
10 feet on private property. Equivalent square footage may be used in lieu of
the 10 feet if approved by the Development Department. In certain
circumstances, when landscaping is not feasible and landscaping requirements
cannot be reasonably met, the developer may request a review of site
development and required landscaping may be adjusted if approved by the City
Planner, City Engineer and City Administrator. All parkways between the street
property line or street right-of-way line and the back of curb or street
driving line shall be landscaped except for areas covered by city sidewalks.
Landscaping will not be required at driveway entrances that have been approved
by the City Engineer.
      (3)   Obstructions.  Landscaping areas required by this section shall not
be obstructed by any type or size of fence or wall.
      (4)   Materials and installation standards.
(Prior Code, § 56-528)
   (B)   Definition of landscape.
      (1)   Generally. A visual buffer consisting of plant material, (grass,
trees and shrubs) and other material approved by the Development Department. No
artificial trees, shrubs, plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum
requirements for landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative
pavers, may be used; provided that, the material does not comprise more than
25% of the minimum required landscaping area. Loose rock shall not be permitted
within any required landscape area, which is within 10 feet of a traveled
street surface.
      (2)   Minimum tree and shrub sizes.
         (a)   Evergreens shall be a minimum of 5 to 6 feet in height, measured
from the top of the root ball to the top of the tree.
         (b)   Large deciduous trees shall have a 2-inch caliper or larger,
measured 12 inches above the root ball.
         (c)   Small deciduous trees shall have a 1-1/2 inch caliper or larger,
measured 12 inches above the root ball.
         (d)   Shrubs shall be a 2-gallon size or greater, or 18 to 24 inches
in height if balled and burlapped.
         (e)   A minimum of 1 tree for each 500 square feet of landscaped area
will be required.
(Prior Code, § 56-529)
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   Where required by conditions of approval of a plat, special permit
or use permit the developer shall submit to the city for review and approval, a
detailed and accurately scaled plan clearly showing the location, height and
design of the landscaping and clearly showing the location and identifying the
plant material.
      (2)   Where landscaping is required by the provision of the zoning
regulations, between incompatible land uses, or around parking lots, the owner
or builder of a structure or parking lot shall submit a landscape plan showing
the location, height, and design of landscaping and clearly showing the
location and identifying the plant material. The plan shall be submitted and
approved prior to the issuance of a final building permit with a structure or
parking lot.
      (3)   Plant material shall be installed within one year following
completion of the development and initial occupancy of the property unless
phase development is permitted or otherwise specified by the Development
Department.
      (4)   Landscaping over 30 inches in height shall not be installed in the
triangular open space required for sight distance for vehicles entering and
exiting the property.
      (5)   Landscaping shall be maintained in a neat appearance and repaired
or replaced to the original state if damaged, destroyed or in need of repair;
plant material shall be replaced in the next appropriate planting season
(spring or fall, depending on the particular plant material), in accordance
with the approved landscape plan. If the landscaping is totally destroyed by an
"Act of God", the replacement period maybe extended with a written request
approved by the Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 56-530)
   (D)   Plant material landscaping.
      (1)   The variety of plant material used shall be reasonably:
         (a)   Free from litter and offensive odors;
         (b)   Resistant to breakage by wind and winter storms;
         (c)   Resistant to disease, insect attack and weather stresses;
         (d)   Long lived;
         (e)   Adaptable to city conditions; and
         (f)   Easily transplanted and grown.
      (2)   The installation of the plant material shall conform to the general
requirements of the city. The installation maybe inspected bythe city.
      (3)   The landowner agrees to promote vigorous growth of the required
plants by performing continuous and properly timed maintenance. The maintenance
responsibility consists of watering, weeding, fertilizing, controlling diseases
and insects, pruning, removing the stakes and wires used to secure the plant
when planting and removing and replacing unhealthy, damaged and/or dead plants.
The replacement plant must be the same species, size and in the same location
as shown on the approved landscape plan and planted during the next appropriate
planting season. Substitute plants maybe permitted by submitting a request to
the Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 56-531)
   (E)   Procedures.
      (1)   All plans and documents required to be submitted by the developer
hereunder shall be filed with the Building Official. Three copies of each of a
detailed and accurately scaled layout showing the resolutions shall be
submitted for review and approval bythe Development Department. The Building
Official shall serve as the coordinating agency for the reviews and approvals
required bythe various departments hereunder.
      (2)   Before the city issues the certificate of occupancy, the owner(s)
shall continuously maintain the required landscape screen and landscaping by
performing the maintenance responsibilities described in division (C)(5) of
these standards.
(Prior Code, § 56-532)
(Ord. 3640, § 3,12-1-2005; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4053, § 1, 3-
16-2021)
§ 156.354 MODIFICATION OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When the strict application of requirements contained in these
regulations result in actual difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice,
or when a mixture of uses or unusual development types mean that a strict
application of these requirements will demonstrably result in excessive number
of parking stalls, paved surfacing or landscaping the City Council, after
recommendation from the city's Planning Commission, may vary, modify or waive
the requirements so that the owner or developer may develop his or her property
in a reasonable manner, but at the same time, the public welfare and interests
of the city and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and
spirit of these regulations preserved. The variation, modification or waiver of
excessive number of parking stalls, paved surfacing or landscaping requirements
shall be for a period of time according to an approved improvement plan and
schedule prepared by the applicant and shall be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds.
   (B)   Provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter shall be
required unless specifically and individually waived, modified or varied by the
City Council after a public hearing and recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   An initial filing fee plus the cost of certified mail plus a fee per
owner notification shall be submitted with a parking lot permit application for
the waiver of the excessive number of parking stalls, paved surfacing or
landscaping requirements set forth in §§
156.350 to
156.353. The applicant shall submit a complete current list of names, legal
descriptions and addresses of all property owners within a 100-foot radius of
the subject property.
(Prior Code, § 56-533) (Ord. 3640, § 3,12-1-2005; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 156.370 NONCONFORMING, GENERAL INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter is to permit lawful nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this subchapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this subchapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district except as may be authorized in this title.
(Prior Code, § 56-561) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012; Am. Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-
2022)
§ 156.371 CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provision of
this chapter, a primary structure and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this subchapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both that are generally
applicable in the district provided that the yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to
the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.372 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Authority to continue. Any structure which is devoted to a use which
is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, but which is
located on a lot which does not comply with the applicable lot size
requirements and/or the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this section.
   (B)   Enlargement, repair, alterations. Any such structure described in this
section may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled; provided, however,
that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create
any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity
of all or any part of such structure, except that as to structures located on a
lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements, the side
yard requirements shall be in conformance with this section, and unless
otherwise permitted by a variance permit unless otherwise approved or as
specified in the residential district.
   (C)   Damage or destruction.
      (1)   In the event that any structure described in §
156.372 is damaged or destroyed, by any means other than intentional
destruction, to the extent of more than 60% of its assessed value, such
structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located; provided that
structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size
requirements shall not have a side yard of less than 5 feet. When a structure
is damaged to the extent of less than 60% of its structural value, no repairs
or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and
restoration is actually begun within 1 year after the date of such partial
destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
      (2)   Complete reconstruction of a nonconforming structure may be allowed
if the structure is damaged or destroyed by natural means and not through
intentional destruction or actions of the property owner or tenant.
Reconstructed structures shall not be allowed to increase the level of
nonconformity with regard to setbacks or lot coverage.
   (D)   Moving. No structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any
distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless
the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located after being moved.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.373 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses of land. Where at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment or this subchapter.
      (2)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this subchapter.
      (3)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 12 consecutive months, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in
which such land is located.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses of structures. If a lawful use of a structure, or
of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this subchapter, that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
      (2)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
      (3)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structures and premises may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the Board of Adjustment either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate
conditions and safeguard in accord with the provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
      (5)   When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises
in combination is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the
structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used
except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located;
      (6)   Where nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.374 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or
on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage of amendment of this subchapter shall not be increased.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
§ 156.375 EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   The City Council may, when it deems proper, permit alterations,
extensions, expansions, and the remodeling or rebuilding of such structures or
extensions or expansions of a land use in all cases where a refusal to do so
would bring hardship to the owner or occupants and in all cases where justice
requires the granting of the same. The City Council may attach appropriate
conditions to the granting of any such relief. Whenever a use district shall be
hereafter changed, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district
may be continued or changed to a use permitted in that zoning district,
provided, all other regulations governing the new use are complied with.
   (B)   Nonconforming mobile homes situated on residential zoned lots are
allowed to extend the nonconformity with approval of a permit application if
the mobile home meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2 ½
inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
      (2)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material, and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single-family
construction;
      (3)   The home shall have wheels, axles, and removable towing apparatus
removed; and
      (4)   The home must meet the standards in §
150.008.
(Ord. 4092, § 1, 6-7-2022)
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.390 AUTHORIZED.
   This chapter may, from time to time, be amended by the Mayor and City
Council after a public hearing and a recommendation of the Planning Commission
in accordance with the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 56-591) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.391 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED.
   The Planning Commission shall hold 1 public hearing on every amendment to
this chapter. No action on any amendment shall be taken by the Mayor and City
Council until a recommendation of the Planning Commission has been received.
(Prior Code, § 56-592) (Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.392 FEE FOR APPLICATION FOR ZONING CHANGE OR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   Before any action shall be taken on a proposed change in zoning or on a
request for conditional use permit, the applicant shall deposit with the City
Clerk the fee for same established by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 56-593) (Ord. 3179, § 2, 8-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.393 PROCEDURE.
   A petition for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of
provisions of this chapter shall be filed with the city's Planning Department
at least 15 calendar days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting. The
city's Planning Department shall notify the City Clerk, who shall fix a time
for hearing before the Planning Commission and a time for hearing before the
City Council and shall thereupon give notice as provided by state statute. All
such applications that are denied cannot be resubmitted for a period of 1 year.
(Prior Code, § 56-594) (Ord. 3292, § 4, 6-20-2000; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-
2012)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 156.410 MEMBERSHIP; BOND; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The North Platte Board of Adjustment shall be known as the city's
Board of Adjustment as established and created in accordance with §
33.03 of this code and in accordance with state statute. The members of the
Board shall be appointed by the governing body.
   (B)   The governing body shall appoint the Board of Adjustment, which shall
consist of 5 regular members, 1 of whom shall be a member of the Planning
Commission, plus 1 additional member designated as an alternate who shall
attend and serve only when 1 of the regular members is unable to attend for any
reason. Each member of the Board shall serve a term of 3 years, unless
reappointed, and shall be removable only for good and sufficient cause by the
governing body upon written charges and after a public hearing. The members of
the Board shall serve without compensation, and maybe required, in the
discretion of the governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of
the governing body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
duties. One member of the Board of Adjustment shall be at the same time a
member of the Planning Commission at all times. Upon the loss of membership on
the Planning Commission, the member shall also lose his or her membership on
the Board of Adjustment.
   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of any member whose
term becomes vacant.
(Prior Code, § 56-620) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.411 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; FUNDING.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall organize at its first meeting in June of
each year and elect from its membership a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall
be the duty of the Secretary to keep complete and accurate minutes of all Board
meetings and to file the minutes at the office of the City Clerk for
examination at any reasonable time by the public. The Board of Adjustment shall
be funded from time to time out of the General Fund by the governing body.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the governing body may
designate, or at such other times as the Chairperson may, in his or her
discretion, call a meeting. Special meetings may be also held upon the call of
any 3 members of the Board. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the purpose of doing business.
   (B)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be a public record.
(Prior Code, § 56-621) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord, 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.412 POWERS.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers (see Neb. RS
19-901):
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures;
      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
      (3)   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of
a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulation, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon
the owner of the property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the
property, a variance from the strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardships, if the relief maybe granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of any ordinance or resolution. No such variation shall be authorized
by the Board unless it finds:
         (a)   The strict application of the regulation would produce undue
hardship;
         (b)   The hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same zoning district and the same vicinity;
         (c)   The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance;
         (d)   The granting of the variance is based upon reasons of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice; and
         (e)   The Board finds that the condition or situation of the property
concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring
a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general
regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulation.
   (B)   The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass.
(Prior Code, § 56-622) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.413 GOVERNING BODY ACTING AS BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   If the governing body fails or neglects to appoint the appropriate number of
Board members, the governing body shall constitute the Board of Adjustment and
shall have the same duties, powers and authority as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 56-623) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.414 DUTIES.
   The Board shall be responsible for making the reports and performing such
other duties as the governing body or state law may require.
(Prior Code, § 56-624) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.415 RESTRICTIONS ON MEMBERSHIP AND OFFICERS.
   No member of the governing body shall serve as a member of the Board of
Adjustment, except as provided in this section. No member of the Board of
Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of both Chairperson and Secretary of the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 56-625) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.416 PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING A VARIANCE.
   The procedures to be followed by the Board of Adjustment shall be as
follows.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, governmental agency affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator. The appeal shall be made within 10 days from the date of
decision by any officer or department. The appeal filed in writing shall define
the appeal being requested and the grounds therefor. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   The city's Development Department shall set a hearing within 30 days
of receipt of the appeal. The time, date, place of the hearing and description
of the request shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation
10 days prior to the actual hearing. The Board shall also notify the interested
parties in the case of the hearing date, time and place.
(Prior Code, § 56-626) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.417 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment, or any officer, departments; board or bureau of the
city, may seek review of the decision by the district court for the city in the
manner provided by the laws of the state and particularly by Neb. RS 19-912.
(Prior Code, § 56-627) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.430 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
   An administrative official designated by the Mayor and City Council shall
administer and enforce this chapter. He or she may be provided with the
assistance of such other persons as the Mayor may direct.
(Prior Code, § 56-651) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.431 ENFORCEMENT.
   If the administrative official shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify, in writing, the person
responsible for the violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of
illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or
structural changes; or discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
take any action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions.
(Prior Code, § 56-652) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
§ 156.999 PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500 and the cost of prosecution, for each offense. Each
day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or a building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city, in addition
to other remedies, may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
the unlawful erection, alteration, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate
the violations, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land.
(Prior Code, § 56-653) (Am. Ord. of 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 3840, § 1, 4-3-2012)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Section Code Section
Neb. RS Section                       Code Section
3-303                                 156.280
3-319                                 156.288
3-320 et seq.                         156.288.2
9-201 et seq.                         115.40
9-239                                 115.40
13-2901—13-2914                     34.44
13-2905                               34.44
13-2914(3)                            34.44
13-601 et seq.                        Ch. 34
13-606                                34.20
16-205                                Ch. 110
16-206                                Ch. 90
16-207                                Ch. 91
16-210                                Ch. 91
16-217                                31.01,
                                      31.02
16-220                                32.09
16-222                                Ch. 94,
                                      94.110
16-226                                Ch. 115,
                                      115.56
16-230                                Ch. 95
16-231                                Ch. 95
16-232                                Ch. 91
16-235—16-237                       Ch. 90
16-238                                32.32
16-246                                10.99
16-247                                10.15
16-302.01                             31.05,
                                      31.06
16-305                                32.09
                                      32.05,
16-308                                32.29,
                                      32.30
16-312—16-316                       31.03
16-317                                31.04,
                                      32.28
16-318                                32.27
16-318.01                             32.09
16-319                                32.25
16-321                                34.43
16-324                                32.33
16-326                                32.56
16-401                                30.021,
                                      30.030
16-402                                31.04
16-403—16-405                       Ch. 31
16-404                                31.21,
                                      31.22
16-405                                31.23
16-501                                34.41
16-503                                34.42
16-609 et seq.                        Ch. 91
16-661 et seq.                        Ch. 91
16-695                                Ch. 93
16-712                                34.33
16-714                                34.34
16-715                                34.35
16-716                                34.36
16-718                                34.40
16-726                                34.38
16-1001 et seq.                       35.075
16-1002                               35.076
16-1003                               35.077
16-1004                               35.078
16-1005                               35.079
16-1006                               35.080
16-1007                               35.081
16-1008                               35.082
16-1009                               35.083
16-1010                               35.084
16-1011                               35.085
16-1012                               35.086
16-1013                               35.087
16-1014                               35.088
16-1015                               35.089
16-1016                               35.090
16-1017                               35.091
16-1018                               35.092
16-1019                               35.093
16-1020 et seq.                       94.130
16-1021                               94.131
16-1022                               94.132
16-1023                               94.133
16-1024                               94.134
16-1025                               94.134
16-1027                               94.136
16-1028                               94.137
16-1029                               94.138
16-1030                               94.139
16-1031                               94.140
16-1032                               94.141
16-1033                               94.142
16-1034                               94.143
16-1035                               94.144
16-1036                               94.145
16-1036.01                            94.146
16-1037                               94.147
16-1038                               94.148
16-1039                               94.149
16-1040                               94.150
16-1041                               94.151
16-1042                               94.152
17-135                                116.28
17-525                                110.37
                                      10.16,
18-132                                94.021,
                                      Ch. 150
18-412                                30.094
18-412.02                             30.094
18-501 et seq.                        Ch. 53
18-1208                               110.37
18-1501 et seq.                       Ch. 114
18-1720                               10.99
18-1722                               10.99
18-1729                               70.24
18-1736—18-1741                     76.03
18-1737                               76.03
18-1739                               76.03
18-1748                               53.074
18-1908                               Ch. 112
18-1909                               Ch. 112
18-2103(11)                           110.22
18-2142.02                            110.22,
                                      110.26
                                      110.06,
18-2142.04                            110.26,
                                      110.34
                                      30.089,
18-2501—8-2531                      30.092,
                                      30.094,
                                      30.999
18-2501 et seq.                       30.080
18-2503—18-2511                     30.081
18-2512                               30.082,
                                      30.083
18-2513                               30.082
18-2514                               30.083
18-2515                               30.083
18-2516                               30.084
18-2517                               30.085
                                      30.086,
18-2518                               30.091—
                                      30.093
18-2519                               30.087
18-2520                               30.088
18-2521                               30.089,
                                      30.093
18-2522                               30.090
18-2523—18-2526                     30.091
18-2524                               30.092
18-2526                               30.092
18-2527                               30.092
18-2528                               30.092
18-2529                               30.092
18-2529—18-2531                     30.093
18-2530                               30.092
18-2532—18-2535                     30.999
18-2536                               30.094
18-2537                               30.094
18-2538                               30.083
19-901                                156.412
19-907—19-912.01                    156.288.1
19-912                                153.22,
                                      156.417
19-1825 et seq.                       Ch. 35
19-1301—19-1304                     34.32
25-505.01                             30.068
25-510.02                             30.083
25-1801                               50.03
25-21,149—25-21,164                 30.083
Ch. 28, Art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or 12 116.06
28-807—28-829                       154.062
28-807                                130.001,
                                      130.056
28-906                                130.012
28-907                                94.004
28-1008                               90.16
28-1009                               90.16
28-1012                               90.16
29-422—29-429                       90.16
29-426                                70.21
31-1001—31-1022                     153.01
32-101 et seq.                        30.060
32-562                                30.068
32-567 - 32-570                       30.068
32-606                                30.070
32-607                                30.070
32-615                                30.064
32-616                                30.064
32-617                                30.064
32-618                                30.064
32-621                                30.064
32-622                                30.070
32-625                                30.070
32-625(2)                             30.064
32-627                                30.070
                                      30.064,
32-628                                30.083,
                                      30.084
                                      30.064,
32-629                                32.068,
                                      30.085
                                      30.064,
32-630                                32.068,
                                      30.085
32-710                                30.064
32-713                                30.067
32-1301                               30.068
32-1302                               30.068
32-1303                               30.068
32-1304                               30.068
32-1305                               30.068
32-1306                               30.068
32-1307                               30.068
32-1308                               30.068
32-1309                               30.068
32-1401—32-1408                     30.068
35-106                                110.02,
                                      110.37
35-201—35-203                       94.151
35-201—35-216                       94.152
35-203.1                              94.133
35-204—35-215                       94.150
Ch. 39                                70.01
44-4301 et seq.                       34.01
44-4301—44-4339                     34.01
44-4303                               34.01
46-1212                               50.07
Ch. 48, Art. 1                        94.141,
                                      94.142
48-101 et seq.                        35.086
49-801(16)                            10.05
49-14,103.01—4914,103.03            32.57
53-103                                116.01
53-103.01—53-103.42                 116.01
53-117.08                             116.25
53-123.04(2)                          110.01
53-124                                116.10
53-124.01                             116.10
53-124.15                             116.03
53-125                                116.06
53-125.15(4)                          110.01
53-131                                116.07,
                                      116.10
53-132                                110.37,
                                      116.10
53-133                                116.03,
                                      116.10
                                      116.07,
53-134                                116.08,
                                      116.10,
                                      116.25
53-134.03                             116.10
53-135                                116.09
53-135.01                             116.09,
                                      116.10
53-148                                116.05
                                      110.23,
53-160                                110.25,
                                      110.26
53-177                                116.03
53-177.01                             116.03
53-178                                116.04
53-179                                116.17
53-180                                116.28
53-183                                116.13
53-184                                116.16
53-186                                116.20
53-186(2)                             116.20
53-186.01                             116.20
53-1,101                              116.11
53-1,102                              116.11
Ch. 60, Art. 6                     76.22
60-311.3                              76.03
60-680(b)                             Ch. 76
60-680(c)                             73.24
60-680(d)                             73.20
60-680(t)                             71.08
60-682 et seq.                        Ch. 71
60-685                                70.20
60-699                                79.08
60-4,126                              79.03
60-6,152—60-6,158                   Ch. 74
60-6,164—60-6,169                   Ch. 76
60-6,165                              70.29
60-6,166                              76.02
60-6,185—60-6,195                   73.01
60-6,211.08                           116.20
60-6,314 et seq.                      Ch. 75
60-6,317(4)                           Ch. 75
60-6,355                              79.01
60-6,358                              79.04
60-6,359                              79.05
60-1901                               95.20
                                      110.23,
66-489                                110.25,
                                      110.26
                                      110.23,
66-489.02                             110.25,
                                      110.26
60-699                                79.08
                                      110.23,
66-4,140                              110.25,
                                      110.26
                                      110.23,
66-4,145                              110.25,
                                      110.26
                                      110.23,
66-4,146                              110.25,
                                      110.26
Chapter 70, Art. 6                    156.260
Chapter 70, Art. 8                    156.260
70-504                                30.094
70-601                                156.260
70-650.01                             30.094
70-1001.01                            156.281
70-1601 et seq.                       50.04
71-1555 et seq.                       156.306
                                      150.001,
71-1557                               150.017,
                                      156.306
71-1557—71-1567                     156.003
71-4402(2)                            90.23
71-4101—71-4109                     54.31
71-4621 et seq.                       Ch. 152
75-302                                76.15
76-825—76-894                       156.003
77-1343                               91.52
                                      110.23,
77-2602                               110.25,
                                      110.26
                                      110.23,
77-2704.24                            110.25,
                                      110.26
77-3001—77-3014                     119.01,
                                      119.03
                                      110.23,
77-4008                               110.25,
                                      110.26
80-203—80-205                       30.094
81-520.01                             94.042
81-829.36—81-829.68                 Ch. 36
81-829.39                             36.01
81-829.50                             36.02
81-3423                               50.07
81-3445                               50.07
81-3449                               50.07
81-3453                               50.07
81-3701 et seq.                       110.13
84-712.05                             33.08
84-1101—84-1116                     30.001
84-1408                               30.020
84-1408 et seq.                       30.020
84-1408—84-1414                     30.028,
                                      94.147
84-1409                               30.020
84-1409(1)                            30.025
84-1409(2)                            30.024
84-1410                               30.026
                                      30.020,
84-1411                               30.027,
                                      30.029
84-1412                               30.028
84-1413                               30.020
86-704                                110.37
                                      
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2008 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2008 Code Section
2-1                30.001
2-31               31.01
2-32               31.02
2-33               31.03
2-34               31.04
2-35               31.05
2-36               31.06
2-37               31.07
2-61               31.20
2-62               31.21
2-63               31.22
2-64               31.23
2-65               31.24
2-91               31.40
2-121              32.01
2-122              32.02
2-123              32.03
2-124              32.04
2-125              32.05
2-126              32.06
2-127              32.07
2-128              32.08
2-129              32.09
2-130              32.10
2-131              32.11
2-131              32.25
2-132              32.12
2-134              32.26
2-135              32.27
2-136              32.28
2-137              32.29
2-138              32.30
2-139              32.31
2-140              32.32
2-141              32.33
2-142              32.34
2-143              32.35
2-144              32.36
2-146              32.38
2-147              32.39
2-148              32.40
2-171              32.55
2-172              32.56
2-173              32.57
2-211              33.01
2-212              33.02
2-213              33.03
2-214              33.04
2-215              33.05
2-216              33.06
2-241              30.020
2-242              30.021
2-243              30.022
2-244              30.023
2-245              30.024
2-246              30.025
2-247              30.026
2-248              30.028
2-248              30.027
2-249              30.029
2-250              30.030
2-281              34.01
2-301              34.20
2-302              34.21
2-303              34.22
2-304              34.23
2-305              34.24
2-306              34.25
2-307              34.26
2-308              34.27
2-309              34.28
2-310              34.29
2-311              34.30
2-312              34.31
2-313              34.32
2-314              34.33
2-315              34.34
2-316              34.35
2-317              34.36
2-318              34.37
2-319              34.38
2-320              34.39
2-321              34.40
2-322              34.41
2-323              34.42
2-324              34.43
2-361              30.045
2-362              30.046
2-363              30.047
4-1                116.01
4-2                116.02
4-3                116.03
4-4                116.04
4-5                116.05
4-6                116.06
4-7                116.07
4-8                116.08
4-9                116.09
4-10               116.10
4-11               116.11
4-12               116.12
4-14               116.13
4-16               116.15
4-17               116.16,
                   116.99
4-18               116.17
4-19               116.18
4-20               116.19
4-21               116.20
4-23               116.21
4-24               116.22
4-25               116.23
4-26               116.24
4-27               116.25
4-28               116.26
6-31               115.01
6-32               115.02
6-33               115.03
6-61               115.20
6-62               115.21
6-63               115.22
6-64               115.23
6-65               115.24
6-66               115.25
6-91               115.40
6-92               115.41
6-93               115.42
6-94               115.43
6-107              90.07
6-121              115.55
6-122              115.56
6-123              115.57
6-124              115.58
8-1                90.01
8-2                90.02
8-3                90.03
8-4                90.04
8-5                90.05
8-6                90.06
8-8                90.08
8-9                90.09
8-10               90.10
8-10               90.99
8-11               90.11
8-12               90.12
8-13               90.13
8-14               90.14
8-15               90.15
8-16               90.16
8-18               90.18
8-19               90.19
8-20               90.20
8-21               90.21
8-22               90.22
8-23               90.23
8-24               90.24
8-25               90.99
10-1               114.01
10-2               114.02
10-3               114.03
12-1               150.001
12-2               150.002
12-3               150.003
12-5               150.004
12-6               150.005
12-17              150.999
12-18              150.006
12-19              150.007
12-41              150.030
12-42              150.031
12-43              150.032
12-44              150.033
12-45              150.034
12-46              150.035
12-47              150.036
12-48              150.037
12-71              150.050
12-72              150.051
12-73              150.052
12-74              150.053
12-101             150.075
12-102             150.076
12-103             150.077
12-104             150.078
12-105             150.079
12-131             150.090
12-133             150.091
12-151             150.092
12-152             150.093
12-153             150.094
12-154             150.094
12-155             150.094
12-156             150.094
12-157             150.094
12-158             150.095
12-159             150.096
12-160             150.096
12-161             150.096
12-169             150.097
12-191             150.135
12-192             150.136
12-193             150.137
12-194             150.138
12-221             150.150
12-222             150.151
12-223             150.152
12-224             150.153
12-225             150.154
12-226             150.155
12-227             150.156
12-251             150.170
12-252             150.171
12-253             150.172
12-254             150.173
12-255             150.174
12-256             150.175
12-257             150.176
12-258             150.177
12-259             150.178
12-260             150.179
12-261             150.180
12-262             150.181
12-263             150.182
12-264             150.183
12-265             150.184
12-266             150.185
12-267             150.186
12-268             150.187
12-269             150.188
12-270             150.188
12-271             150.188
12-272             150.189
12-273             150.190
14-31              110.01
14-32              110.02
14-33              110.03
14-34              110.36
14-61              111.01
14-62              111.02
14-81              111.20
14-82              111.21
14-83              111.22
14-84              111.23
14-111             112.01
14-112             112.02
14-113             112.03
14-114             112.04
14-115             112.05
14-116             112.06
14-117             112.07
14-118             112.08
14-119             112.09
14-120             112.10
14-121             112.11
14-122             112.12
14-151             113.01
14-152             113.02
14-153             113.03
14-154             113.04
14-155             113.05
14-156             113.06
14-157             113.07
14-158             113.08
14-159             113.09
14-160             113.10
14-161             113.11
16-1               36.01
16-2               36.02
17-1               33.08
18-1               30.060
18-2               30.061
18-3               30.062
18-4               30.063
18-5               30.064
18-6               30.065
18-7               30.066
18-8               30.067
18-9               30.068
18-10              30.069
18-31              30.080
18-32              30.081
18-33              30.082
18-34              30.083
18-35              30.084
18-36              30.085
18-37              30.086
18-38              30.087
18-39              30.088
18-40              30.089
18-41              30.090
18-42              30.091
18-43              30.092
18-44              30.093
18-45              30.999
18-46              30.094
20-31              36.20
20-32              36.21
20-33              36.22
20-34              36.23
20-35              36.24
20-38              36.25
20-39              36.99
22-31              95.01
22-32              95.02
22-33              95.03,
                   95.99
22-34              95.04
22-35              95.05
22-36              95.06
22-37              95.07
22-38              95.08
22-61              95.20
22-62              95.21
22-63              95.22
22-64              95.23
22-65              95.99
22-81              95.40
22-82              95.41
22-83              95.42
22-84              95.43
22-85              95.44
22-86              95.45
22-87              95.46
22-88              95.47
22-89              95.48
22-90              95.99
24-1               94.001
24-2               94.002
24-3               94.003
24-4               94.004
24-5               94.005
24-6               94.006
24-7               94.007
24-31              94.020
24-32              94.021
24-34              94.022
24-35              94.023
24-61              94.040
24-62              94.041
24-91              94.055
24-92              94.056
24-93              94.057
24-94              94.058
24-121             94.070
24-122             94.071
24-123             94.072
24-124             94.073
24-125             94.074
24-126             94.075
24-127             94.076
24-128             94.077
24-129             94.078
24-130             94.079
24-131             94.080
24-132             94.081
24-133             94.082
24-134             94.083
24-161             94.095
24-162             94.096
24-163             94.097
24-164             94.098
24-165             94.099
24-166             94.999
24-191             94.110
24-192             94.111
24-193             94.112
24-194             94.113
24-195             94.114
24-196             94.115
24-197             94.116
24-198             94.117
24-199             94.118
24-200             94.119
24-221             94.130
24-222             94.131
24-223             94.132
24-224             94.133
24-225             94.134
24-226             94.135
24-228             94.136
24-229             94.137
24-230             94.138
24-231             94.139
24-232             94.140
24-233             94.141
24-234             94.142
24-235             94.143
24-236             94.144
24-237             94.145
24-238             94.146
24-239             94.147
24-240             94.148
24-241             94.149
24-242             94.150
24-243             94.151
24-244             94.152
28-251             151.195
28-252             151.196
28-253             151.197
28-254             151.198
28-255             151.199
28-256             151.200
28-257             151.201
28-258             151.202
28-259             151.203
28-260             151.204
28-261             151.205
28-263             151.207
28-265             151.209
28-281             151.220
28-302             151.236
28-303             151.237
28-304             151.238
28-305             151.239
28-306             151.240
28-307             151.241
28-321             151.999
28-341             151.255
28-342             151.256
28-343             151.257
28-361             151.270
30-31              35.060
30-61              35.075
30-62              35.076
30-63              35.077
30-64              35.078
30-65              35.079
30-66              35.080
30-67              35.081
30-68              35.082
30-69              35.083
30-70              35.084
30-71              35.085
30-72              35.086
30-73              35.087
30-74              35.088
30-75              35.089
30-76              35.090
30-77              35.091
30-78              35.092
30-79              35.093
32-1               92.01
32-2               92.02
32-3               92.03
32-4               92.04
32-5               92.05
32-6               92.06
32-7               92.07
34-31              152.01
34-51              152.02
34-52              152.02
34-71              152.03
34-72              152.03
34-73              152.03
34-74              152.03
34-75              152.03
34-76              152.03
34-77              152.03
34-78              152.03
34-79              152.03
34-80              152.03
34-81              152.03
34-82              152.03
34-83              152.03
34-84              152.03
34-85              152.03
34-86              152.03
34-101             152.04
34-102             152.04
34-103             152.04
36-1               130.001
36-2               130.002
36-3               130.003
36-4               130.004
36-5               130.025
36-6               130.026
36-7               130.027
36-8               130.028
36-9               130.005
36-10              130.006
36-11              130.007
36-12              130.008
36-13              130.009
36-14              130.010
36-15              130.011
36-16              130.999
36-17              130.040,
                   130.999
36-18              130.041,
                   130.999
36-41              130.055
36-42              130.056
36-43              130.057
36-44              130.058
36-47              130.999
36-101             130.075,
                   130.999
38-1               93.01
38-2               93.02
38-3               93.03
38-4               93.04
38-6               93.06
38-31              93.20
38-32              93.21
38-33              93.22
38-34              93.23
40-31              35.001
40-32              35.002
40-33              35.003
40-34              35.004
40-35              35.005
40-36              35.006
40-37              35.007
40-61              35.020
40-62              35.021
40-63              35.022
40-64              35.023
40-65              35.024
40-66              35.025
40-68              35.027
40-69              35.028
40-70              35.029
40-91              35.040
40-92              35.041
40-93              35.042
40-94              35.043
40-95              35.044
40-96              35.045
40-97              35.046
40-671             35.026
44-31              54.01
44-32              54.02
44-33              54.03
44-34              54.04
44-35              54.05
44-36              54.06
44-37              54.07
44-38              54.08
44-39              54.09
44-40              54.10
44-41              54.11
44-42              54.12
44-43              54.13
44-44              54.14
44-71              54.30
44-72              54.31
46-1               91.01
46-2               91.02
46-3               91.03
46-4               91.04
46-5               91.05
46-6               91.06
46-7               91.07
46-31              91.20
46-32              91.21
46-33              91.22
46-34              91.23
46-35              91.24
46-36              91.25
46-37              91.26
46-38              91.27
46-39              91.28
46-61              91.40
46-62              91.41
46-63              91.42
46-64              91.43
46-65              91.44
46-66              91.45
46-67              91.46
46-68              91.47
46-69              91.48
46-70              91.49
46-71              91.50
46-72              91.51
46-73              91.52
46-74              91.53
48-1               155.001
48-2               155.002
48-3               155.003
48-4               155.004
48-5               155.005
48-6               155.006
48-7               155.007
48-31              155.020
48-32              155.021
48-33              155.022
48-34              155.023
48-35              155.024
48-36              155.025
48-37              155.026
48-38              155.027
48-61              155.040
48-62              155.041
48-63              155.042
48-64              155.043
48-65              155.044
48-66              155.045
48-67              155.046
48-68              155.047
48-91              155.060
48-92              155.061
48-93              155.062
48-94              155.063
48-95              155.064
48-96              155.065
48-97              155.066
48-98              155.067
48-99              155.068
48-100             155.069
48-101             155.070
48-102             155.071
48-103             155.072
48-104             155.073
48-105             155.074
48-106             155.075
48-107             155.076
48-121             155.090
48-122             155.091
48-123             155.092
48-124             155.093
48-125             155.094
48-126             155.095
48-151             155.110
48-171             155.125
48-172             155.126
48-173             155.127
48-174             155.128
48-201             155.140
48-202             155.141
48-221             155.155
48-222             155.156
48-223             155.157
48-241             155.170
48-242             155.171
48-261             155.008
48-262             155.999
50-1               70.01
50-31              71.01
50-32              71.02
50-33              71.03
50-34              71.04
50-35              71.05
50-36              71.06
50-37              71.07
50-38              71.08
50-39              71.09
50-40              71.10
50-41              71.11
50-61              72.01
50-62              72.02
50-63              72.03
50-64              72.04
50-65              72.05
50-66              72.06
50-101             73.01
50-102             73.02
50-103             73.03
50-104             73.04
50-111             73.20
50-112             73.21
50-113             73.22
50-114             73.23
50-115             73.24
50-116             73.25
50-117             73.26
50-118             73.27
50-119             73.28
50-120             73.29
50-121             73.30
50-122             73.31
50-123             73.32
50-124             73.33
50-124             73.99
50-151             74.01
50-152             74.02
50-153             74.03
50-154             74.04
50-181             75.01
50-182             75.02
50-183             75.03
50-186             75.04
50-201             75.20
50-202             75.21
50-203             75.22
50-204             75.23
50-205             75.24
50-231             76.01
50-232             76.02
50-233             76.03
50-234             76.04
50-235             76.05
50-236             76.06
50-237             76.07
50-238             76.08
50-239             76.09
50-240             76.10
50-241             76.11
50-242             76.12
50-243             76.13
50-244             76.14,
                   76.99
50-245             76.15
50-246             76.16
50-247             76.17
50-248             76.18
50-249             76.19
50-250             76.20
50-251             76.21
50-281             70.20
50-282             70.21
50-283             70.22
50-284             70.23,
                   70.99
50-285             70.24
50-286             70.25
50-287             70.26
50-288             70.27
50-289             70.28
50-290             70.29
50-311             Ch. 77, Sch. I
50-312             Ch. 77, Sch. II
50-313             Ch. 77, Sch. III
50-314             Ch. 77, Sch. IV
50-316             Ch. 78, Sch. I
50-317             Ch. 77, Sch. V;
                   Ch. 78, Sch. II
50-318             Ch. 77, Sch. VI
50-319             Ch. 77, Sch. VII
50-320             Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
50-321             Ch. 77, Sch. IX
50-322             Ch. 77, Sch. X
52-1               50.01
52-2               50.02
52-3               50.03
52-4               50.04
52-5               50.99
52-6               50.05
52-7               50.06
52-31              51.01
52-32              51.02
52-33              51.03
52-34              51.04
52-35              51.05
52-36              51.06
52-38              51.07
52-39              51.08
52-40              51.09
52-41              51.10
52-42              51.11
52-43              51.12
52-44              51.13
52-45              51.14
52-46              51.15
52-47              51.16
52-48              51.17
52-49              51.18
52-50              51.99
52-71              52.001
52-72              52.002
52-73              52.003
52-74              52.004
52-75              52.005
52-76              52.006
52-77              52.007
52-78              52.008
52-79              52.009
52-80              52.010
52-81              52.011
52-82              52.012
52-83              52.013
52-84              52.014
52-85              52.050
52-86              52.051
52-87              52.052
52-88              52.053
52-89              52.054
52-90              52.055
52-91              52.056
52-92              52.057
52-93              52.015
52-94              52.016
52-95              52.017
52-96              52.018
52-97              52.019
52-98              52.020
52-99              52.021
52-100             52.022
52-101             52.023
52-102             52.024
52-103             52.025
52-104             52.026
52-105             52.027
52-106             52.028
52-107             52.029
52-108             52.030
52-109             52.031
52-110             52.032
52-111             52.033
52-112             52.034
52-113             52.035
52-114             52.036
52-115             52.037
52-141             52.070
52-142             52.071
52-143             52.072
52-144             52.073
52-145             52.074
52-146             52.075
52-147             52.076
52-148             52.077
52-149             52.078
52-150             52.079
52-181             53.001
52-182             53.020
52-183             53.021
52-184             53.022
52-185             53.023
52-186             53.024
52-187             53.025
52-188             53.040
52-189             53.041
52-190             53.042
52-191             53.043
52-192             53.044
52-193             53.045
52-194             53.046
52-195             53.047
52-196             53.048
52-197             53.049
52-198             53.050
52-199             53.051
52-200             53.052
52-201             53.053
52-202             53.054
52-203             53.055
52-204             53.056
52-205             53.057
52-206             53.058
52-207             53.059
52-208             53.060
52-209             53.061
52-210             53.062
52-211             53.063
52-212             53.064
52-213             53.065
52-214             53.066
52-215             53.067
52-216             53.068
52-217             53.069
52-218             53.070
52-219             53.071
52-220             53.072
52-221             53.073
52-222             53.074
54-31              96.01
54-32              96.02
54-33              96.20
54-34              96.21
54-35              96.22
54-36              96.23
54-37              96.24
54-38              96.03
54-39              96.04
54-40              96.05
54-41              96.06
54-42              96.07
54-43              96.08
54-44              96.25
54-45              96.99
56-1               156.001
56-2               156.002
56-3               156.003
56-31              156.020
56-32              156.021
56-33              156.023
56-34              156.024
56-35              156.025
56-36              156.026
56-61              156.040
56-62              156.041
56-63              156.042
56-64              156.043
56-65              156.044
56-66              156.045
56-75              156.060
56-76              156.061
56-77              156.062
56-78              156.063
56-79              156.065
56-91              156.080
56-92              156.081
56-93              156.082
56-94              156.083
56-95              156.085
56-121             156.100
56-122             156.101
56-123             156.102
56-124             156.103
56-125             156.105
56-151             156.120
56-152             156.121
56-153             156.122
56-154             156.123
56-155             156.125
56-181             156.140
56-182             156.141
56-183             156.142
56-184             156.143
56-185             156.145
56-211             156.160
56-212             156.161
56-213             156.162
56-271             156.175
56-272             156.176
56-273             156.177
56-274             156.178
56-275             156.179
56-276             156.180
56-301             156.195
56-302             156.196
56-303             156.197
56-304             156.198
56-305             156.199
56-306             156.200
56-331             156.215
56-332             156.216
56-333             156.217
56-334             156.218
56-335             156.219
56-336             156.220
56-361             156.235
56-362             156.236
56-363             156.237
56-364             156.238
56-365             156.239
56-391             156.250
56-392             156.251
56-393             156.252
56-394             156.253
56-395             156.254
56-411             156.270
56-412             156.271
56-413             156.272
56-414             156.273
56-415             156.274
56-421             156.290
56-422             156.291
56-423             156.292
56-424             156.293
56-425             156.294
56-426             156.295
56-427             156.296
56-428             156.297
56-429             156.298
56-430             156.299
56-431             156.299
56-432             156.299
56-433             156.299
56-434             156.299
56-435             156.299
56-436             156.300
56-437             156.301
56-438             156.302
56-439             156.303
56-440             156.304
56-441             156.304
56-442             156.304
56-443             156.304
56-444             156.304
56-445             156.304
56-446             156.305
56-447             156.305
56-448             156.305
56-449             156.305
56-450             156.305
56-451             156.305
56-452             156.305
56-453             156.305
56-454             156.305
56-455             156.305
56-456             156.305
56-457             156.305
56-458             156.305
56-459             156.306
56-460             156.307
56-461             156.320
56-462             156.321
56-463             156.322
56-491             156.335
56-492             156.336
56-493             156.337
56-494             156.338
56-495             156.339
56-521             156.350
56-522             156.351
56-524             156.352
56-525             156.352
56-526             156.352
56-527             156.352
56-528             156.353
56-529             156.353
56-530             156.353
56-531             156.353
56-532             156.353
56-533             156.354
56-561             156.370
56-591             156.390
56-592             156.391
56-593             156.392
56-594             156.393
56-620             156.410
56-621             156.411
56-622             156.412
56-623             156.413
56-624             156.414
56-625             156.415
56-626             156.416
56-627             156.417
56-651             156.430
56-652             156.431
56-653             156.999
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No. Date Passed Description
—      1-31-1994   Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      10-17-1995  Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      7-16-1996   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      10-15-1996  94.041
—      12-19-1996  33.09
—      11-19-1996  Ch. 77, Sch. IV,
                     V
—      7-6-1999    Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      6-19-2001   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      9-18-2001   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      11-6-2001   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      2-5-2002    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      5-7-2002    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      7-2-2002    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      9-3-2002    Ch. 77, Sch. III
—      5-6-2003    Ch. 77, Sch. III
—      7-1-2003    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      9-2-2003    Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                     II
—      10-7-2003   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      2-3-2004    Ch. 77, Sch. III;
                     Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      4-6-2004    Ch. 77, Sch. III
—      9-7-2004    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      4-5-2005    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      5-3-2005    Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      8-2-2005    Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      4-18-2006   Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      12-1-2009   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      2-16-2010   Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      9-21-2010   Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      3-6-2012    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      7-17-2012   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      1-15-2013   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      3-19-2013   Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                     II
                     Ch. 77, Sch. II,
                     III,
—      3-19-2013   IV,
                     IX,
                     X
—      2-18-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      5-20-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      5-20-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      12-2-2014   Ch. 77, Sch. VI
—      12-2-2014   Ch. 77, Sch, VII
—      6-2-2015    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      9-20-2016   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      11-1-2016   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      11-15-2016  Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      4-18-2017   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      12-5-2017   Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      6-5-2018    Ch. 78, Sch. II
—      2-16-2021   Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                     II
—      5-4-2021    Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                     II
—      4-19-2022   Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                     II
—      3-5-2024    Ch. 78, Sch. I
—      3-19-2024   Ch. 78, Sch. I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2931     11-2-1993   31.07
2939     12-14-1993  52.070—
                     52.079
2944     12-14-1993  76.21
2947     12-14-1993  130.075,
                     130.999
2950     1-31-1994   91.21
2955     3-15-1994   94.041
2956     4-19-1994   116.20
2960     5-17-1994   70.24
2964     6-21-1994   54.01—
                     54.14
2971     8-2-1994    32.35
2974     9-20-1994   96.04
2984     11-1-1994   90.21
2986     1-3-1995    91.25
2987     1-3-1995    90.08
2991     2-21-1995   94.055—
                     94.058
3008     5-16-1995   31.40
                     150.001—
                     150.007,
                     150.030—
                     150.032,
                     150.050—
                     150.053,
                     150.075—
3035     9-5-1995    150.079,
                     150.090—
                     150.097,
                     150.135—
                     150.138,
                     150.150—
                     150.156,
                     150.999
3039     10-17-1995  70.24
                     94.096,
3046     1-3-1996    94.097,
                     130.027
3049     2-20-1996   96.20,
                     96.21
3080     12-3-1996   52.070—
                     52.079
3093     12-17-1996  150.001
3099     2-4-1997    156.142
3102     2-4-1997    156.003
3103     2-4-1997    33.02
3109     5-6-1997    130.040,
                     130.999
3135     8-19-1997   94.021,
                     94.058
3134     9-2-1997    70.24,
                     76.15
3139     9-2-1997    95.21,
                     95.99
3156     2-3-1998    156.162
3160     2-17-1998   116.17
3162     5-5-1998    90.99
3169     6-2-1998    156.237—
                     156.239
3176     6-2-1998    94.056
3172     6-16-1998   91.03,
                     91.05
                     156.003,
3175     7-7-1998    156.299—
                     156.303
3177     7-21-1998   150.170—
                     150.190
                     152.02,
                     155.047,
                     155.063,
                     155.064,
                     156.041,
                     156.042,
                     156.081,
3179     8-4-1998    156.082,
                     156.101,
                     156.102,
                     156.121,
                     156.122,
                     156.141,
                     156.142,
                     156.392
3186     9-1-1998    94.097,
                     130.027
3187     10-20-1998  94.056
3213     12-1-1998   130.040,
                     130.999
3246     7-20-1999   90.07
                     156.003,
                     156.081,
                     156.083,
                     156.101,
3247     9-7-1999    156.102,
                     156.121,
                     156.141,
                     156.142,
                     156.304,
                     156.351
                     156.042,
                     156.082,
                     156.142,
                     156.177,
                     156.197,
3253     9-7-1999    156.216,
                     156.217,
                     156.237,
                     156.252,
                     156.274,
                     156.305
3257     10-19-1999  110.03
3292     6-20-2000   156.176,
                     156.393
3320     8-15-2000   110.03
3337     3-6-2001    156.177
3350     3-20-2001   33.08
3376     8-7-2001    94.096,
                     130.027
3383     8-21-2001   110.03
3386     9-4-2001    155.063
3397     11-6-2001   150.030—
                     150.033
3399     11-6-2001   94.020
                     156.003,
                     156.020,
                     156.040—
                     156.044,
                     156.080—
                     156.083,
                     156.085,
                     156.100—
                     156.102,
                     156.105,
                     156.120—
                     156.122,
                     156.125,
                     156.140—
                     156.142,
                     156.145,
                     156.175—
                     156.177,
—      12-4-2001   156.195—
                     156.197,
                     156.215—
                     156.217,
                     156.235—
                     156.238,
                     156.250,
                     156.252,
                     156.253,
                     156.270,
                     156.272,
                     156.306,
                     156.307,
                     156.351,
                     156.410—
                     156.417,
                     156.430,
                     156.431,
                     156.999
3407     2-5-2002    70.24
3409     3-19-2002   76.10
3414     4-2-2002    156.003,
                     156.083
3417     6-4-2002    156.197
                     95.01—
3419     6-4-2002    95.08,
                     95.99
3420     6-4-2002    150.001,
                     150.053
3424     6-4-2002    156.083
3442     9-17-2002   95.20
3446     9-17-2002   110.03
                     95.40—
3449     11-5-2002   95.48,
                     95.99
3452     3-4-2003    156.021
                     150.076,
                     150.173,
3455     3-4-2003    150.187,
                     150.188,
                     155.092,
                     156.177
3472     5-20-2003   150.030—
                     150.034
3473     5-20-2003   156.085
3477     5-20-2003   76.03
3481     7-1-2003    94.056
3483     8-5-2003    156.351
3486     8-19-2003   73.33,
                     73.99
3494     9-16-2003   94.021
3497     10-7-2003   54.03
                     156.041,
                     156.122,
3506     1-6-2004    156.236,
                     156.252,
                     156.274
                     150.030—
3508     1-6-2004    150.032,
                     150.034—
                     150.036
3509     1-6-2004    94.020
3513     2-17-2004   156.272
3516     2-17-2004   156.338
3531     4-6-2004    156.336
                     156.060—
3532     4-6-2004    156.063,
                     156.065
3543     5-4-2004    156.350,
                     156.351
3561     8-3-2004    130.026
3581     2-15-2005   94.095,
                     94.096
3591     4-5-2005    70.24
                     54.01,
3580     4-19-2005   54.08,
                     54.13
3603     6-7-2005    150.037
3612     9-20-2005   130.041,
                     130.999
3625     10-4-2005   90.08
3639     12-1-2005   155.067
                     156.001,
3640     12-1-2005   156.350,
                     156.352,
                     156.353
3648     5-2-2006    155.070—
                     155.076
3661     7-18-2006   76.99
3670     10-17-2006  156.142,
                     156.297
                     156.122,
3674     11-21-2006  156.177,
                     156.236,
                     156.351
3681     1-2-2007    75.01—
                     75.04
3679     2-6-2007    33.07
                     154.001—
                     154.003,
                     154.020—
                     154.026,
                     154.040—
3680     3-6-2007    154.047,
                     154.060—
                     154.070,
                     154.085—
                     154.096,
                     154.110,
                     154.999 
3685     4-3-2007    33.07
                     156.003,
                     156.024,
3689     5-1-2007    156.042,
                     156.065,
                     156.197,
                     156.236
3691     5-1-2007    150.188
3693     6-5-2007    90.05
                     154.003,
3700     8-7-2007    154.060,
                     164.061,
                     156.083
                     156.003,
                     156.179,
                     156.197,
3703     10-2-2007   156.999,
                     156.236,
                     156.297,
                     156.351
                     53.100—
3705     9-4-2007    53.107,
                     53.998,
                     53.999
3710     10-16-2007  130.042,
                     130.999
3720     2-19-2008   154.061
                     150.170,
                     150.182,
3721     3-18-2008   156.003,
                     156.042,
                     156.083
                     130.043—
3728     6-17-2008   130.046,
                     130.999
3733     8-5-2008    130.045,
                     130.999 
3729     10-21-2008  156.236
3734     9-16-2008   154.062
3735     9-2-2008    155.093
3736     10-21-2008  55.01—
                     55.07
                     117.01—
3739     10-21-2008  117.21,
                     117.99
3740     10-7-2008   156.297
3741     10-7-2008   155.007
3744     10-7-2008   156.351
3748     12-16-2008  52.038
3755     4-7-2009    116.27,
                     116.99
                     96.05,
3756     4-7-2009    115.24,
                     150.137,
                     155.043
3757     5-5-2009    33.07
3758     5-5-2009    156.003,
                     156.236
3759     4-7-2009    78.01
3763     7-7-2009    156.199
                     90.03,
                     90.08,
3768     8-4-2009    90.11,
                     90.15,
                     90.18
                     153.01—
3779     11-3-2009   153.26,
                     153.99
3784     2-2-2010    156.236
                     36.20,
3789     5-18-2010   36.23,
                     36.24
3791     6-1-2010    156.196
3792     7-6-2010    156.197
3797     8-17-2010   32.04
3814     5-3-2011    154.060
                     156.001—
                     156.003,
                     156.020,
                     156.021,
                     156.023—
                     156.026,
                     156.040—
                     156.045,
                     156.060—
                     156.063,
                     156.065,
                     156.080—
                     156.083,
                     156.085,
                     156.100—
                     156.103,
                     156.105,
                     156.120—
                     156.123,
                     156.125,
                     156.140—
                     156.143,
                     156.145,
                     156.160—
                     156.162,
                     156.165—
                     156.170,
3840     4-3-2012    156.175—
                     156.180,
                     156.195—
                     156.200,
                     156.215—
                     156.220,
                     156.235—
                     156.239,
                     156.250—
                     156.254,
                     156.270—
                     156.274,
                     156.290—
                     156.310,
                     156.320—
                     156.322,
                     156.335—
                     156.339,
                     156.350—
                     156.354,
                     156.370,
                     156.390—
                     156.393,
                     156.410—
                     156.417,
                     156.430,
                     156.431,
                     156.999
3844     5-1-2012    130.027
3846     5-15-2012   94.056
3847     6-5-2012    156.197,
                     156.308
3848     6-21-2012   94.021
3863     3-19-2013   150.030—
                     150.037
3864     1-15-2013   151.200
3865     1-15-2013   154.060,
                     154.070
3866     1-15-2013   156.273
3872     5-21-2013   94.056
3877     8-20-2013   130.045
3878     10-1-2013   156.042,
                     156.237
3882     10-1-2013   94.020
3885     4-1-2014    150.008
3887     1-21-2014   156.280—
                     156.288.6
3926     10-6-2015   94.056
3927     12-1-2015   130.028
3934     5-17-2016   153.19,
                     153.26
3941     5-17-2016   90.11,
                     90.16
3953     8-2-2016    96.04
3969     10-3-2017   156.240,
                     156.241
3995     9-4-2018    150.030
4003     5-7-2019    94.021
4011     9-3-2019    30.021
4016     12-17-2019  118.01—
                     118.29
                     150.030—
4017     12-3-2019   150.032,
                     150.034—
                     150.036
4020     1-7-2020    130.040—
                     130.042
4024     12-17-2019  94.020
4028     4-7-2020    110.01
                     151.001,
                     151.195—
                     151.205,
                     151.207,
                     151.209,
4036     9-15-2020   151.220,
                     151.236—
                     151.241,
                     151.255—
                     151.257,
                     151.270,
                     151.999
4042     11-3-2020   150.094,
                     156.083
4047     10-6-2020   130.040—
                     130.042
4053     3-16-2021   156.353
4059     5-4-2021    156.352
4067     6-1-2021    110.01,
                     110.03
                     71.12,
4080     2-1-2022    79.01—
                     79.09,
                     79.99
4090     3-15-2022   130.025
4091     3-15-2022   156.260,
                     156.261
                     156.001—
                     156.003,
                     156.020—
                     156.028,
                     156.060—
                     156.065,
                     156.080—
                     156.085,
4092     6-7-2022    156.100—105,
                     156.120—
                     156.125,
                     156.140—145,
                     156.150,
                     156.311,
                     156.312,
                     156.370—
                     156.375
4101     10-18-2022  116.17
4114     1-17-2024   34.44
                     119.01,
4137     9-5-2023    119.03—
                     119.06
4138     8-15-2024   120.01,
                     120.02
4148     12-5-2023   110.01
4153     1-7-2023    76.22
4159     1-16-2024   70.24
4164     12-17-2024  110.21—
                     110.35
4168     6-4-2024    90.03
4178     10-15-2024  156.042
4179     10-15-2024  156.042
4180     10-29-2024  156.313
4181     10-29-2024  156.042,
                     156.237
4187     12-17-2024  110.03—
                     110.09
4188     12-17-2024  110.10—
                     110.20
4189     12-17-2024  110.36,
                     110.37
                     119.01,
4190     1-21-2025   119.03—
                     119.06
4192     1-21-2025   110.01
4193     2-18-2025   90.99
4199     3-18-2025   91.21,
                     91.29
                    
 
 
