CITY OF VALLEY, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement Contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 838, passed 8-12-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 831
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE CITY OF VALLEY, NEBRASKA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF VALLEY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
MUNICIPAL CODE, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Valley are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Nebraska empower and
authorize the City of Valley to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Valley has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Valley
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City of Valley that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF VALLEY,
NEBRASKA.
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Valley as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Municipal Code of the City of Valley, Nebraska.”
Section 2.   Such Municipal Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
   VALLEY, NEBRASKA
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provisions
11. City Standards
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Mayor and City Council
31. City Officials
32. Organizations
33. Elections
34. Finance and Revenue
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Utilities Generally
51. Solid Waste
52. Water
53. Sewer
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Regulations
72. Parking Regulations
73. Recreational Vehicles
74. Traffic Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Leisure and Recreation
91. Nuisances
92. Animals
93. Fire Prevention and Protection
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Business Licensing
111. Alcoholic Beverages
112. Salvage Yards
113. Self-Serve Motor Fuel Dispensing Stations
114. Amusements and Leisure
115. Mobile Food Vendors
116. Railroad Companies
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
131. Control of Minors
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations
151. Factory-Built Housing
152. Trailer Courts
153. Public Ways and Property
154. Trees
155. Municipal Planning
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Street Vacations
II. Zoning Map Changes
III. Franchises
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Municipal Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Valley is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Municipal Code in the Office of
the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Valley, Nebraska on this
14th day of January, 2025.
   CITY OF VALLEY, DOUGLAS COUNTY, NEBRASKA
    /s/ Cindy Grove
                                              Cindy Grove, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Christie Donnermeyer
Christie Donnermeyer, City Clerk
CITY OF VALLEY, NEBRASKA
CORPORATE SEAL
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.17   Local changes to this code of ordinances
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the Valley Code of
Ordinances and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Valley,
Nebraska.
      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the city.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Douglas County, Nebraska.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities,
the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies and associations.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-801(16))
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Mayor
and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to
the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including ordinances
specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public
places;
   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;
   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public
use;
   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
   (G)   Appropriating money;
   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or
   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified
by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed
or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in
force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-614
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of
the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 18-132)
   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-712 et seq.
§ 10.17 LOCAL CHANGES TO THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   Any provision of this code of ordinances may be repealed, modified or
superseded by an ordinance passed by the City Council.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city code,
unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding
$500. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of
failure to comply with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in Title IX of this code,
the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1722
   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-505
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Corporate existence
   
11.02   Corporate seal
§ 11.01 CORPORATE EXISTENCE.
   The City of Valley, Nebraska, is hereby declared to be a city of the second
class and shall be governed in all respects by the laws regulating cities of
the second class.
(Prior Code, § 1-101)
§ 11.02 CORPORATE SEAL.
   There shall be owned by the city, in the office of the City Clerk, a common
seal of the corporation, having engraved thereon the words “City of Valley,
Nebraska, Seal.” The City Clerk shall affix an impression of said seal on all
papers or documents executed by him or her in his or her official capacity.
(Prior Code, § 1-301)
Statutory reference:
   Seal, other powers, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-502
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   ELECTIONS
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
Mayor
   
30.01   Election; qualifications; term
   
30.02   Powers and duties
   
30.03   Vacancy
City Council
   
30.15   Election; qualifications; terms
   
30.16   President; Acting President
   
30.17   Succession of control
   
30.18   Vacancy
   
30.19   Resignations
   
30.20   Powers
   
30.21   Standing committees
Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions
   
30.35   Grant of power
   
30.36   Introduction of ordinances
   
30.37   Procedure for resolutions and motions
   
30.38   Ordinances; style, title
   
30.39   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders, bylaws
   
30.40   Passage; Mayor’s veto
   
30.41   Publication or posting
   
30.42   Certificate of publication or posting
   
30.43   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
30.44   Amendments and revisions
MAYOR
§ 30.01 ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected as provided in the Election Act, being Neb.
Rev. Stat. §§ 32-101 et seq. The Mayor shall take office on the date of the
first regular meeting of the City Council held in December following the
statewide general election. The Mayor shall be a resident and registered voter
of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-107)
   (B)   The Mayor shall serve for a term of four years or until his or her
successor is elected and qualified.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-533)
§ 30.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor of the city may:
      (1)   Require any city official to exhibit his or her accounts at
reasonable intervals and make reports to the Council on any subject pertaining
to his or her office; and
      (2)   Remove an appointed police officer of the city at any time, subject
to such officer’s right of appeal as set forth herein.
   (B)   The Mayor shall:
      (1)   Have the general and immediate control over all property and
officials of the city;
      (2)   Preside at all meetings of the City Council and may vote when his
or her vote shall be decisive on any pending matter, legislation or
transaction; and shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member
of the Council;
      (3)   Sign the City Clerk’s minutes of all meetings, all resolutions
which have been passed and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by
the City Council;
      (4)   Have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the City Council
and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to enter
into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, as provided in §
30.40;
      (5)   From time to time communicate to the Council such information and
recommendations as, in his or her opinion, may improve the city; and
      (6)   Have such other duties as the City Council may by resolution confer
upon him or her.
   (C)   The Mayor’s territorial authority shall extend over all places within
five miles of the corporate limits of the city for the enforcement of any
health ordinance and one-half mile in all matters vested in him or her except
taxation.
   (D)   Any candidate for Mayor must be a registered voter and resident of the
city prior to filing for said office.
(Prior Code, § 1-104) (Ord. 672, passed 3-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-107 and 17-110 through 17-117
§ 30.03 VACANCY.
   (A)   The office of Mayor shall be vacant upon the happening of any of the
events specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-560 except as provided in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 32-561.
   (B)   (1)   In case of any vacancy in the office of Mayor, or in case of his
or her disability or absence, the President of the City Council shall exercise
the office of Mayor for the unexpired term, until such disability is removed
or, in case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-568)
      (2)   If the President of the Council assumes the office of Mayor for the
unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on the Council.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-107 and 32-568)
Statutory reference:
   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-560 through 32-
572
   Ineligibility of person subjected to recall, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1308
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS.
   (A)   The City Council shall consist of not less than four nor more than 12
residents of the city who are registered voters.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-103)
   (B)   All Council members shall be nominated and elected on a nonpartisan
ballot unless the city provides for a partisan ballot by ordinance.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-557)
   (C)   If members of the Council are not elected at large:
      (1)   Unless the city elects Council members at large as provided in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 32-554, the city shall be divided into not less than two nor more
than six wards, as provided by ordinance of the City Council. Each ward shall
contain, as nearly as practicable, an equal portion of the population;
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-102)
      (2)   Unless the city elects Council members at large as provided in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 32-554, each ward of the city shall have at least two Council
members elected in the manner provided in the Election Act. No person shall be
eligible to the office of Council member who is not at the time of the election
an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is elected and a registered
voter; and
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-104)
      (3)   Such wards shall be substantially equal in population as determined
by the most recent federal decennial census.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-553)
   (D)   The term of office shall begin on the first regular meeting of the
Council in December following the statewide general election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-104)
   (E)   Members of the Council shall serve for terms of four years or until
their successors are elected and qualified.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-533)
   (F)   If the city operates under a city manager plan, members of the City
Council shall be residents and registered voters of the city and shall hold no
other employment with the city. Any Council member who ceases to possess any of
the qualifications required by this section or who has been convicted of a
felony or of any public offense involving the violation of the oath of office
of such member while in office shall forthwith forfeit such office.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-613)
Statutory reference:
   Ability to elect Council members at large or by ward, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §
32-554
   Election Act, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-101
   Other requirements for wards, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-552 and 32-553
   Restrictions on holding other office or employment, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§
17-108.02, 32-109, 32-603 and 32-604
§ 30.16 PRESIDENT; ACTING PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall elect one of its own body who shall be styled
the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of the
Council in the absence of the Mayor.
   (B)   In the absence of the President, the Council shall elect one of its
own body to occupy his or her place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting
President of the Council.
   (C)   The President, and Acting President, when occupying the place of the
Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the Council; and all
acts of the President or Acting President, while so acting, shall be as binding
upon the Council and upon the city as if done by the Mayor.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-148)
§ 30.17 SUCCESSION OF CONTROL.
   In order to designate the succession of control of the city and to declare
and control a disaster or emergency when the Mayor is not present or is unable
to act as the principal executive officer of the city, then the following is
the procedure used to determine who is next in line to fulfill those duties and
responsibilities.
   (A)   If the Mayor is not present or is incapable of performing his or her
duties in order to declare a disaster or emergency and/or act as principal
executive officer in a disaster or emergency situation, the President of the
City Council shall perform those functions and duties.
   (B)   Should the President of the Council not be present or be unable to
perform said functions and duties, then the Council member who has continuously
served in such capacity for the longest period of time shall perform those
duties and functions.
   (C)   The line of succession for the remaining elected officials shall
follow by seniority from the date originally elected or appointed. If more than
one Council member has the same date of seniority, then the most senior in age
shall assume control.
(Prior Code, § 1-107)
§ 30.18 VACANCY.
   (A)   The office of member of the City Council shall be vacant upon the
happening of any of the events specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-560 except as
provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-561.
   (B)   Any vacancy on the City Council shall be filled as provided in
division (C) below.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-568)
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2) or (C)(3)
below or §
30.03, vacancies in city elective offices shall be filled by the Mayor and
Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy, except a
vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing and
presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear as a
part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council shall at once give public
notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city or by posting in three public places in the city
the office vacated and the length of the unexpired term.
         (b)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council or place
the issue of filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting at
which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to
fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The regular or special
meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or within four weeks after
the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented. The Council
shall vote upon the nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of the nominee,
the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to receive a
majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall, at
the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to
receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at that meeting to
submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination and the Council
shall continue to vote upon the nominations at such meeting until the vacancy
is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in
case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a
ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights,
including voting, as if that person were elected.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a city
elected office as provided in division (C)(1) above, call a special city
election to fill such vacancy.
      (3)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
city election to fill such vacancies.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-569)
Statutory reference:
   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-560 through 32-
572
   Ineligibility of person subjected to recall, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1308
§ 30.19 RESIGNATIONS.
   All resignations of the Mayor and Council members shall be in writing and
submitted to the City Council for acceptance. Resignations shall not be
effective until accepted by formal action of the Council. No resignations shall
be accepted unless a quorum for conducting business will remain after such
acceptance.
(Prior Code, § 1-109)
§ 30.20 POWERS.
   The Council shall have all powers granted under the laws of the state,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   To pass ordinances to prevent and remove nuisances;
   (B)   To prevent, restrain and suppress gambling and disorderly houses;
   (C)   To license and regulate amusements;
   (D)   To establish and provide for police protection;
   (E)   To prevent the spread of contagious diseases;
   (F)   To regulate business;
   (G)   To erect, repair, construct and regulate public ways and property;
   (H)   To maintain good government, public welfare and domestic tranquility;
and
   (I)   To enforce all ordinances by assessing penalties upon inhabitants or
other persons for violation thereof, not exceeding the amount permitted by
state law for each offense, recoverable with costs, together with enforcement
by injunction where necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1-110)
§ 30.21 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   At the organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor shall appoint
members of such standing committees as the Council may create by ordinance or
resolution. The membership of such standing committees may be changed at any
time by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of each standing
committee. The members of the standing committees shall serve a term of office
of one year, unless reappointed.
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS
§ 30.35 GRANT OF POWER.
   In addition to its special powers specifically granted by law, the city
shall have the power to make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and
resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the state, as may be expedient
for maintaining the peace, good government and welfare of the city and its
trade, commerce and manufactories, and to enforce all ordinances by inflicting
fines or penalties for the breach thereof, not exceeding $500 for any one
offense, recoverable with costs.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-505)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of standard codes, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-132 and 19-922
   Prosecution in county court, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2703
§ 30.36 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, ordinances shall be introduced
by members of the City Council in one of the following ways.
   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the City Council, read aloud
the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the City Clerk for
future consideration.
   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk, who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the City Council, shall read aloud the substance of the
ordinance and file it for future consideration.
§ 30.37 PROCEDURE FOR RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, resolutions and motions shall be
introduced in one of the methods prescribed in §
30.36 for the introduction of ordinances. The issue raised by the resolution or
motion shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary law
adopted for the guidance of the City Council. A majority vote shall be required
to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution or motion shall be
by roll call vote.
§ 30.38 ORDINANCES; STYLE, TITLE.
   (A)   Style. The style of all city ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by
the Mayor and Council of the City of Valley, Nebraska:….”
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-613)
   (B)   Title. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly
expressed in the title.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-614)
§ 30.39 READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation
or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence
of a majority of all elected members of the City Council. The Mayor may vote on
any such matter if the Mayor’s vote is required due to the City Council members
being equally divided or a majority vote of all the elected members of the City
Council cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy, or abstention of one or more
City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the mayor is deemed to be a
member of the City Council.
      (2)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title
on three different days unless three-fourths of the City Council vote to
suspend this requirement. Such requirement shall not be suspended for any
ordinance for the annexation of territory, or the redrawing of boundaries for
City Council election districts or wards, or as otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read
by title and then moved for final passage.
      (4)   Three-fourths of the City Council may require a reading of any such
ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this
section.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-614)
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and every
resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City Council, the yeas and
nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance or any
such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of
members elected to the City Council shall be required. All appointments of the
officers by the City Council shall be made viva voce, and the concurrence of a
like majority shall be required, and the names of those, and for whom they
voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment, shall be recorded. The
requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a city
which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-616)
Statutory reference:
   Adjustments to boundaries of election districts, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-
614
§ 30.40 PASSAGE; MAYOR’S VETO.
   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or
payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of
a majority of the City Council. The Mayor may vote when his or her vote would
provide the additional vote required to attain the number of votes equal to a
majority of the number of members elected to the Council, and the Mayor shall,
for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the
City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or
vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim. If the Mayor
approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract or claim, he or she
shall sign it and it shall become effective. If the Mayor vetoes the ordinance,
order, bylaw, resolution, contract or any item or items of appropriations or
claims, he or she shall return it to the City Council, stating that the measure
is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at which the measure
passed or within seven calendar days after the meeting. If the Mayor issues the
veto after the meeting, he or she shall notify the City Clerk of the veto in
writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in writing of the Mayor’s
veto.
   (C)   (1)   Any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to
enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the Mayor may
be passed over his or her veto by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the
Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract or the allowance of any
claim but fails to veto the measure within the time required by this section,
the measure shall become effective without his or her signature.
      (2)   The Mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill or
any claims bill and approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items vetoed
may be passed by the Council over the veto as in other cases.
(Prior Code, § 1-407) (Ord. 672, passed 3-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-111 and 17-614
§ 30.41 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published one time, within 15 days after they are passed:
   (A)   In newspaper in or of general circulation in the city; or
   (B)   In book, pamphlet or electronic form.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-613)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-131
§ 30.42 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   The passage, approval and publication or posting of an ordinance shall be
sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the City
Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what
paper the ordinance was published, or when and by whom and where the ordinance
was posted.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-613)
Statutory reference:
   Passage; rules and regulations, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-615
§ 30.43 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
30.41 and division (B) below, an ordinance for the government of the city which
has been adopted by the City Council without submission to the voters of the
city shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-3701)
   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases or other
impending danger, failure of a public utility or any other emergency requiring
its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation
of the Mayor and the posting thereof in at least three of the most public
places in the city. The emergency ordinance shall recite the emergency, be
passed by a three-fourths vote of the City Council and be entered of record on
the City Clerk’s minutes.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-613)
§ 30.44 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the city and modifications to zoning or building
districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-614)
Statutory reference:
   Modifications to zoning or building districts, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-915
   Ordinances revising all the ordinances of the city, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §
17-614
   Requests to detach property from city or village, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-
614
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Bonds; requirements
   
31.02   Oath of office; city officials
Appointed Officials
   
31.15   Appointment of officers
   
31.16   Merger of offices
   
31.17   City Administrator
   
31.18   City Clerk
   
31.19   City Treasurer
   
31.20   City Attorney
   
31.21   City Police Chief
   
31.22   Public Works Superintendent
   
31.23   Street Superintendent
   
31.24   City Engineer; Special Engineer
   
31.25   Building Inspector
   
31.26   Zoning Administrator
   
31.27   Electrical Inspector
   
31.28   Plumbing Inspector
Meetings
   
31.40   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
31.41   Notice to news media
   
31.42   Council meetings; when; quorum
   
31.43   Closed sessions
   
31.44   Public participation
   
31.45   City Council; order of business
   
31.46   City Council; parliamentary procedure
   
31.47   Change in office
   
31.48   Organizational meeting
Compensation; Conflicts of Interest
   
31.60   Compensation; how fixed; limitations
   
31.61   Conflict of interest involving contracts
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BONDS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to require from all officers
and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or evidence of
equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their duties. The city may
pay the premium for such bonds or insurance coverage.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-604)
   (B)   (1)   All official bonds of officers of the city shall be in form
joint and several and made payable to the city in such penalty as the City
Council may fix.
      (2)   In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by
municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking or
evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a
single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position or blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers,
including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or
undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium for the
bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a
minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council and
with such terms and conditions as may be required.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-104)
      (3)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal
minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official.
   (C)   (1)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed
in the City Clerk’s office within the following time:
         (a)    Of all officers elected at any general election, following
receipt of their election certificate and not later than ten days before the
first Thursday after the first Tuesday in January next succeeding the election;
         (b)   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days after their
appointment; and
         (c)   Of officers elected at any special election and city officers,
within 30 days after the canvass of the votes of the election at which they
were chosen.
      (2)   The filing of the bond with the oath endorsed thereon does not
authorize a person to take any official action prior to the beginning of his or
her term of office pursuant to Article XVII, § 5, of the Constitution of the
state.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-105)
   (D)   All official bonds of city officers shall be executed by the principal
named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who shall be
freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any official bond
of a city officer may be executed by the officer as principal and by a
guaranty, surety, fidelity or bonding company as surety, or by two or more such
companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to transact business
in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a city officer.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-109)
   (E)   The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the bonds in his or
her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when required, under the
seal of his or her office and shall be entitled to receive for the same the
usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in other cases.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-110)
   (F)   (1)   The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed upon such
bond by the officer approving the same, and no bond shall be filed and recorded
until so approved.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-111)
      (2)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval
of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the instrument
by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the City Council.
   (G)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the
faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such principal and shall
inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the conditions of
such bonds.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-112)
   (H)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any informality
of irregularity in its execution or approval.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-113)
   (I)   No city official shall be taken as security on the bond of any
administrator, executor or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be
required.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-114)
   (J)   If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to have his
or her official bond executed and approved as provided by law and filed for
record within the time limited by this section, the City Clerk shall
immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she has
failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be deemed
to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file the bond
within ten days of the issuance of such order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials and sufficient cause is not
shown within that time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto become
vacant, and such vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by election or
appointment as the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the same office.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-115)
   (K)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon the
duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and form with
the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed, as herein
provided.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-116)
   (L)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed, he or she
shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above directed, but
when such officer has had public funds or property in his or her control, his
or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced and fully
accounted for such funds and property. When it is ascertained that the
incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the nonelection or
nonappointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor to
qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days from the time at which
his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-117)
   (M)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than two
successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply to
incorporated surety companies.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-118)
   (N)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer of the
city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the Council may
by resolution fix a reasonable time within which the officer may give a new
bond or additional sureties as directed. If the officer fails, refuses or
neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and
approval of the Council, the office shall, by such failure, refusal or neglect,
become vacant, and it shall be the duty of the Council to appoint a competent
and qualified person to fill the office.
§ 31.02 OATH OF OFFICE; CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall before entering upon
their respective duties take and subscribe the following oath, which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:
      “I, ______________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely and without
mental reservation or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully
and impartially perform the duties of the office of ____________________,
according to law and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I
do not advocate nor am I a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will
not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence. So help me God.”
   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-101)
APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor, at the first regular meeting of the City Council held after he or
she takes office or as soon as he or she can reasonably do so, may appoint,
with the advice and consent of the Council, a City Administrator, City Clerk,
City Engineer, City Attorney, City Police Chief, Public Works Superintendent
and Water Superintendent. The Mayor shall also appoint whatever other officials
of the city he or she deems necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-201) (Ord. 756, passed 8-10-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-107 and 17-541
§ 31.16 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   (A)   The City Council may at its discretion by ordinance combine and merge
any elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of
any such offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member, with any
other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such
offices or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or
employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time.
   (B)   The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be
construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination or merger shall be
limited to a consolidation of official duties only.
   (C)   The salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding the
merged and combined offices or employments or offices and employments shall not
be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or
compensation of the office, offices, employment or employments so merged and
combined.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, volunteer firefighters and ambulance
drivers shall not be considered officers.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-108.02)
§ 31.17 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the office of City Administrator, who
shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The City Administrator
shall serve as administrative agent for the Mayor and the City Council in the
supervision of the offices and good government of the city. All departments of
the city, except the Police Department, shall be under the administrative
supervision and direction of the City Administrator, and the Mayor and City
Council shall deal with all departments of the city and employees through the
City Administrator. Such office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor by
and with the consent of the City Council, and the person filling such office
shall serve at the Mayor’s pleasure.
   (B)   In the performance of the City Administrator’s role as chief
administrative officer of the city, he or she shall have the following duties
and powers:
      (1)   Maintain all city, general, utility, payroll, revenue sharing and
bond retirement financial records and reports;
      (2)   Supervise payroll, maintain permanent payroll records, collect
payroll deductions and remit the same according to law;
      (3)   Administer city comprehensive, business, employee health, dental,
self-insurance, workers’ compensation, unemployment and other insurance
programs and employee retirement programs;
      (4)   Serve as city personnel director;
      (5)   Assist and supervise all city department heads in general operation
of their departments but not to include the making of operational decisions
made by said department heads. In pursuance of this provision, the City
Administrator shall meet periodically with department heads;
      (6)   Supervise personnel evaluation programs;
      (7)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor annual evaluations of all city
personnel under his or her supervision;
      (8)   Supervise city office personnel;
      (9)   Coordinate employment application procedures and interviews;
      (10)   Generally supervise the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
and assistants;
      (11)   Serve as city purchasing agent for all departments;
      (12)   Assume general responsibility in conjunction with department heads
for maintenance of perpetual inventories for each department;
      (13)   Assume general responsibility for accident, injury and damage
reports and supervision over periodic department safety meetings;
      (14)   Attend City Council, board, commission or committee meetings when
indicated; and
      (15)   Assume general responsibility for budget preparation and periodic
budget reports to Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-203) (Ord. 756, passed 8-10-2021)
§ 31.18 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The duties of the City Clerk will be those set forth herein and as set
forth specifically in the job description separately adopted by the Mayor and
City Council.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall have custody of all laws and ordinances and
shall:
      (1)   Keep a current journal of the proceedings of the City Council;
      (2)   Maintain a complete record of all outstanding bonds against the
city, showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom said bonds were
issued and all other pertinent information in regard to said bonds;
      (3)   Take possession of all books, papers and all other official records
of the city and maintain said records in a safe place;
      (4)   Have custody of the seal of the city and all written official
papers;
      (5)   Attend the meetings of the City Council and keep a minute record of
the proceedings thereof;
      (6)   Maintain an account of all of the appropriations of the several
funds of the city;
      (7)   Draw, sign and attest all warrants ordered for payment on a
particular fund from which the same is payable, and at the end of each month
make a report of the amount appropriated to each fund and the amount of
warrants drawn thereon;
      (8)   Attest to the Mayor’s signature when necessary and attach the city
seal to all official documents;
      (9)   Whenever any claim presented by any person has been disallowed by
the City Council, notify said claimant of said disallowance by the Council
within five days after such disallowance;
      (10)   Account for all money received in the normal course of city
business and keep a proper record of all moneys received, issuing a proper
receipt to those parties making payment to the account of the city;
      (11)   Publish all notices required in the performance of his or her
duties and keep a record of all published notices; keep a record of the
publisher’s affidavit of said publication if said notices are published in a
legal newspaper;
      (12)   Maintain all books and public records of the city for public
inspection by any resident during normal business hours;
      (13)   Make a notation on all correspondence received as to the date of
receipt and convey said correspondence to the appropriate official of the city
as soon as possible;
      (14)   Keep and maintain all other legal papers required to be maintained
by city ordinances or by state law; and
      (15)   Maintain a minute book wherein shall be recorded all of the formal
and informal actions of the Mayor and City Council and maintain a record of the
various ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. The minutes of any
meeting of the Council shall be written and available for public inspection
within ten working days of the meeting or prior to the next convened meeting,
whichever occurs earliest, except that an additional ten days shall be allowed
for writing and making available for inspection such minutes in the event of
the Clerk’s serious illness or an emergency which prevents him or her from
writing such minutes and making them available to the general public within ten
working days as set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 1-204) (Ord. 756, passed 8-10-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Examination of public records, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-712
   Records Management Act, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1201 through 84-1220
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-605, 19-1102 and 19-1104
§ 31.19 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Duties and powers.
      (1)   The duties of the City Treasurer will be those set forth herein and
as set forth specifically in the job description separately adopted by the
Mayor and City Council.
      (2)   The City Treasurer shall:
         (a)   Deposit and at all times keep on deposit for safekeeping in
banks or other institutions of approved and responsible standing all money
collected, received or held as Treasurer. Such deposits shall be subject to all
regulations imposed by law or adopted by the city for the receiving and holding
thereof. A bond or pledged securities shall be required from every bank or
financial institution in which municipal funds are deposited in any amount
exceeding that amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
         (b)   Keep a separate account of each and every fund or appropriation
and the debits and credits belonging to the city;
         (c)   Provide a receipt for anyone paying money into the City Treasury
if such person requests a receipt, specifying the date of payment and on what
account paid and also file copies of said receipts with his or her monthly
reports made to the Mayor and City Council;
         (d)   At the end of each month and as often as may be required, render
a report to the Mayor and City Council showing, under oath, the condition of
the various accounts of the Treasury at the time of such reports and the
balance in the Treasury; and accompany such accounts with a statement of all
receipts and disbursements, together with all warrants paid which, with any and
all vouchers held, shall be filed with his or her accounts in the City Clerk’s
office;
         (e)   Keep a record, in a book suitable for that purpose, of each and
every warrant paid and from what fund paid; and
         (f)   Procure and keep a warrant register which shall show the number,
date and amount of each warrant presented and registered as hereinafter
provided, the particular fund upon which the same is drawn, the date of
presentation, the name and address of the person in whose name the same is
registered, the date of payment, the amount of interest and the total amount
paid thereon, with the date when the notice to such person in whose name such
warrant is registered is mailed as hereinafter provided. It shall be the duty
of the City Treasurer, upon presentation of any warrant for payment, in the
presence of such person to enter such warrant in the warrant register for
payment in the order of its presentation and, upon every warrant as presented
and registered, endorse “Registered for Payment” with the date of such
registration and register number; and sign such endorsement, whereupon such
warrant shall draw interest at the legal rate from the date of registration
until notice of payment shall be given to the holder as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-205)
   (B)   Treasurer’s monthly report. The City Treasurer shall, at the end of
each month and as often as may be required, render a report to the Mayor and
City Council showing, under oath, the condition of the various accounts of the
Treasury at the time of such reports and the balance of money in the Treasury;
such accounts shall be accompanied with a statement of all receipts and
disbursements, together with all warrants paid which, with any and all vouchers
held, shall be filed with his or her accounts in the City Clerk’s office. The
City Treasurer shall also produce depository evidence that all city money is in
a solvent financial institution in the name of the city. If he or she neglects
or fails, for a period of ten days from the end of each and every month, to
render his or her account, the office shall be declared vacant, and the Mayor
and City Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment until the next election
of city officials.
(Prior Code, § 1-206)
   (C)   Treasurer’s annual report. The City Treasurer is required to publish
or cause to be published in a legal weekly newspaper published in or of general
circulation in said city within 60 days following the end of each fiscal year a
report of the activities of his or her office, which said report shall show in
detail all receipts, disbursements, warrants outstanding and the debit or
credit balance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-207)
(Ord. 756, passed 8-10-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Examination of public records, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-712
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-606 through 609
   Treasurer’s annual report, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1101
§ 31.20 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City Council. He
or she shall commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary to
be commenced, prosecuted or defended on behalf of the city, or that may be
ordered by the Council. When requested, he or she shall attend meetings of the
Council and give them his or her opinion upon any matters submitted to him or
her, either orally or in writing, as may be required. He or she shall draft or
review for legal correctness ordinances, contracts, franchises and other
instruments as may be required, and he or she shall perform such other duties
as may be imposed upon him or her by general law or ordinance. The Council
shall have the right to pay the City Attorney compensation for legal services
performed by him or her for it on such terms as the Council and Attorney may
agree, and to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal
assistance out of the funds of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-610)
   (B)   The City Attorney shall also examine, when requested to do so by the
City Council, the ordinance records and advise and assist the City Clerk as
much as may be necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in
the passage of each ordinance to ensure that it will be a valid and subsisting
local law in so far as its passage and approval are concerned.
§ 31.21 CITY POLICE CHIEF.
   The duties of the City Police Chief will be those set forth herein and as
set forth specifically in the job description separately adopted by the Mayor
and City Council. The City Police Chief shall:
   (A)   Diligently inquire into any and all violations of city ordinances and
state statutes; if he or she determines that a violation of city ordinances or
state statutes has occurred, issue a written complaint and cause the arrest of
such person;
   (B)   Make or cause to be made the necessary written complaint against any
person under arrest for the violation of any city ordinances or state laws and
bring any such prisoner before the county court whenever required to do so by
rule or order of the county judge;
   (C)   Have general control over motor vehicular traffic and, together with
such special officers detailed to assist as traffic officers by the Mayor and
City Council, shall direct the movement of traffic at intersections and
elsewhere; and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order or
signal of the city police or of any special traffic officer; and
   (D)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by
resolution or by order of the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-209) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-107 and 17-121
§ 31.22 PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   (1)   As soon as a system of waterworks or mains or portion or
extension of any system of waterworks or water supply has been established by
the city, the Mayor shall nominate and by and with the advice and consent of
the City Council shall appoint any competent person who shall be known as the
Water Superintendent of the city and whose term of office shall be for one
fiscal year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Annually
at the first regular meeting of the City Council in December, the Water
Superintendent shall be appointed as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Water Superintendent may at any time, for sufficient cause, be
removed by a two-thirds vote of the City Council. Any vacancy occurring in the
office of Water Superintendent by death, resignation, removal from office or
removal from the city may be filled in the manner provided in this section for
the appointment of the Superintendent.
      (3)   The Water Superintendent, subject to the supervision of the Mayor
and City Council, shall have the general management and control of the system
of waterworks or mains or portion or extension of any system of waterworks or
water supply in the city.
      (4)   In a city where no Board of Public Works exists, and the city has
other public utilities than its waterworks system, the Mayor and Council shall
by ordinance designate Water Superintendent as Public Works Superintendent with
authority to manage not only the system of waterworks but also other public
utilities, and all of the provisions of this division (A) applying to the Water
Superintendent shall apply to the Public Works Superintendent.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-541)
   (B)   (1)   The Water Superintendent shall collect all money received by the
city on account of its system of waterworks and shall faithfully account for
and pay over the same to the City Treasurer, taking his or her receipt therefor
in duplicate, filing one of the same with the City Clerk.
      (2)   He or she shall make a detailed report to the City Council, at
least once every six months, of the condition of the water system, of all
mains, pipes, hydrants, reservoirs and machinery and such improvements, repairs
and extension thereof as he or she may think proper. The report shall show the
amount of receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the preceding six
months. No money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or extension of
the waterworks system except upon recommendation of the Water Superintendent.
      (3)   The Water Superintendent shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by ordinance.
      (4)   The Water Superintendent shall be paid such salary as the Council
may by ordinance provide, and upon his or her written recommendation, the Mayor
and Council shall employ such laborers and clerks as may to them seem
necessary.
      (5)   Neither the Mayor nor any member of the Council shall be eligible
to the office of Water Superintendent during the term for which he or she was
elected.
      (6)   If the city owns public utilities other than the waterworks system
and the Water Superintendent has been designated by ordinance as the Public
Works Superintendent under the authority of division (A) above, then all
provisions of this division (B) in reference to a Water Superintendent shall
apply to the Public Works Superintendent.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-543)
   (C)   In the event the city shall have created a Board of Public Works, the
Water Superintendent shall, subject to confirmation by the Mayor and Council,
be employed thereafter by the Board at such reasonable compensation as may be
agreed upon at the time of such employment and shall thereafter be under the
jurisdiction of the Board, any of the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-501
through 17-560 to the contrary notwithstanding. Any Water Superintendent under
the jurisdiction and control of the Board of Public Works may be removed by the
Board, after an opportunity to be heard before the Mayor and Council if he or
she shall so request, for malfeasance, misfeasance or neglect in office.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-804)
§ 31.23 STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The Street Superintendent shall, subject to the order of the Mayor and
Council, have general charge, direction and control of all works on the
streets, sidewalks, culverts and bridges of the city, and shall perform such
other duties as the Council may require.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-119)
   (B)   It shall be his or her responsibility to see that gutters and drains
in the city function properly and that they are kept in good repair.
   (C)   He or she shall, at the request of the City Council make a detailed
report to the Council on the condition of the streets, sidewalks, culverts,
alleys and bridges of the city and shall direct their attention to such
improvements, repairs and extension thereof as he or she may think proper.
   (D)   The Street Superintendent shall issue such permits and perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Incentive payments to street superintendents, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-2512
§ 31.24 CITY ENGINEER; SPECIAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   (1)   The City Engineer shall, when requested by the Mayor or City
Council, make estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or
furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of
culverts, sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public
heating system, bridges, curbing and gutters, the improvement of streets and
the erection and repair of buildings and shall perform such other duties as the
City Council may require.
      (2)   When the city has appointed a Board of Public Works and the Mayor
and City Council have by ordinance so authorized, the Board may utilize its own
engineering staff and may hire consulting engineers for the design and
installation of extensions and improvements of the works under the jurisdiction
of the Board.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-568.01)
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council may employ a special engineer to make, or
assist in making, any estimate necessary or to perform any other duty provided
for in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-568.01. Any work executed by such special engineer
shall have the same validity and serve in all respects as though executed by
the City Engineer.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-568)   
   (C)   The City Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her
surveys and of all work done for the city and, when directed by the Mayor and
City Council, shall accurately make such plats, sections, profiles and maps as
may be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public
records and belong to the city and be turned over to his or her successor.
Statutory reference:
   Duties related to areas to be annexed, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-3301
   Duties related to sewerage systems, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-150 and 17-919
§ 31.25 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall report to the City Council as often as
may be deemed necessary and shall have such other duties and issue such permits
as may be directed. He or she may be removed at any time for good and
sufficient cause by the City Council.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall:
      (1)   Conduct surveys and make inspections in any area of the city to
determine whether all buildings and structures are in compliance with the
municipal ordinances;
      (2)   Investigate all complaints, whether verbal, written or in the form
of a petition, alleging and charging that a violation of the municipal
ordinances exists and that a building or structure is unfit or unsafe for human
habitation;
      (3)   Upon properly identifying himself or herself, be authorized to
enter, inspect, survey and investigate any building between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists, or if requested by
the owner or occupant thereof;
      (4)   Keep records of all complaints received, inspection reports, orders
and complaints issued. The records shall be available for public inspection,
and he or she shall prepare an annual report including statistics based on the
records kept; and
      (5)   Have no financial interest in the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building except
where he or she is the owner of a building, and he or she shall not act as an
agent for any said dealer, or as an agent for the sale, lease or rental of any
real estate.
(Prior Code, § 1-213)
§ 31.26 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1-216)
§ 31.27 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, acting as the Electrical Inspector, shall
enforce all laws relating to the installation of electrical wiring, and
connections thereto. When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope
of his or her official duties, he or she shall not be held personally liable
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act
required by him or her or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of
his or her duties.
   (B)   Said Inspector shall, in the discharge of his or her official duties
and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour and shall perform such other
duties and issue any permits that the City Council may direct.
   (C)   The Electrical Inspector may be removed at any time for good and
sufficient cause by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-214)
§ 31.28 PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, acting as the Plumbing Inspector, shall
enforce all laws relating to the installation of plumbing and connections
thereto. When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or
her official duties, he or she shall not be held personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act required
by him or her or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or
her duties.
   (B)   Said Inspector shall, in the discharge of his or her official duties
and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour and shall perform such other
duties and issue any permits that the Mayor and City Council may direct.
   (C)   The Plumbing Inspector may be removed at any time for good and
sufficient cause by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-215)
MEETINGS
§ 31.40 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   All public meetings, as defined by law, shall be held in a public
building located within the city, which shall be open to attendance by the
public. All meetings shall be held in the public building in which the City
Council usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter
required shall designate some other public building or other specified place.
The advance publicized notice of all public, convened meetings shall be
transmitted to all members of the City Council and to the public by a method
designated by the Council. Such notice shall contain the time and specific
place for each meeting, and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known
at the time of the notice or a statement that an agenda, kept continually
current, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the City
Clerk. Agenda items shall be sufficiently descriptive to give the public
reasonable notice of the matters to be considered at the meeting. The city
shall have the right to modify the agenda at the public meeting when convened.
The minutes of the City Clerk shall include a record of the manner by which the
advanced publicized notice was given, the time and specific place of each
meeting and the names of each member of the Council present or absent at each
convened meeting.
   (B)   In order to address any item on the agenda of any public meeting, no
member of the public shall be required to be named on the agenda prior to such
meeting, nor shall such members of the public be required to identify
themselves by signing in prior to such meeting. However, prior to addressing
the City Council on any agenda item, members of the public shall be required to
identify themselves.
   (C)   Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be taken only by roll call vote of the City Council in open session. The
record of the City Clerk shall show how each member voted or that the member
was absent and did not vote.
   (D)   Any formal actions taken at any public meeting not in conformity with
the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be void. Any official who
shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (E)   This section does not apply to chance meetings or to attendance at or
travel to conventions or workshops of the City Council at which there is no
meeting of the Council then intentionally convened, if there is no vote or
other action taken regarding any matter over which the Council has supervision,
control, jurisdiction or advisory power.
   (F)   The City Council shall make available at least one current copy of the
Open Meetings Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1407 et seq., to be posted in
the meeting room at a location accessible to members of the public. At the
beginning of each meeting, the public shall be informed about the location of
the posted information.
(Prior Code, § 1-304) (Ord. 579, passed 2-10-2008)
§ 31.41 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The City Clerk, in the case of the City Council, and the secretary or other
designee of each other public body shall maintain a list of the news media
requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to
provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting and
the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-1411)
§ 31.42 COUNCIL MEETINGS; WHEN; QUORUM.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at such times as
the Council may provide by ordinance. A majority of all the members elected to
the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but
a fewer number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of
absent members. When the City Council consists of four members as established
by ordinance or home rule charter, the Mayor shall be deemed a member of the
City Council for purposes of establishing a quorum when the Mayor’s presence is
necessary to establish the quorum. Unless a greater vote is required by law, an
affirmative vote of at least one-half of the elected members shall be required
for the transaction of any business.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-105)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor or any three Council members shall have power to call
special meetings of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to
the Council in writing; and the call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-106)
      (2)   On filing the call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall
notify the Mayor and Council members of the special meeting, stating the time
and purpose.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided by the Council, on the request of any two
members, whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent
for and compelled to attend.
   (D)   At the hour appointed for a meeting, the City Clerk shall proceed to
call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum
is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or
if absent, by the President of the Council.
§ 31.43 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if that individual has
not requested a public meeting. The subject matter and the reason necessitating
the closed session shall be identified in the motion to close. Closed sessions
may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if that person has
not requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
entire motion, the vote of each member on the question of holding a closed
session, and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall be
recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close passes, then the presiding
officer immediately prior to the closed session shall restate on the record the
limitation of the subject matter of the closed session. The public body holding
such a closed session shall restrict its consideration of matters during the
closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the motion to close as the
reason for the closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session
before any formal action may be taken. For the purpose of this section, FORMAL
ACTION means a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to
make a decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order or
ordinance or formation of a position or policy but shall not include
negotiating guidance given by members of the public body to legal counsel or
other negotiators in closed sessions authorized under division (A)(1)(a) above.
   (C)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. The challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-1410)
§ 31.44 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter and the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 84-1407 et seq., the public has the right to attend and the right to
speak at meetings of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a
public body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to §
31.43, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast or recorded by any
person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, a camera, video equipment or
any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of division (A) above for any public body
to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting or recording its meetings, including meetings held by virtual
conferencing. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each
meeting, but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings.
   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior
to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body shall
require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself, including an address and the name of any organization
represented by such person unless the address requirement is waived to protect
the security of the individual.
   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter
or the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1407 et seq., hold a
meeting in a place known by the body to be too small to accommodate the
anticipated audience.
   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this
state.
   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if, a member entity of the
public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements of Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 84-1412 are met.
   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented
at the meeting.
   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and
copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting, either in paper or electronic
form. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1407 et seq. posted in the meeting
room at a location accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the
meeting, the public shall be informed about the location of the posted
information.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-1412)
§ 31.45 CITY COUNCIL; ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the
members of the City Council, the Mayor, the City Clerk and such other city
officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the meeting
place, and the business of the city shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the manner prescribed by the official agenda on file at the
office of the City Clerk.
§ 31.46 CITY COUNCIL; PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, the rules of parliamentary
procedure specified in this section shall apply to meetings of the City
Council. The Mayor shall preserve order during meetings of the City Council and
shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council. When
any person is called to order, he or she shall be seated until the point is
decided. When the Mayor is putting the question, no person shall leave the
meeting room. Every person present, previous to speaking, shall rise from his
or her seat and address the presiding officer and while speaking shall confine
his or her comments to the question. When two or more persons rise at once, the
Mayor shall recognize the one who spoke first. All resolutions or motions shall
be reduced to writing before being acted upon, if requested by the City Clerk
or any member of the Council. Every member of the Council who is present when a
question is voted upon shall cast his or her vote unless excused by a majority
of the members of the Council present. No motion shall be put or debated unless
seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor before being
debatable. In all cases where a motion or resolution is entered on the minutes,
the name of the member of the Council making the motion or resolution shall be
entered also. After each vote, the “yeas” and “nays” shall be taken and entered
in the minutes. Before the vote is actually taken, any resolution, motion or
proposed ordinance may be withdrawn from consideration by the sponsor with the
consent of the member of the Council seconding the resolution, motion or
ordinance. When, in the consideration of an ordinance, different times or
amounts are proposed, the question shall be put on the largest sum or the
longest time. A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a member
voting with the majority, but the motion to reconsider must be made before the
expiration of the third regular meeting after the initial consideration of the
question. When any question is under debate, no motion shall be made,
entertained or seconded except the previous question, a motion to table and to
adjourn. Each of those motions shall be decided without debate. Any of the
rules of the Council for meetings may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the
members present. In all cases in which provisions are not made by these rules,
Robert’s Rules of Order is the authority by which the Council shall decide all
procedural disputes that may arise.
§ 31.47 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall meet at the time and place of the
first regular meeting in December in each election year, and the outgoing
officers and the outgoing members of the Council shall present their reports.
Upon the outgoing Council having completed its business, the outgoing members
of the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members, and the
outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to their successors in office
all property, records, papers and moneys belonging to the same.
   (B)   The newly elected members of the Council and those continuing in
office shall convene immediately after the prior Council adjourns and proceed
to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor shall call the meeting
to order. The Clerk shall report to the Council the names of all Council
members-elect who have qualified for their respective offices. The Council
shall examine the credentials of its members and any other elective officers of
the city to see that each has been duly and properly elected and to see that
such oaths and bonds as are required have been given. The Clerk’s report shall
be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call.
   (C)   After ascertaining that all Council members and officers are duly
qualified and after the Clerk has called the roll, the Council shall elect a
President of the Council. The Mayor shall nominate his or her candidates for
appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired and call for a
vote on approval of the candidates. The Mayor shall then proceed with the
regular order of business.
§ 31.48 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
   (A)   The newly elected City Council shall convene in the Council chambers
on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a city election
is held, immediately after the prior Council adjourns, and proceed to organize
the body for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for the new municipal year
shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then proceed to examine the
credentials of its members and other elective officers of the city to see that
each has been duly and properly elected and to see that such oaths and bonds
have been given as are required. After ascertaining that all members are duly
qualified, the Council shall then elect one of its members to be President. The
Mayor shall nominate his or her candidates for appointive offices and then
proceed with the regular order of business.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the Council or
his or her successor in office, and of each officer elected to any office, to
qualify prior to the first regular meeting in December following his or her
election. All appointive officers shall qualify within two weeks following
their appointments. Qualification for each officer who is not required to give
bond shall consist in his or her subscribing and taking an oath to support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state and the laws
of the city and to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her
office. Each officer who is required to give a bond shall file the required
bond in the office of the City Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on
the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office, with the oath
endorsed thereon.
(Prior Code, § 1-309)
COMPENSATION; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
§ 31.60 COMPENSATION; HOW FIXED; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The officers and employees of the city shall receive such compensation
as the Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-108)
   (B)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and prescribe the
compensation of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-604)
   (C)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary. The City Council shall not pay or appropriate any money
or other valuable thing to any person not an officer for the performance of any
act, service or duty, the doing or performance of which shall come within the
proper scope of the duties of any officer of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-611)
   (D)   The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, except
when there has been a combination and merger of offices as provided in §
31.16, except that when there are officers elected to the Council, or any other
board or commission having more than one member and the terms of one or more
members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of
such Council, board or commission may be increased or diminished at the
beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have
resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time
for which he or she was elected if during the same time the emoluments thereof
were increased.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-612)
§ 31.61 CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.
         (a)   A business:
            1.   In which the individual is a partner, limited liability
company member, director or officer; or
            2.   In which the individual or a member of the individual’s
immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or
is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market
value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
         (b)   An individual who occupies a confidential professional
relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This
definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if
the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-1408)
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A child residing in an individual’s household, a spouse
of an individual, or an individual claimed by that individual or that
individual’s spouse as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-1425)
      OFFICER.
         (a)   Includes:
            1.   A member of any board or commission of the city which spends
and administers its own funds, who is dealing with a contract made by such
board or commission; or
            2.   Any elected city official.
         (b)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance
drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 49-1499.04 or 70-
624.04, no officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her
governing body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an
interest in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract
or took assignment of the contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited
conflict. An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be
brought by the County Attorney, the governing body or any resident within the
jurisdiction of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after
the contract is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the
reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods,
material, labor or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the governing body has benefited thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a payment, fee or commission as a result of the
contract.
   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply if the contract is an agenda item
approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governing body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (E)   If an officer’s parent, spouse or child is an employee of the
officer’s governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to all employees, or all employees within a
classification, and do not single out his or her parent, spouse or child for
special action.
   (F)   Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by
this section.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,103.01)
   (G)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) below about every
contract entered into by the governing body in which an officer of the body has
an interest and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division (C) above.
This information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of
the officer’s last day in office and shall include:
         (a)   The names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   The nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   The date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   The amount of the contract; and
         (e)   The basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this division (G) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,103.02)
   (H)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by division (G)
above shall be filed within ten days after the account is opened. Thereafter,
the person charged with keeping records for the governing body shall maintain a
running account of amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from
petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to this section.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,103.03)
   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (H) above, the governing body
may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an officer of the
governing body may have an interest.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,103.05)
   (J)   The governing body may exempt from divisions (A) through (H) above,
contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of that body may have an
interest.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-14,103.06)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on conflicts of interest, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-305
through 18-312 and 49-1499.03 through 49-14,103
   Penalty for violation of restrictions on contracts, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §
49-14,103.04
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Boards and Commissions
   
32.01   Planning Commission
   
32.02   Board of Adjustment
   
32.03   Board of Health
   
32.04   Cemetery Board
   
32.05   Community Redevelopment Agency
   
32.06   Fair Housing Board
Police Department
   
32.20   Duties
   
32.21   Arrest and enforcement jurisdiction
   
32.22   Officers; discipline or removal from duty
   
32.23   Officers; suspension, removal, demotion appeals
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 32.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant
to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 et seq., the Planning Commission shall consist of
five, seven or nine regular members, as specified by the City Council by
ordinance, who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different
professions or occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor by
and with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City
Council. Two of the regular members may be residents of the area over which the
city is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision
regulation. When there are 500 residents in the area over which the city
exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one regular
member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is
determined by the City Council that 500 residents reside in the area subject to
extraterritorial zoning or subdivision regulation, and no such resident is a
regular member of the Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission
shall be filled by the appointment of such an individual. A number of
commissioners equal to a majority of the number of regular members appointed to
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
All regular members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. The
term of each regular member shall be three years, except that one-third or
fewer of the regular members of the first commission to be so appointed shall
serve for terms of one year, one-third or fewer for terms of two years, and the
remaining members for terms of three years. All regular members shall hold
office until their successors are appointed. Any member may, after a public
hearing before the Council, be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a
majority vote of the members elected to the Council for inefficiency, neglect
of duty or malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies
occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor.
      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the Council, appoint one alternate member to the Planning
Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation. The term of
the alternate member shall be three years, and he or she shall hold office
until his or her successor is appointed and approved. The alternate member may
be removed from office in the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate
member position becomes vacant other than through the expiration of the term,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor
with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members of the Council. The
alternate member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and
participating member of the Commission at any time when less than the full
number of regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.
      (3)   A regular or alternate member of the Planning Commission may hold
any other municipal office except:
         (a)   Mayor;
         (b)   A member of the City Council;
         (c)   A member of any community redevelopment authority or limited
community redevelopment authority created under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-2102.01;
or
         (d)   A member of any citizen advisory review committee created under
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-2715.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-926)
   (B)   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members and create
and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the
Chairperson shall be one year, and he or she shall be eligible for reelection.
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar
quarter, except as provided in this section. The City Council may require the
Commission to meet more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may
call for a meeting when necessary to deal with business pending before the
Commission. If no business is pending before the Commission, the Chairperson
may cancel a quarterly meeting, but no more than three quarterly meetings may
be cancelled per calendar year. The Commission shall adopt rules and
regulations for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public
record.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-927)
   (C)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (D)   The City Council may provide the funds, equipment and accommodations
necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures of the
Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for
that purpose by the Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for
expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-928)
   (E)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-930 through
19-933, the Planning Commission shall:
            1.   Make and adopt plans for the physical development of the city,
including any areas outside its boundaries which in the Commission’s judgment
bear relation to the planning of such city and including a comprehensive
development plan as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-903;
            2.   Prepare and adopt such implemental means as a capital
improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes and a zoning
ordinance in cooperation with other interested city departments; and
            3.   Consult with and advise public officials and agencies, public
utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions and citizens with
relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive
development plan and its implemental programs. The Commission may delegate
authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys for the
commission, make preliminary reports on its findings and hold public hearings
before submitting its final reports.
         (b)   The City Council shall not take final action on matters relating
to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes,
subdivision development, the annexation of territory or zoning until it has
received the recommendation of the Planning Commission; provided, that the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendation so that it is received by the
City Council within 60 days after the Commission begins consideration of a
matter or within such other number of days as the City Council has set by
ordinance.
         (c)   A recommendation from the Planning Commission shall not be
required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever all required
public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public rights-of-
way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance
requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots and blocks,
if the City Council has designated by ordinance an agent pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 19-916.
      (2)   (a)   The Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, in
its own name make and enter into contracts with public or private bodies,
receive contributions, bequests, gifts or grant funds from public or private
sources, expend the funds appropriated to it by the city, employ agents and
employees and acquire, hold and dispose of property.
         (b)   The Commission may on its own authority make arrangements
consistent with its program, conduct or sponsor special studies or planning
work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive grants, remuneration or
reimbursement for such studies or work, and at its public hearings, summon
witnesses, administer oaths and compel the giving of testimony.
      (3)   (a)   The Commission may grant conditional uses or special
exceptions to property owners for the use of their property if the City Council
has, through a zoning ordinance or special ordinance, generally authorized the
Commission to exercise such powers and has approved the standards and
procedures adopted by the Commission for equitably and judiciously granting
such conditional uses or special exceptions. The granting of a conditional use
permit or special exception shall only allow property owners to put their
property to a special use if it is among those uses specifically identified in
the zoning ordinance as classifications of uses which may require special
conditions or requirements to be met by the owners before a use permit or
building permit is authorized.
         (b)   The power to grant conditional uses or special exceptions shall
be the exclusive authority of the Commission, except that the City Council may
choose to retain for itself the power to grant conditional uses or special
exceptions for those classifications of uses specified in the zoning ordinance.
The Council may exercise such power if it has formally adopted standards and
procedures for granting such conditional uses or special exceptions in a manner
that is equitable and will promote the public interest.
         (c)   An appeal of a decision by the Commission or Council regarding a
conditional use or special exception shall be made to the district court.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-929)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on planning commissions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-925
through 19-933
§ 32.02 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant to
Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 et seq., except as provided in division (B) below,
the Council shall provide for the appointment of a Board of Adjustment. Any
actions taken by the Board of Adjustment shall not exceed the powers granted by
division (F) below.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-907)
   (B)   If the county has adopted a comprehensive development plan, as defined
by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 23-114.02, and is enforcing zoning regulations based upon
such a plan, the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the county shall, upon request
of the City Council, serve as the Zoning Board of Adjustment for the city. If
the city is located in more than one county, it shall be served by request or
otherwise only by the County Zoning Board of Adjustment of the county in which
the greatest area of the city is located, and the jurisdiction of such County
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall include all portions of the city and its
extraterritorial control, regardless of county lines.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-912.01)
 
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members,
plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and
serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason,
each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the
membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the
Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his or her immediate
loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another
Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The first vacancy occurring
on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who
resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city at such time as
more than 200 persons reside within such area if the Board does not already
include such a person. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the
Board of Adjustment shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the
city but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901
through 19-914. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-908)
   (D)   A number of members equal to a majority of the number of regular
members appointed to the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any business. All members of an appointed Board of Adjustment
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other city office except for
the member of the Planning Commission appointed to serve on the Board of
Adjustment. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of
both Chairperson and Secretary of the Board. The Secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (E)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-909)
   (F)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall, subject to such appropriate
conditions and safeguards as may be established by the City Council, have only
the following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures, except
that the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made
by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding a conditional use or
special exception under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-929(3);
         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
         (c)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation under Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-
901 and 19-903 through 19-904.01 and this division (F) or division (C) above
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize,
upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict
application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
      (2)   (a)   No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it
finds that:
            1.   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
            2.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in
the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
            3.   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance; and
            4.   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice.
         (b)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the
condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to the zoning regulations.
      (3)   In exercising the powers granted in this division (F), the Board
may, in conformity with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 through 19-915, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members
of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-910)
   (G)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board
or bureau of the city, may present to the district court a petition duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition must be presented to
the court within 15 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
Board. Upon the filing of such petition, a summons shall be issued and be
served upon the Board of Adjustment, together with a copy of the petition.
Return of service shall be made within four days after the issuance of the
summons. Within ten days after the return day of such summons, the Board of
Adjustment shall file an answer to the petition which shall admit or deny the
substantial averments of the petition and shall state the contentions of the
Board with reference to the matters in dispute as disclosed by the petition.
The answer shall be verified in like manner as required for the petition. At
the expiration of the time for filing answer, the court shall proceed to hear
and determine the cause without delay and shall render judgment thereon
according to the forms of law. If, upon the hearing, it appears to the court
that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may
take evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and
report the same to the court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions
of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the
determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. The appeal
to the district court shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed
from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the Board and on due
cause shown, grant a restraining order. Any appeal from such judgment of the
district court shall be prosecuted in accordance with the general laws of the
state regulating appeals in actions at law.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-912)
§ 32.03 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Health shall consist of four members: the Mayor,
who shall be Chairperson; the President of the City Council; and two other
members. One member shall be a physician or healthcare provider, if one can be
found who is willing to serve. Such physician or healthcare provider, if
appointed, shall be the Board’s medical advisor. If the Mayor has appointed a
Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall serve on the Board as secretary and
quarantine officer.
      (2)   A majority of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum and
shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the full force and effect
of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the city, may enforce them and
may provide fines and punishments for the violation of such rules and
regulations. The Board shall have power to and shall make all needful rules and
regulations relating to matters of sanitation of the city, including the
removal of dead animals, the sanitary condition of the streets, alleys, vacant
grounds, stockyards, cattle and hog pens, wells, cisterns, privies, water
closets, cesspools, stables and all buildings and places not specified where
filth, nuisances or offensive matter is kept or is liable to or does
accumulate. It may regulate, suppress and prevent the occurrence of nuisances
and enforce all laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to
nuisances or to matters of sanitation of the city. The Board shall also have
control of hospitals, dispensaries, places for treatment of sick people and
matters relating to the same under such restrictions and provisions as may be
provided by ordinance of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-121)
   (B)   The members of the Board of Health other than the Mayor, President of
the Council and Chief of Police shall serve terms of office of the length
specified by the City Council and may be reappointed.
   (C)   The Board of Health shall reorganize at its meeting after appointments
are regularly considered by the City Council and, if necessary, select a member
to serve as secretary. No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than
one Board of Health position. The secretary shall keep full and correct minutes
and records of all meetings and file the same with the City Clerk where they
shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (D)   The Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may designate.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any two
members of the Board of Health.
   (E)   The members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation.
The Board of Health shall be funded by the City Council from time to time out
of the General Fund.
   (F)   The Board of Health shall regularly inspect such premises and
businesses as the City Council may direct.
   (G)   All members of the Board of Health shall be responsible for making
such reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may from time
to time designate.
§ 32.04 CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   Members. The Cemetery Board shall consist of six members appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council from the citizens at large.
Every new or reappointed member shall serve a term of three years. Board
members shall be removable only for good and sufficient cause by the City
Council, after public hearing. The Board shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 1-1301)
   (B)   Officers; meetings. The members of the Cemetery Board may select such
officers from among their own number as they may deem necessary. The City
Council shall adopt rules under which the Cemetery Board shall conduct its
meetings or, in the alternative, the Board may adopt rules under which it shall
conduct its meetings, with the approval of the Council. It shall be the duty of
the Board to keep full and correct minutes of all meetings and to file the same
with the City Clerk within ten days of such meeting, where they shall be
available for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 1-1302)
   (C)   Powers, duties. The Cemetery Board shall have entire control and
management of any cemeteries belonging to the city. The Board shall establish
appropriate rules and regulations for the management, use and operation of
municipal cemeteries. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports
and performing such other duties as the City Council from time to time may
designate.
(Prior Code, § 1-1303)
(Ord. 574, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 676, passed 6-9-2015)
§ 32.05 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   Creation of Agency; members. There is hereby established, pursuant to
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-2101.01, a Community Development Agency for the city. The
Mayor and City Council are hereby designated to be members of the Community
Development Agency for the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-1501)
   (B)   Officers. The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Community
Development Agency; the President of the City Council shall be the Vice-
Chairperson; and the City Clerk shall be the secretary.
(Prior Code, § 1-1502)
   (C)   Powers.
      (1)   The Community Development Agency shall have the power and authority
to exercise those powers and authority granted to a community redevelopment
authority under Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-2101 through 18-2144. The Community
Development Agency shall also have the power and authority to do all community
development activities and to do all things necessary to cooperate with the
federal government in all matters relating to community development program
activities as a grantee or as an agent or otherwise under the provisions of the
federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 53-
101 et seq., as amended, through the Housing and Community Development
Amendments of 1981, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 53-101 et seq.
      (2)   The Community Development Agency may levy taxes for the exercise of
such jurisdiction and authority and may issue general obligation bonds, general
obligation notes, revenue bonds and revenue notes including those general
obligation and revenue refunding bonds and notes for the purposes set forth in
such sections and under the powers granted to any community redevelopment
authority described therein.
(Prior Code, § 1-1503)
   (D)   Transfer of rights, property and obligations. All of the rights and
property, both real and personal, of the existing City Community Redevelopment
Authority and all obligations including leases, bonds, redevelopment contracts,
agreements and other evidence of debt of said Authority are hereby transferred
to and assumed by the Community Development Agency of the city which is created
pursuant to this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-1504)
   (E)   Affirmation of prior obligations. All obligations including leases,
bonds, redevelopment contracts, agreements and other evidence of debt
previously issued in the name of the Community Development Agency of the city
are hereby affirmed as though issued after the adoption of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-1505)
(Ord. 570, passed 11-11-2008)
§ 32.06 FAIR HOUSING BOARD.
   (A)   Purpose. The City Council hereby declares it to be the public policy
of this city to eliminate discrimination and safeguard the right of any person
to sell, purchase, lease, rent, finance or obtain funding or real property
without regard to race, color, sex, religion, national origin or ancestry.
(Prior Code, § 1-1601)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS. Any building or portion thereof, whether such
building or portion is constructed to be used or is intended for use as the
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS
shall not mean or include:
         (a)   The rental of a dwelling or portion thereof containing
accommodations for no more than five families, one of which is occupied by the
owner or his or her family at the time of the rental; or
         (b)   The rental of rooms in a one-family dwelling to another person
or persons by the owner or occupant of such accommodation in which he or she or
members of his or her family reside.
      OWNER. The owner, lessee, sub-lessee, assignee, manager, agent or other
person, firm or corporation having the right to sell, rent or lease any housing
accommodations or real property within the corporate limits of the city.
      PERSON. One or more individuals, partnerships or other organizations,
corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or
receivers.
      UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. Any discrimination or
segregation against any person or group of persons because of race, color, sex,
religion, national origin or ancestry and shall include only those unlawful
practices and acts as set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 1-1602)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 DUTIES.
   (A)   If the Mayor and City Council have provided for the appointment of a
Police Chief, the Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and
such further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by
resolution of the Council.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor, have
control and management of all matters relating to the Police Department and its
officers and members and shall have the custody and control of all property and
books belonging to the Department. The Chief shall devote his or her whole time
to the city affairs and interests of the city and to the preservation of peace,
order, safety and cleanliness thereof.
   (C)   The Department shall execute and enforce all laws and also the orders
of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the rights of
persons and property. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances,
impediments, obstructions and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business
places and residences of the city. The Department shall execute, or cause to be
executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be
brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of
Police and all regular and special police officers shall become thoroughly
conversant with the laws of the city and shall see that the same are strictly
enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or persons for
violation of the same. It shall be the duty of every city police officer making
a lawful arrest to search all persons in the presence of some other person,
whenever possible, and to carefully keep and produce to the proper judicial
official upon the trial everything found upon the person of such prisoners. All
personal effects so taken from prisoners shall be restored to them upon their
release. The Police Chief and other police officers shall file such reports as
may be required by the city ordinances and the laws of the state. No law
enforcement official shall have any interest in any establishment having a
liquor license.
   (D)   Suitable badges shall be furnished to the city police by the city. Any
police officer who loses or destroys the same shall be required to pay the
replacement costs. If a police officer leaves the city police force, he or she
shall immediately deliver his or her badge to the Police Chief.
   (E)   City police officers shall have full power and authority to call on
any person whenever necessary to assist them in performing public duties, and
failure, neglect or refusal to render such assistance shall be deemed an
offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.21 ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The police officers of the city shall have the power to arrest all
offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by day or by night, in
the same manner as the County Sheriff and to keep such offenders in the city
prison, county jail or other place of confinement to prevent their escape until
trial can be had before the proper officer.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-118)
   (B)   Every city law enforcement officer has the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state and the city or otherwise perform the functions
of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN NEED OF ASSISTANCE.
         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger; or
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an
arrest and the suspect:
            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested;
            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to
property unless immediately arrested; or
            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime.
      PRIMARY JURISDICTION. The geographic area within territorial limits of
the city.
   (D)   Any city law enforcement officer who is within this state, but beyond
his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and authority to enforce the
laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated village
or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office, including the
authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing
the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases.
      (1)   Any city law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow that person
into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and detain that
person and return that person to the officer’s primary jurisdiction.
      (2)   Any city law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic
infraction, may follow that person anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the
boundaries of the officer’s primary jurisdiction and there arrest and detain
that person and return that person to the officer’s primary jurisdiction.
      (3)   Any city law enforcement officer has this enforcement and arrest
and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local, state or
federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance.
      (4)   If the city, under the provisions of the Interlocal Cooperation
Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-801 et seq. or the Joint Public Agency Act,
being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-2501 et seq., enters into a contract with any other
city or county for law enforcement services or joint law enforcement services,
law enforcement personnel may have this enforcement authority within the
jurisdiction of each of the participating political subdivisions if provided
for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the agreement, the city
shall provide liability insurance coverage for its own law enforcement
personnel as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-1802.
   (E)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is operating or in
the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, personal
watercraft or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any
drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472,
37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01 or
60-6,211.02, a city law enforcement officer has the power and authority to do
any of the following or any combination thereof:
      (1)   Transport that person to a facility outside of the law enforcement
officer’s primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing of the person;
      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary
jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or
      (3)   With respect to that person, perform other procedures or functions
outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary jurisdiction which are
directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any
other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1465, 28-1466,
28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-
6,211.01 or 60-6,211.02.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-215)
   (F)   If city law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law
enforcement capacity outside the limits of the city in the event of disaster,
emergency or civil defense emergency or in connection with any program of
practice or training for a disaster, emergency or civil defense emergency when
that program is conducted or participated in by the State Emergency Management
Agency or with any other related training program, the law enforcement
personnel have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state or any
legal ordinances or resolutions of the local government where they are
rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office, including the
authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing
the functions within their primary jurisdiction. The city shall self-insure or
contract for insurance against any liability for personal injuries or property
damage that may be incurred by it or by its personnel as the result of any
movement made pursuant to this division (F).
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-829.65)
§ 32.22 OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM DUTY.
   (A)   Any city police officer or the Police Chief (hereinafter collectively
referred to as officer) may be demoted, suspended with or without pay or
discharged from duty for gross misconduct, neglect of duty, disobedience of
orders of the Mayor or the City Council as a whole, or for any reason necessary
for the proper management and the effective operation of the Police Department
in the performance of its duties under the statutes of the state, upon the
written accusation of the Police Chief, the Mayor or any citizen or taxpayer.
In the event of gross misconduct, neglect of duty, disobedience of lawful
orders of the Mayor or City Council as a whole, an officer may be subject to
peremptory suspension or immediate removal from duty.
   (B)   Except in cases where the written accusation is made by the Mayor and
cases where an officer has been peremptorily suspended or immediately removed
from duty, within 30 days after receipt of a written accusation the Mayor shall
meet with or make a good faith attempt to meet with the person making the
written accusation. After such meeting or after good faith attempts to meet
have failed, the Mayor shall take one of the following actions:
      (1)   Make a finding that no action shall be taken on the written
accusation, in which case there shall be no informal hearing;
      (2)   Conduct such investigation concerning the allegations contained in
the written accusation as he or she deems appropriate. At the conclusion of any
such investigation, the Mayor shall either make a finding that no action shall
be taken on the written accusation, in which case there shall be no informal
hearing, or set a time and date for an informal hearing in front of the Mayor
on the allegations contained in the written accusation; or
      (3)   An informal hearing, if any, shall be held no later than 30 days
after receipt of the written accusation by the Mayor.
   (C)   In cases where the written accusation has been made by the Mayor and
in cases where an officer has been peremptorily suspended or immediately
removed from duty, the Mayor shall set a time and date for an informal hearing
in front of the Mayor on the allegations contained in the written accusation.
In the event of a written accusation by the Mayor, the informal hearing shall
be no later than 30 days after the date of the written accusation. In the event
of a peremptory suspension or immediate removal from duty, the informal hearing
shall be not later than 30 days after the effective date of the suspension or
removal.
   (D)   In all cases where an informal hearing is to be held, the Mayor or the
City Administrator shall give the officer written notice of the date and time
of such hearing. Notice shall be deemed sufficient if mailed to the officer’s
address as maintained in the city’s records. Notice of any such hearing shall
also be given by U.S. mail to any known representative of the officer.
   (E)   After receipt of a written accusation and prior to any informal
hearing, the following shall occur.
      (1)   The Mayor or the City Administrator shall provide the officer with
notice of and a complete copy of the written accusation.
      (2)   The Mayor or the City Administrator shall advise the officer of the
following.
         (a)   He or she has the right to have an attorney or representative
retained by the officer present at all hearings or proceedings regarding any
written accusation.
         (b)   Upon receipt of any written accusation, he or she has the right
to respond with a written statement regarding the incident(s) in question.
         (c)   The officer or his or her attorney or representative shall have
the right to be heard and the right to present evidence on the incident(s)
contained in any written accusation.
         (d)   The officer and his or her attorney or representative, and the
individual imposing the disciplinary action, shall have the right to record all
hearings or proceedings regarding the written accusation.
         (e)   The date and time at which the Mayor will conduct an informal
hearing on the written accusation and that at such hearing the officer shall
have the rights enumerated in this section.
   (F)   At the informal hearing, a representative of the city may present
evidence concerning the incident(s) alleged in the written accusation and the
officer or his representative shall have the right to respond and to present
evidence concerning the incident(s) described in the written accusation. The
rules of evidence shall not apply at such hearing; however, the Mayor shall
have the right to exclude evidence which is not relevant to the proceedings.
The City Administrator shall be present at the informal hearing. The Mayor
shall make a decision on the written accusation within ten business days after
the date of the hearing and shall immediately advise the officer and his or her
representative in writing of such decision, including the actions to be taken
against the officer, if any, and the officer’s right to appeal the decision to
the City Council pursuant to the provisions of §
32.23.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the peremptory
suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer by the Mayor, or the
City Council acting as a whole, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty
or disobedience of orders.
   (H)   This section shall not apply to an officer during his or her
probationary period.
(Prior Code, § 1-703)
(Ord. 630, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 775, passed 5-10-2022)
§ 32.23 OFFICERS; SUSPENSION, REMOVAL, DEMOTION APPEALS.
   (A)   In the event of removal, demotion or suspension for any of the causes
set forth in §
32.22, the City Police Chief or police officer shall have the right to appeal
his or her removal, demotion or suspension to the City Council. Such appeal
shall be made within 30 days of his or her removal, demotion or suspension by
filing a written application for a hearing before the Council. Such written
application shall be made to the City Administrator, who shall immediately
notify the Mayor of the receipt of such application.
   (B)   Upon notice of the filing of such application, the Mayor shall call a
special meeting of the City Council to consider such application. Both the
police officer and the individuals causing such removal, demotion or suspension
shall have the right to be heard at the hearing and to present evidence to the
Council for its consideration. The hearing will be governed as follows.
      (1)   The hearing will be before the City Council. It will be held within
30 days of the filing of the request, unless a later date is agreed upon by the
Police Chief or police officer.
      (2)   Notice for hearing will be given the Police Chief or police officer
and posted.
      (3)   All witnesses testifying at hearing must take an oath or
affirmation to be truthful in their testimony. All witnesses are subject to
cross-examination by the other party.
      (4)   In the event a participant requires an interpreter, the participant
shall notify the City Administrator at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
Interpreters may participate in person or by telephone.
      (5)   The rules of privilege apply to the extent recognized by law.
      (6)   Hearings are open to the public unless closure is requested by the
Police Chief or police officer, in which case the hearing will be closed to the
public if permitted by law. Those persons in attendance at the hearing who are
not parties are generally not permitted to speak at the hearing unless called
as witnesses by a party.
      (7)   The City Council may allow testimony or evidence via
teleconference, video conference or similar electronic means. Each party to the
proceeding shall have the opportunity to hear (or, for a videoconference, to
both hear and see) testimony given in this manner and to question the person
giving such testimony. Any costs associated with electronic conferencing shall
be borne by the party requesting it.
      (8)   At the hearing, a city representative shall first present evidence
in support of the disciplinary action or discharge. The Police Chief or police
officer may then present evidence on his or her behalf. The city may then offer
rebuttal evidence.
      (9)   All persons appearing shall conduct themselves with civility and
courtesy to all persons involved in the hearing.
      (10)   (a)   At the hearing, the President of the City Council shall be
the presiding officer, unless he or she presented the written accusation
resulting in the removal, demotion or suspension, in which case the presiding
officer shall be chosen by a vote of the remaining members of the City Council.
         (b)   The presiding officer shall rule on all questions of evidence.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted if the presiding officer
determines that it is relevant to the issue, comes from a reliable source and
has probative value. Such evidence is that on which responsible persons would
commonly rely in the conduct of their important affairs. The presiding officer
may exclude evidence that is irrelevant, unreliable, immaterial, unduly
repetitive or privileged. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of
copies or excerpts.
      (11)   Hearings may be continued.
      (12)   The proceeding will be recorded by electronic means.
      (13)   Not later than 30 days following the adjournment of the meeting at
which the hearing was held, the City Council shall vote to uphold, reverse or
modify the removal, demotion or suspension.
      (14)   Deliberations for decision will comply with applicable open
meeting laws.
   (C)   The failure of the City Council to act within 30 days or the failure
of a majority of the Council members to vote to reverse or modify the removal,
demotion or suspension shall be construed as a vote to uphold the removal,
demotion or suspension. The decision of the Council shall be based upon its
determination that, under the facts and evidence presented at the hearing, the
challenged removal, demotion or suspension was necessary for the proper
management and effective operation of the Police Department in the performance
of its duties under the statutes of the state.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the peremptory
suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer by the appropriate
authority, pending the hearing authorized by this section and §
32.22, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty or disobedience of orders.
(Prior Code, § 1-704) (Ord. 630, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 775, passed 5-10-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-107
CHAPTER 33: ELECTIONS
Section
   
33.01   Generally
   
33.02   Registered voters; qualifications
   
33.03   Special elections
   
33.04   Primary election; number of candidates filing
   
33.05   Tie votes
   
33.06   Filing fee
   
33.07   Petition, write-in and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
33.08   Exit polls; poll watchers
   
33.09   Certificate of nomination or election
   
33.10   Inability to assume office
   
33.11   Ballots
   
33.12   Elections at large; single polling place
   
33.13   Recall procedure
§ 33.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   All city issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide primary
and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of separate
ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if city offices or issues can
reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan ballot and state law does not
require otherwise. All city elections involving the election of officers shall
be held in accordance with the Election Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-101 et
seq. and in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-556)
   (B)   When the city holds an election in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided in the
Election Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-101 et seq. Any other election held
by the city shall be held as provided in the Election Act, being Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 32-101 et seq. unless otherwise provided by the charter, code or
bylaws of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-404)
§ 33.02 REGISTERED VOTERS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REGISTERED VOTER. An elector who has a current voter registration record
on file with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk in the county of his or
her residence.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-115)
   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the city
on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city elections.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-602)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of elector, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-110
§ 33.03 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-3444, any issue to be
submitted to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall be
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk on or
before the eighth Friday prior to the election. A special election may be held
by mail as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-952 through 32-959. Any other
special election under this section shall be subject to division (B) below.
      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the city may
submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled
county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide
election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be submitted has been
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by
March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for the general election.
      (3)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received the
certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible for
all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered voters,
except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or posting
of any required special notice of the submission of the issue other than the
notice required to be given of the statewide election issues. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue ballots for
early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the issue, including the
receiving and counting of ballots on the issue. The election returns shall be
made to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted
and canvassed at the same time and in the same manner as the other ballots.
Upon completion of the canvass of the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify the election results to the
City Council. The canvass by the County Canvassing Board shall have the same
force and effect as if made by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   A city that has submitted an issue for a special election under
division (A)(1) above may cancel the special election if the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by
the political subdivision canceling the special election on or before the
fourth Thursday prior to the election. No cancellation shall be effective after
such date. If a special election is canceled in such manner, the city shall be
responsible for the costs incurred that are related to the canceled election.
Such costs shall include all chargeable costs as provided in section Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 32-1202 associated with preparing for and conducting a special
election.
      (2)   A city that has submitted an issue at a statewide primary or
general election or at any scheduled county election under division (A)(2)
above may withdraw the issue from the ballot if the Secretary of State,
Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by the city
withdrawing the issue from the ballot no later than March 1 prior to a
statewide primary election or September 1 prior to a statewide general
election. No withdrawal shall be effective after such date. Any issue withdrawn
in this manner shall not be printed on the ballot.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-559)
   (C)   Any special election under the Election Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§
32-101 et seq. shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday
of the selected month unless otherwise specifically provided. No special
election shall be held under the Election Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-101
et seq. in April, May, June, October, November or December of an even-numbered
year unless it is held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general
election. No special election shall be held under the Election Act, being Neb.
Rev. Stat. §§ 32-101 et seq. in September of an even-numbered year except for a
special election by a political subdivision pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-
519 or 77-3444 to approve a property tax levy or exceed a property tax levy
limitation.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-405)
§ 33.04 PRIMARY ELECTION; NUMBER OF CANDIDATES FILING.
   If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary
election does not exceed two for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates
properly filed shall be considered nominated and no primary election for their
nomination shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 1-602)
§ 33.05 TIE VOTES.
   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or
general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at
his or her office on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before
the Canvassing Board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be
given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail.
(Prior Code, § 1-603)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1122
§ 33.06 FILING FEE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) below, a filing fee shall be
paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each candidate for city office
prior to filing for office. The fee shall be placed in the General Fund of the
city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed until the proper payment or the
proper receipt showing the payment of such filing fee is presented to the
filing officer. On the day of the filing deadline, the City Treasurer’s office
shall remain open to receive filing fees until the hour of the filing deadline.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) below, the filing fee shall
be a sum equal to 1% of the annual salary as of November 30 of the year
preceding the election for the office for which he or she files as a candidate.
   (C)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees that are
required for the office at the time that they present the write-in affidavit to
the filing officer.
   (D)   No filing fee shall be required for any candidate filing for an office
in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there is a salary
of less than $500 per year.
   (E)   (1)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate completing an
affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma pauperis.
      (2)    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         AVAILABLE RESOURCES. Includes every type of property or interest in
property that an individual owns and may convert into cash except:
            1.   Real property used as a home;
            2.   Household goods of a moderate value used in the home; and
            3.   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a recipient in a
planned effort directed towards self-support.
         PAUPER. A person whose income and other resources for maintenance are
found under assistance standards to be insufficient for meeting the cost of his
or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or other available resources does
not exceed the maximum available resources that an eligible individual may own.
   (F)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-608)
§ 33.07 PETITION, WRITE-IN AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of the
general election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot
for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this section and
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or
committee pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the office
by petition as prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) below, files as a write-in
candidate as prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-615 or is nominated by
political party convention or committee pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-710.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-616)
   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name
and address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate
the party affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be
filed with the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed
by registered voters residing in the city, if candidates are chosen at large,
or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen
by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as
provided for candidate filing forms. Petition signers and petition circulators
shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630. No
petition for nomination shall be filed unless there is attached thereto a
receipt showing the payment of the filing fee required pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 32-608. The petitions shall be filed by September 1 in the year of the
general election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-617)
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, not
to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of the entire state, at least 4,000, and at least 750 signatures shall be
obtained in each congressional district in the state;
         (b)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a county, at least 20% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election within the county, not to exceed 2,000, except that the number of
signatures shall not be required to exceed 25% of the total number of
registered voters voting for the office at the immediately preceding general
election; and
         (c)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a political subdivision other than a county, at least 20% of the total
number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United
States at the immediately preceding general election within the political
subdivision, not to exceed 2,000.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-618)
§ 33.08 EXIT POLLS; POLL WATCHERS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct an exit poll, a public opinion poll or any
other interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter
preference within 20 feet of the entrance of any polling place or, if inside
the polling place or building, within 100 feet of any voting booth.
   (B)   (1)   No poll watcher shall interfere with any voter in the
preparation or casting of such voter’s ballot or prevent any election worker
from performing the worker’s duties.
      (2)   A poll watcher shall not provide assistance to a voter as described
in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-918 unless selected by the voter to provide assistance
as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-918.
      (3)   A poll watcher shall not engage in electioneering as defined in
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1524 while engaged in observing at a polling place.
      (4)   A poll watcher shall maintain a distance of at least eight feet
from the sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot
box and any ballots which have not been cast, except that if the polling place
is not large enough for a distance of eight feet, the judge of election shall
post a notice of the minimum distance the poll watcher must maintain from the
sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot box and any
ballots which have not been cast. The posted notice shall be clearly visible to
the voters and shall be posted prior to the opening of the polls on election
day. The minimum distance shall not be determined to exclude a poll watcher
from being in the polling place.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1525) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.09 CERTIFICATE OF NOMINATION OR ELECTION.
   The County Clerk shall, within 40 days after the election, prepare, sign and
deliver a certificate of nomination or certificate of election to each person
whom the Canvassing Board has declared to have received the highest vote for
each municipal office. A certificate of election prepared by the City Clerk
shall be as near as possible to the form prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-
1033 and shall be signed by the Mayor under the seal of the city and
countersigned by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-609)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-558 and 32-1033
§ 33.10 INABILITY TO ASSUME OFFICE.
   In any general election where the person who received the highest number of
votes is ineligible, disqualified, deceased or for any other reason is unable
to assume the office for which he or she was a candidate and the electorate had
reasonable notice of such disability at the time of election, the candidate in
such election who received the highest number of votes shall be declared
elected and shall be entitled to the certificate of election; provided, that
any candidate so declared elected received not less than 35% of the total
number of votes cast for such office in the election. If any of the
qualifications of this section are not met by the candidate to be declared
elected, or reasonable notice of the winner’s ineligibility is not available to
the voters, a vacancy in such office shall be declared to exist at the time of
commencement of the term and shall be filled as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-610)
§ 33.11 BALLOTS.
   The County Clerk shall provide printed ballots for every general municipal
election, and the expense of printing and delivering the ballots and cards of
instruction shall be a charge upon the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-612)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1202
§ 33.12 ELECTIONS AT LARGE; SINGLE POLLING PLACE.
   All elected officials of the city shall be nominated and elected on an at-
large basis. There shall be one polling place within the city to be selected
and designated as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-613)
§ 33.13 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FILING CLERK. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1301)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council and any other elected
official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to this
section.
      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of this
section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward.
Only registered voters of such member’s ward may sign a recall petition or vote
at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member’s
ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary
election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions
shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1302)
   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council or any other elected official be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election,
except that for City Council office for which more than one candidate is
chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes
for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed
to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630.
      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing clerk. Prior
to the issuance of such petition papers, a recall petition filing form shall be
signed and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators
of the recall petition. The filing form shall state the name and office of the
official sought to be removed, shall include in concise language of 60 words or
less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall request that
the filing clerk issue initial petition papers to the principal circulator for
circulation. The filing clerk shall notify the official sought to be removed by
any method specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-505.01 or, if notification cannot
be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods specified in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the filing form at the official’s usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first class mail to the official’s
last known address. If the official chooses, he or she may submit a defense
statement in concise language of 60 words or less for inclusion on the
petition. Any such defense statement shall be submitted to the filing clerk
within 20 days after the official receives the copy of the filing form. The
filing clerk shall prepare the petition papers within five business days after
receipt of the defense statement. The principal circulator or circulators shall
gather the petition papers within 20 days after being notified by the filing
clerk that the petition papers are available. The filing clerk shall notify the
principal circulator or circulators that the necessary signatures must be
gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing the petitions.
      (4)   The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her
office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers
were issued, the date of issuance and the number of papers issued. The filing
clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or
circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions
from the filing clerk may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as
circulators of such petitions.
      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a
registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the
office in question.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1303)
   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 32-1304.
   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one
instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing clerk issues
the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators as
provided in division (C) above.
      (2)   Within 15 business days after the filing of the petition, the
filing clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the
initial filing of the petition papers. No signatures may be removed unless the
filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting his or her
signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the filing clerk for
signature verification. If the petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such
examination. If the requisite number of signatures has not been gathered, the
filing clerk shall file the petition in his or her office without prejudice to
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1305)
   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council
that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the official
sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-
505.01 or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of
the methods specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at
the official’s usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first class mail
to the official’s last known address.
      (2)   The City Council shall, within 21 days after receipt of the
notification from the filing clerk pursuant to division (F)(1) above, order an
election. The date of the election shall be the first available date that
complies with Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-405 and that can be certified to the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk at least 50 days prior to the election,
except that if any other election is to be held in the city within 90 days
after such notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of the
recall election on the same day.
      (3)   All resignations shall be tendered as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §
32-562. If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall
election is held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if the City
Council notifies the Election Commissioner or County Clerk of the cancellation
on or before the fourth Thursday prior to the election, otherwise the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.
      (4)   If a filing clerk is subject to a recall election, the Secretary of
State shall conduct the recall election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1306)
   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held pursuant to
division (F) above shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-
1307.
   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against
the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a
tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term
but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in division (I)
below.
      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the
removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless
a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall
result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as otherwise provided
in this section and Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-567 through 32-570 and 32-574.
      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall order a recount of the votes
cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement with the
filing clerk that he or she does not want a recount.
      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council or any other governing body at one time due to the
recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns
after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1308)
   (I)   No recall petition filing form shall be filed against an elected
official within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or
her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of
office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the
office.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1309)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Annual audit; financial statements
   
34.02   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
34.03   Orders or warrants for money; expenditures; requirements
   
34.04   Claims and accounts payable
   
34.05   Special assessment fund
   
34.06   Sinking funds; gifts of money or property
   
34.07   Deposit of funds
   
34.08   Investment and use of surplus funds
   
34.09   Bond issues
   
34.10   All-purpose levy; extraordinary levies; allocation; abandonment
   
34.11   Natural gas franchise fee
   
34.12   Miscellaneous expenditure policy
Annual Budget
   
34.25   Fiscal year
   
34.26   Budget procedures
   
34.27   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction
   
34.28   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification of tax
amount
   
34.29   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of tax amount
   
34.30   Transfer of funds
   
34.31   Budget revision
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ACCOUNTANT. A duly licensed public accountant or certified public
accountant who otherwise is not an employee of or connected in any way with the
city.
         ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT. The written report of the accountant and all
appended statements and schedules relating thereto presenting or recording the
findings of an examination or audit of the financial transactions, affairs or
financial condition of the city and its proprietary functions for the fiscal
year immediately prior to the making of the annual report.
         FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year for the city or the fiscal year
established in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-2804 for a proprietary function if
different than the city fiscal year.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2902)
      (2)   (a)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city’s accounts
to be made by a recognized independent and qualified accountant as
expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year and to cover
all financial transactions and affairs of the city for that preceding fiscal
year. The audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion of
the City Council. The audit shall be completed and the annual audit report made
by the accountant shall be submitted within six months after the close of the
fiscal year in any event, unless an extension of time is granted by a written
resolution adopted by the City Council.
         (b)   If the city owns or operates any type of public utility or other
enterprise which substantially generates its own revenue, that phase of the
affairs of the city shall be audited separately from other functions of the
city and the result shall appear separately in the annual audit report made by
the accountant to the city and such audit shall be on an accrual basis and
shall contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted
accounting principles.
         (c)   For the utilities operated through the Board of Public Works,
the City Council may provide for an entirely separate audit, on an accrual
basis, of such operations and report and by a different accountant than the one
making the general audit.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2903)
      (3)   The annual audit report shall set forth, insofar as possible, the
financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or group
of accounts of the city. When the accrual method is selected for the annual
audit report, the report shall be in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. The annual audit report shall also include the
professional opinion of the accountant with respect to the financial
statements, or, if an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the
accountant is unable to express such an opinion with an explanation of the
reasons why he or she cannot do so.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2904)
      (4)   At least three copies of such annual audit report shall be properly
signed and attested by the accountant; two copies shall be filed with the City
Clerk, and one copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The
annual audit report filed, together with any accompanying comment or
explanation, shall become a part of the public records of the City Clerk and
shall at all times thereafter be open and subject to public inspection.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2905)
   (B)   The City Council shall provide and file with the City Clerk, not later
than August 1 of each year, financial statements showing the city’s actual and
budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal year.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-606)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on audits, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-2906 through 19-2909
§ 34.02 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-412.01, for a contract with
a public power district to operate, renew, replace or add to the electric
distribution, transmission or generation system of the city, no contract for
enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewer, public
heating system, bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement
costing over $30,000 shall be made when such cost is assessed to the property,
unless it is first approved by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-412.01, before the
City Council makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general
improvements such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges,
work on streets or any other work or improvement when the cost of such
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost
shall be made by the City Engineer and submitted to the Council.
      (2)   In advertising for bids as provided in this section, the City
Council may publish the amount of the estimate.
   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing
over $30,000 entered into:
      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets or any other work or
improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property; or
      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of such
enlargement or general improvements.
(Prior Code, § 1-508) (Ord. 580, passed 2-10-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-568.01
§ 34.03 ORDERS OR WARRANTS FOR MONEY; EXPENDITURES; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall have no power to appropriate, issue
or draw any order or warrant on the City Treasurer for money, unless the same
has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for the payment of
which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to the
provisions of §
34.04, and funds for the class or object out of which such claim is payable
have been included in the adopted budget statement or transferred according to
law.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-708)
   (B)   All warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor
and countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to which the
same is chargeable, the person to whom payable and for what particular object.
No money shall be otherwise paid than upon such warrants so drawn. Each warrant
shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget statement for such fund
upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended of such fund.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-711)
§ 34.04 CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   (A)   (1)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against the city shall:
         (a)   Be presented in writing;
         (b)   State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
         (c)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed or the time, place, nature and circumstances giving rise to
the claim.
      (2)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-903, the claimant
shall file such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office
of the City Clerk.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or
attorney by letter mailed to the claimant’s address within five days if the
claim is disallowed by the City Council.
      (4)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action brought
against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has not been
presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is for a
greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-714)
   (B)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order for their
payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which they
are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no order or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn, unless there is sufficient money in the Treasury at the
credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided, that if there exists at
the time such warrant is drawn, obligated funds from the federal government or
the state, or both from the federal government and the state, for the general
purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in excess
of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn to the
additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal or state funds. No claim
shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant for the payment thereof
may legally be drawn.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-715)
§ 34.05 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
   All money received on special assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and this money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any such
improvement.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-710)
§ 34.06 SINKING FUNDS; GIFTS OF MONEY OR PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to receive money or property by donation,
bequest, gift, devise or otherwise for the benefit of any one or more of the
public purposes for which sinking funds are established by this section, as
stipulated by the donor. Title to any money or property so donated shall vest
in the City Council, or in its successors in office, who shall become the
owners thereof in trust to the uses of the sinking fund or funds. In the event
of a donation of real estate, the City Council may manage such real estate as
in the case of real estate donated to the city for city library purposes under
the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-215 and 51-216.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1301)
   (B)   The City Council, subject to all the limitations set forth in this
section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on each
$100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property within
the city for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the amount of
tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget
statement of the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the
construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment or repair,
not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following public
improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making thereof:
city libraries; city auditoriums or community houses for social or recreational
purposes; city halls; city public libraries, auditoriums or community houses in
a single building; city swimming pools; city jails; city fire stations,
together with firefighting equipment or apparatus; city parks; city cemeteries;
city medical buildings, together with furnishings and equipment; or city
hospitals. The city shall not be authorized to levy the tax or to establish the
sinking fund as provided in this division (B) if, having bonded indebtedness,
such city has been in default in the payment of interest thereon or principal
thereof for a period of ten years prior to the date of the passage of the
resolution providing for the submission of the proposition for establishment of
the sinking fund as required in division (C) below.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1302)
   (C)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any annual
tax is levied for any such planned city improvements mentioned in division (B)
above by the city, the City Council shall declare its purpose by resolution to
submit to the qualified electors of the city at the next general city election
the proposition to provide the city with the specific city improvement planned
under this section. The resolution of submission shall, among other things, set
forth a clear description of the improvement planned, the estimated cost
according to the prevailing costs, the amount of annual levy over a definite
period of years, not exceeding ten years, required to provide such cost, and
the specific name or designation for the sinking fund sought to be established
to carry out the planned improvement, together with a statement of the
proposition for placement upon the ballot at the election. Notice of the
submission of the proposition, together with a copy of the official ballot
containing the proposition, shall be published in its entirety three successive
weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper in or of general
circulation in the city or, if no legal newspaper is in or of general
circulation in the city, in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in
the county in which the city is located. No such sinking fund shall be
established unless the same has been authorized by a majority or more of the
legal votes of the city cast for or against the proposition. If less than a
majority of the legal votes favor the establishment of the sinking fund, the
planned improvement shall not be made, no annual tax shall be levied therefor,
and no sinking fund or sinking funds shall be established in connection
therewith, but such resolution of submission shall immediately be repealed. If
the proposition shall carry at such election in the manner prescribed in this
division (C), the City Council and its successors in office shall proceed to do
all things authorized under such resolution of submission but never
inconsistent with this section. The election provided for under this section
shall be conducted as provided under the Election Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§
32-101 et seq.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1303)
   (D)   All funds received by the City Treasurer, by donation or by tax levy,
as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested by
the Treasurer, with the written approval of the City Council, in the manner
provided in §
34.08. Whenever investments of such sinking fund or funds are made, as
aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be reported to the City
Council, and the investment report shall be made a matter of record by the City
Clerk in the proceedings of the City Council. The sinking fund, or sinking
funds, accumulated under the provisions of this section, shall constitute a
special fund, or funds, for the purpose or purposes for which the same was
authorized and shall not be used for any other purpose unless authorized by 60%
of the qualified electors of the city voting at a general election favoring
such change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds. The question of
the change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds, when it fails to
carry, shall not be resubmitted in substance for a period of one year from and
after the date of such election.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1304)
Statutory reference:
   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-702
   Investment in warrants, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2337
§ 34.07 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on
deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions or
qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing,
all money collected, received or held by him or her as City Treasurer. These
deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the
City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a
stockholder, director or other officer of the bank, capital stock financial
institution or qualifying mutual financial institution is also serving as
Mayor, a member of the City Council, as a member of the Board of Public Works,
or as any other officer of the city shall not disqualify the bank, capital
stock financial institution or qualifying mutual financial institution from
acting as a depository for the city funds.
      (2)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital stock
financial institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions a bond in
such penal sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit at any time less the
amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or,
in lieu thereof, security given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit
Security Act, to secure the payment of all such deposits and accretions. The
City Council shall approve this bond or giving of security. The City Treasurer
shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by reason of the
failure of any such depository so designated and approved.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-607)
   (B)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock financial
institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be a surety bond
or bonds to the extent that the deposits are insured or guaranteed by that
corporation, and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no other surety bond or
bonds or other security shall be required.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2362)
   (C)   Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock
financial institutions. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-607 and 77-2362)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on deposits of public funds, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-2363
and 77-2364
   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2386
§ 34.08 INVESTMENT AND USE OF SURPLUS FUNDS.
   (A)   When the City Treasurer holds funds of the city in excess of the
amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and improvements,
the Mayor and City Council may by resolution direct and authorize the Treasurer
to invest the surplus funds in the outstanding bonds or registered warrants of
the city, bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by any of
the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit banks or the 13 banks for
cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration, or in
interest-bearing bonds or the obligations of the United States. The interest on
such bonds or warrants shall be credited to the fund out of which the bonds or
warrants were purchased.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-608)
   (B)   All income received by the city from public utilities and from the
payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall be
applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money borrowed
and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there be any
surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the payment of
public utility bonds or for the improvements of the works, or into the General
Fund as the Council may direct. The surplus remaining, if any, may, if the
Council so directs, be invested in interest-bearing bonds or obligations of the
United States.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-540)
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may by resolution direct and authorize the
Treasurer to dispose of the surplus electric light, water or gas funds, or the
funds arising from the sale of electric light, water or natural gas
distribution properties, by the payment of outstanding electric light, water or
gas distribution bonds or water warrants then due. The excess, if any, after
such payments, may be transferred to the General Fund of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-609)
   (D)   Any surplus funds arising out of the operation of any system of
waterworks, power plant, ice plant, gas plant, sewerage, heating or lighting
plant or distribution system by the Board of Public Works, or by the City
Council, where any of such utilities are not being operated by such a Board,
may be invested, if not invested pursuant to the provisions of any other law
upon the subject, in like manner and subject to the same conditions as the
investment of similar funds of cities of the first class, as provided in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 16-691.01.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-803)
   (E)   (1)   Whenever the city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in
excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment
of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to
pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the
current year, the City Council may invest any such surplus in excess of current
needs or such excess in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit, in time
deposits and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer is
authorized to invest pursuant to the State Capital Expansion Act, being Neb.
Rev. Stat. §§ 72-1260 et seq. and the State Funds Investment Act and as
provided in the authorized investment guidelines of the State Investment
Council in effect on the date the investment is made. The State Investment
Officer shall upon request furnish a copy of current authorized investment
guidelines of the State Investment Council.
      (2)   Nothing in division (E)(1) above shall be construed to authorize
investments in venture capital.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2341)
§ 34.09 BOND ISSUES.
   (A)   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law,
issue bonds, fund bonds and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted
by state law.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the authority to levy special assessments
for the payment of interest and principal on these bonds and may spread the
payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Bonds in general, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1801 through 18-1805
   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 10-606 through 10-612
   General provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 10-101 through 10-143
§ 34.10 ALL-PURPOSE LEVY; EXTRAORDINARY LEVIES; ALLOCATION; ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions in the statutes of the state and this code
to the contrary, for any fiscal year the City Council may decide to certify to
the County Clerk for collection one all-purpose levy required to be raised by
taxation for all city purposes instead of certifying a schedule of levies for
specific purposes added together. Subject to the limits of state law, the all-
purpose levy shall not exceed an annual levy of $1.05 on each $100 upon the
taxable valuation of all the taxable property in the city. Otherwise authorized
extraordinary levies to service and pay bonded indebtedness of the city may be
made by the city in addition to such all-purpose levy.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1309)
   (B)   If the method provided in division (A) above is followed in city
financing, the city shall allocate the amount so raised to the several
departments of the city in its annual budget and appropriation ordinance, or in
other legal manner, as the City Council deems wisest and best.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1310)
   (C)   If the city elects to follow the method provided in division (A)
above, it shall be bound by that election during the ensuing fiscal year but
may abandon such method in succeeding fiscal years.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1311)
   (D)   If it is necessary to certify the amount to county officers for
collection, the same shall be certified as a single amount for general fund
purposes.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1312)
§ 34.11 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a franchise fee on every natural gas
company and every other person, firm or corporation, their successors and
assigns, owning, operating, controlling, leasing or managing a natural gas
plant or system and/or generating, manufacturing, selling, distributing or
transporting natural gas (hereinafter referred to, collectively, as “energy
providers,” each, individually, an “energy provider”). Energy providers shall
collect from their customers located within the corporate limits of the city as
depicted on the map (but not from the city) and pay to the city an amount equal
to 3% of gross receipts energy providers derive from the sale, distribution or
transportation of natural gas delivered within the present or future limits of
the city. Gross receipts as used herein are revenues received from the sale,
distribution, or transportation of natural gas, after adjustment for the net
write-off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore
rendered. The amount paid by energy providers shall be in lieu of, and energy
providers shall be exempt from, all other fees, charges, taxes or assessments
which the city may impose for the privilege of doing business within the city,
including, without limitation, excise taxes, occupation taxes, licensing fees
or right-of-way permit fees, and in the event the city imposes any such fee,
charge, tax or assessment, the payment to be made by energy providers in
accordance with this section shall be reduced in an amount equal to any such
fee, charge, tax or assessment imposed upon the energy providers. Ad valorem
property taxes imposed generally upon all real and personal property within the
city shall not be deemed to affect energy providers’ obligations under this
section.
   (B)   Energy providers shall report and pay any amount payable under this
section on an annual basis. Such payment shall be made no more than 30 days
following the close of the period for which payment is due. Initial and final
payments shall be prorated for the portions of the periods at the beginning and
end of any franchise granted by the city to an energy provider.
   (C)   Energy providers shall list the franchise fee collected from customers
as a separate item on bills for utility service issued to their customers. If
at any time the State Public Service Commission or other authority having
proper jurisdiction prohibits such recovery, energy providers will no longer be
obligated to collect and pay the franchise fee. In addition, energy providers
may reduce the franchise fee payable for natural gas delivered to a specific
customer when such reduction is required to attract or retain the business of
that customer.
   (D)   Within ten days of the date of this section, the city shall provide
the energy providers with a map of its corporate limits (the “map”). The map
shall be of sufficient detail to assist energy providers in determining whether
their customers reside within the city’s corporate limits. The map along with
energy provider’s geographic information system (“GIS”) mapping information
shall serve as the sole basis for determining energy provider’s obligation
hereunder to collect and pay the franchise fee from customers; provided,
however, that if the city’s corporate limits are changed by annexation of
otherwise, it shall be the city’s sole responsibility to update the map so that
such changes are included therein, and provide the updated map to the energy
providers. An energy provider’s obligation to collect and pay the franchise fee
from customers within an annexed area shall not commence until the later of 60
days after such energy provider’s receipt from the city of an updated map
including such annexed area, or such time after such energy provider’s receipt
from the city of an updated map including such annexed area as is reasonably
necessary for such energy provider to identify the customers in the annexed
area obligated to pay the franchise fee. In addition, energy providers shall
not be liable for paying franchise fees from or to any customer incorrectly
identified by the city or by the energy provider, as being subject to the
franchise fee or being subject to a different level of franchise fees or being
exempt from the imposition of franchise fees.
   (E)   The city shall have access to and the right to examine, during normal
business hours, such of an energy provider’s books, receipts, files, records
and documents as is reasonably necessary to verify the accuracy of payments due
hereunder; provided, that the city shall not exercise such right more than
twice per calendar year. If it is determined that a mistake was made in the
payment of any franchise fee required hereunder, such mistake shall be
corrected promptly upon discovery such that any under-payment by an energy
provider shall be paid within 30 days of recalculation of the amount due, and
any over-payment by an energy provider shall be deducted from the next payment
of such franchise fee due by such energy provider to the municipality;
provided, that neither party shall have the obligation to correct a mistake
that is discovered more than one year after the occurrence thereof.
(Ord. 811, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 34.12 MISCELLANEOUS EXPENDITURE POLICY.
   This policy is hereby adopted pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-2203(3),
which authorizes the expenditure of public funds for achievement plaques or
items of value to be awarded to elected or appointed officials, employees, or
volunteers, which includes persons serving on boards and commissions of the
city. No such achievement plaque or item of value shall exceed $500 in value
and may be awarded annually at the City Council’s discretion.
(Ord. 833, passed 1-14-2025)
ANNUAL BUDGET
§ 34.25 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city and any public utility of the city commences on
October 1 and extends through the following September 30 except as provided in
the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-2801 et
seq.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-701)
§ 34.26 BUDGET PROCEDURES.
   The budget instruction manual prepared by the Auditor of Public Accounts is
incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
§ 34.27 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.
   (A)   The City Council shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to §
34.28. A proposed budget statement shall contain the following information,
except as provided by state law:
      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the unencumbered cash balance at the
beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by
taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and
estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the
amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement
shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and
shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or
biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget
adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an
estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than
revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately
stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated unencumbered cash
balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year
or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year or
biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of
prior years or biennial period, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters of
the political subdivision; and
         (b)   For all other purposes.
      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each
proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act and a grand total
of all funds maintained by the City Council; and
      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a separate budget
statement which is approved by the City Council as provided in the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act.
   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer for
the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.
   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget statement
detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-504)
   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and less
the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to be
received from taxes, and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes and the unencumbered balances
shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required cash
reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-505)
§ 34.28 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.
   (A)   The City Council shall each year or biennial period conduct a public
hearing on its proposed budget statement. Such hearing shall be held separately
from any regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body and shall not be
limited by time. Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a
summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published four calendar days
prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such notice, the four calendar days
shall include the day of publication but not the day of hearing. When the total
operating budget, not including reserves, does not exceed $10,000 per year or
$20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget summary may be posted at the
City Council’s principal headquarters. At such hearing, the governing body
shall make at least three copies of the proposed budget statement available to
the public and shall make a presentation outlining key provisions of the
proposed budget statement, including, but not limited to, a comparison with the
prior year’s budget. Any member of the public desiring to speak on the proposed
budget statement shall be allowed to address the governing body at the hearing
and shall be given a reasonable amount of time to do so.
   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of the
hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation
shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is
adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount
to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify
separately the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters
of the political subdivision and the amount to be received for all other
purposes.
   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes shall be
published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner provided in
this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-506)
   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with the
Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors in
mathematics, improper accounting and noncompliance with the State Budget Act or
Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-518 through 13-522. If the Auditor detects such errors,
he or she shall immediately notify the Council of such errors. The Council
shall correct any such error as provided in §
34.31. Warrants for the payment of expenditures provided in the budget adopted
under this section shall be valid notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance
for which the Auditor has notified the Council.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-508)
   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-507)
§ 34.29 ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF TAX AMOUNT.
   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with and
certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 30 of each year
or September 30 of the final year of a biennial period and file with the
Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget statement which
complies with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-518 through 13-522, together with the
amount of the tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:
         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest
on bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal
voters of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.
      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.
   (B)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board is 10% or
more at the time of the filing and certification required under this section,
the City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make allowance for
delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or biennial period
and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated
litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or
can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action being
filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the preceding year
or biennial period which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser than
the amount determined under §
34.27.
   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as provided by
the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-509 for the current year
in setting or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of its
members to perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by this
section.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-508)
§ 34.30 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes apparent to the
City Council that due to unforeseen emergencies there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted
budget of expenditures for that fund, the Council may by a majority vote,
unless otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds to such
fund.
   (B)   No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of the
amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized in §
34.31 or by state law.
   (C)   Any officer or officers of the City Council who obligate funds
contrary to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-510) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.31 BUDGET REVISION.
   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Council may propose
to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public
hearing on that proposal whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent to the City Council that:
         (a)   There are circumstances which could not reasonably have been
anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was adopted;
         (b)   The budget adopted violated Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-518 through
13-522, such that the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof
will be insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or
there is a need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 13-518 through 13-522; or
         (c)   The City Council has been notified by the Auditor of Public
Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or noncompliance with the State
Budget Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-501 et seq.
      (2)   The public hearing requirement shall not apply to emergency
expenditures pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-829.51.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least four calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Council’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of hearing. This published notice shall set forth:
      (1)   The time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and
for what purpose;
      (3)   A statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated
circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be increased, the reasons
why the previously adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced during the
remainder of the current year to meet the need for additional money in that
manner;
      (4)   A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published; and
      (5)   A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.
   (C)   At the hearing any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement
protesting any application for additional money. A written record shall be kept
of all such hearings.
   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised budget
and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the Council
shall file with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the City
Council is located, and with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a copy of the
revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue warrants in payment
for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. These warrants shall
be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid during the next
fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under §
34.28, the City Council may, or within 30 days after notification of an error
by the Auditor of Public Accounts, the Council shall correct an adopted budget
which contains a clerical, mathematical or accounting error which does not
affect the total amount budgeted by more than 1% or increase the amount
required from property taxes. No public hearing shall be required for such a
correction. After correction, the City Council shall file a copy of the
corrected budget with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the
City Council is located and with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The City
Council may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the
budget.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-511)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Denial of service; when prohibited
   
50.02   Discontinuance of service; notice procedure
   
50.03   Diversion of services, meter tampering, unauthorized reconnection,
prohibited; evidence
   
50.04   Diversion of services; civil action
   
50.05   Delinquent utility charges; lien; civil action
§ 50.01 DENIAL OF SERVICE; WHEN PROHIBITED.
   No applicant for the services of a public or private utility company
furnishing water, natural gas or electricity at retail in this city shall be
denied service because of unpaid bills for similar service which are not
collectible at law because of statutes of limitations or discharge in
bankruptcy proceedings.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1601)
§ 50.02 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities, villages,
political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies or businesses of any nature.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1602)
   (B)   No public or private utility company, including any utility owned and
operated by the city, furnishing water, natural gas or electricity at retail in
this city shall discontinue service to any domestic subscriber for nonpayment
of any past-due account unless the utility company first gives notice to any
subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. Such notice shall be
given in person, by first class mail or by electronic delivery, except that
electronic delivery shall only be used if the subscriber has specifically
elected to receive such notices by electronic delivery. If notice is given by
first class mail or electronic delivery, such notice shall be conspicuously
marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least
seven days after notice is sent or given. Holidays and weekends shall be
excluded from the seven days. A public or private utility company shall not
charge a fee for the discontinuance or reconnection of utility service that
exceeds the reasonable costs of providing such service.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1605)
   (C)   The notice required by division (A) above shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the utility
regarding payment of the bill;
      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the utility’s employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      (5)   The domestic subscriber’s right, prior to the disconnection date,
to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      (6)   A statement that the utility may not disconnect service pending the
conclusion of the conference;
      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection shall be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician’s, physician
assistant’s or advanced practice registered nurse’s certificate, which shall
certify that a domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber’s
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the utility’s service to that household. Such certificate
shall be filed with the utility within five days of receiving notice under this
section, excluding holidays and weekends, and will prevent the disconnection of
the utility’s service for a period of at least 30 days from such filing. Only
one postponement of disconnection shall be required under this division (C)(7)
for each incidence of nonpayment of any past-due account;
      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
utility for an installment payment plan;
      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section
which has received prior approval from the City Council or Board of Public
Works, in the case of a city utility or the board of directors or
administrative board of any other utility.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1606)
   (D)   The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for the
notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance of
service and shall advise its subscribers, including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1607)
   (E)   The provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-1608 through 70-1614 shall
apply to disputes over a proposed discontinuance of service.
   (F)   The procedures adopted for resolving utility bills by the City Council
or Board of Public Works for any city utility, one copy of which is on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition
to any amendments thereto and are made a part of this section as though set out
in full.
   (G)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or
to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general
public.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1615)
§ 50.03 DIVERSION OF SERVICES, METER TAMPERING, UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION,
PROHIBITED; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   It is an offense for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   To connect any instrument, device or contrivance with any wire
supplying or intended to supply electricity or electric current or to connect
any pipe or conduit supplying gas or water, without the knowledge and consent
of any city utility supplying such products or services, in such a manner that
any portion thereof may be supplied to any instrument by or at which
electricity, electric current, gas or water may be consumed without passing
through the meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or
quantity thereof passing through it;
      (2)   To knowingly use or knowingly permit the use of electricity,
electric current, gas or water obtained unlawfully pursuant to this section;
      (3)   To reconnect electrical, gas or water service without the knowledge
and consent of any city utility supplying such service if the service has been
disconnected pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-1601 through 70-1615 or §
50.02; or
      (4)   To willfully injure, alter or by any instrument, device or
contrivance in any manner interfere with or obstruct the action or operation of
any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity
of electricity, electric current, gas or water passing through it, without the
knowledge and consent of any city utility supplying the electricity, electric
current, gas or water passing or intended to pass through the meter.
   (B)   Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe or conduit connection or
reconnection or of any injury, alteration, interference or obstruction of a
meter is prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the
premises where that connection, reconnection, injury, alteration, interference
or obstruction is proved to exist.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-515.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 DIVERSION OF SERVICES; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 25-21,275 shall apply.
   (B)   (1)   The city utility may bring a civil action for damages against
any person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets or attempts
bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering, when that act results in damages
to the utility. A city utility may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to
this section against any person receiving the benefit of utility service
through means of bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering.
      (2)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city
utility shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing,
tampering or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:
         (a)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the damage
or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or
         (b)   Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual damage or
loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.
      (3)   In addition to damage or loss under division (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b)
above, the utility may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on
account of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering, including, but
not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs of
the suit and reasonable attorneys’ fees in cases within the scope of Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 25-1801.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-21,276)
   (C)   (1)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is
proven to exist caused or had knowledge of that bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant:
         (a)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the
premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist; and
         (b)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for utility
services to the premises.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to exist
caused or had knowledge of that bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering
if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply system on
the premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering was proven
to exist.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-21,277)
   (D)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws. The remedies
provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of any other
civil or criminal statutory or common-law remedies.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-21,278)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 DELINQUENT UTILITY CHARGES; LIEN; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   All water rates, taxes or rent assessed by the City Council shall be a
lien upon the premises or real estate, upon or for which the same is used or
supplied; and such taxes, rents or rates shall be paid and collected and such
lien enforced in such manner as the Council shall by ordinance direct and
provide.
   (B)   All sewer charges established by the City Council shall be a lien upon
the premises or real estate for which the same is used or supplied. Such lien
shall be enforced in such manner as the Council provides by ordinance.
   (C)   If the service charge established by the City Council for the use of
any city sewage disposal plant and sewerage system is not paid when due, such
sum may be recovered by the city in a civil action or it may be certified to
the County Assessor and assessed against the premises served and collected or
returned in the same manner as other city taxes are certified, assessed,
collected and returned.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-503)
   (D)   Unless the City Council otherwise provides, on June 1 of each year,
the City Clerk shall report to the Council a list of all unpaid accounts due
for utilities service together with a description of the premises served. If
the Council approves the report, the Clerk shall certify the report to the
County Clerk to be collected as a special tax in the manner provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-538 and 17-925.01
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Garbage, trash and waste
   
51.03   Dead animals
   
51.04   Collection authority; nuisance
   
51.05   Collection; notice; removal
   
51.06   Collection; nuisance
   
51.07   Collection; lien
   
51.08   Scope
   
51.09   Solid waste disposal; filling authorization
   
51.10   Solid waste disposal; enforcement
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING RUBBLE. Rubble from construction, remodeling and repairs on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures, including, but not limited to,
stones, brick, plaster, lumber and waste parts.
   DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Combustible and noncombustible waste material resulting
from the demolition of structures, roadways or other paved surfaces, except
hazardous or toxic substances.
   FILLING. The placement, without significant voids, of building rubble and/or
demolition debris for the purpose of providing a stable raised grade on the
property where it is placed, with final cover of at least 24 inches of clean
dirt and seeded to prevent erosion.
   GARBAGE. Kitchen refuse, decayed waste, dead animals or anything that may
decompose and become detrimental to the public health.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County Health Department or his or her
authorized representative.
   REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish, except sewage, dirt and manure, from all public
and private establishments and residences.
   RUBBISH or TRASH. Discarded machinery, chips, pieces of wood, sticks, dead
trees, branches, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes, papers, rags
or any other litter or debris that is not an immediate hazard to the health of
the residents of the city.
   WASTE. Cinders, ashes, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust or sand.
   YARD WASTE. Grass and leaves.
(Prior Code, § 6-401)
§ 51.02 GARBAGE, TRASH AND WASTE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in a single-family
dwelling to keep in, on or about his or her premises any decayed vegetable or
animal substance, garbage or refuse matter of any kind that may be injurious to
the public health or offensive to the residents of the city unless the same is
kept in receptacles not exceeding a capacity of 35 gallons, as nearly airtight
as may be practical.
      (2)   No person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse to collect,
and all persons shall remove the same from their property within 24 hours after
being notified to do so by the Police Chief, who shall represent the Board of
Health. Any person having leaves or grass clippings or any other garbage,
rubbish, waste or refuse that is subject to decay or fermentation within a
short period of time shall be required to place the same in a standard garbage
can with a tight cover or a durable plastic bag that is securely tied at its
opening.
      (3)   All persons shall have the contents of their garbage cans removed
at least once a week.
   (B)   See §
130.005 for prohibitions on placing lawn debris, garbage and other waste items
on public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 6-402) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any dead animal shall be immediately removed and buried by its owner. If the
owner of such animal cannot be found within two hours after discovery of the
same, then such animal shall be removed by and at the expense of the city. Dead
animals shall not be buried within the corporate limits of the city nor within
one mile thereof, nor in or above the course of groundwater that is used for
drinking purposes by the inhabitants of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-403)
§ 51.04 COLLECTION AUTHORITY; NUISANCE.
   The City Council may provide for the collection and removal of garbage or
refuse which constitutes a public nuisance found upon any lot or land within
its corporate limits, or upon any streets, roads or alleys abutting such lot or
land. The city may require the owner, duly authorized agent or tenant of such
lot or land to remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and streets,
roads or alleys.
(Prior Code, § 6-404)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901
and 18-1752
§ 51.05 COLLECTION; NOTICE; REMOVAL.
   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to each
owner or duly authorized agent and to the tenant, if any. Such notice shall be
provided by personal service or by certified mail. After providing such notice,
the city, through its proper offices, shall remove the garbage or refuse or
cause it to be removed from such lot or land and streets, roads or alleys, in
addition to other proper remedies.
(Prior Code, § 6-405)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901
and 18-1752
§ 51.06 COLLECTION; NUISANCE.
   If the Mayor declares that the accumulation of garbage or refuse upon any
lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health and
safety, the city shall remove the garbage or refuse or cause it to be removed
from such lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal service or
following receipt of a certified letter in accordance with §
51.05, if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.
(Prior Code, § 6-406)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901
and 18-1752
§ 51.07 COLLECTION; LIEN.
   Whenever the city removes any garbage or refuse or causes it to be removed
from any lot or land pursuant to this chapter, it shall assess the cost of the
removal against such lot or land after a hearing conducted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-407)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901
and 18-1752
§ 51.08 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the corporate limits of the
city and its one-mile zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-408)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-2016.01
§ 51.09 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL; FILLING AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place building rubbish or demolition debris on
any public or private property in a manner which conforms to the definitions of
filling, or for the purpose of storage of such materials, without first
obtaining written authorization from the City Council.
   (B)   Application for such authorization shall include:
      (1)   Legal description of property;
      (2)   Current ownership of property;
      (3)   Dimensions of fill site;
      (4)   Original and proposed final grades of project;
      (5)   Duration of project in months;
      (6)   Types of materials to be used in filling; and
      (7)   Estimated volume in cubic yards of building rubble and demolition
debris to be used in filling.
(Prior Code, § 6-409) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL; ENFORCEMENT.
   The health officer shall supply the operator of an authorized fill site
written guidelines for the proper operation of such fill site. The health
officer is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are
necessary to assure satisfactory compliance with these guidelines. The fill
site operator shall be notified to correct any deficiencies noted by the health
officer during such inspections.
(Prior Code, § 6-410)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, persons, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $500 or be
sentenced to be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days in jail, at the discretion of
the court.
(Prior Code, § 6-411)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Definitions
   
52.002   Operating and funding
   
52.003   Consumer application; service deposit
   
52.004   Water contract
   
52.005   Mandatory hookup
   
52.006   Installation
   
52.007   Prohibition of lead pipes, solder and flux
   
52.008   New lines; check valves
   
52.009   Repairs
   
52.010   Water meters
   
52.011   Approval of water main connections and extensions
   
52.012   Single premises
   
52.013   Restricted use
   
52.014   Fire hydrants
   
52.015   Pollution
   
52.016   Inspection
   
52.017   Destruction of property
   
52.018   Wells, wellfields; drilling or installation of other facilities
   
52.019   Fluoride
Cross-Connection Control Devices; Backflow Prevention
   
52.030   Policy and purpose
   
52.031   Definitions
   
52.032   Surveys and investigations
   
52.033   Protection required; type and location
   
52.034   Backflow prevention devices; installation, testing
   
52.035   Authorized representative, authority
   
52.036   Appeals
   
52.037   Violations
   
52.038   Liability claims
Water Shortage
   
52.050   Definitions
   
52.051   Watch, warning or emergency
   
52.052   Declaration of watch
   
52.053   Declaration of warning
   
52.054   Declaration of emergency
   
52.055   Reports and review of rationing
   
52.056   Violation; disconnection
   
52.057   Emergency reduction
Private Water Systems
   
52.070   Scope
   
52.071   Definitions
   
52.072   Sanitation requirements
   
52.073   Construction requirements
   
52.074   Quality of water
   
52.075   Permits and fees
   
52.076   Inspections
   
52.077   Abatement of nuisance
   
52.078   Water service and drain layer; license
   
52.079   Lawn sprinkler installer; license
Rates and Fees
   
52.090   Fees and collections
   
52.091   Water bills
   
52.092   Water usage rates
   
52.093   Water treatment capital facilities charge
   
52.094   Deposit
   
52.095   Rental unit billing
   
52.096   Special water main extension fee
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Valley, Nebraska.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. As defined in state laws. The terms shall have the
same meaning and are equivalent terms.
   MAIN. Any pipe, other than a supply or service pipe, that is used for the
purpose of carrying water to any premises and dispersing the same in the city.
   MUNICIPAL. The City of Valley, Nebraska.
   SEPARATE PREMISES. That only one consumer shall procure water from the same
service or supply pipe. Any other property using the same service or supply
pipe is to be considered a SEPARATE PREMISES for billing and installation of a
separate water meter.
   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe extending from the shut-off, stop box or curb cock at
or near the lot line to and beyond the property line of the consumer to the
location on the premises where the water is to be dispersed.
   SUPPLY PIPE. Any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to a point
at or near the lot line of the consumer’s premises where the shut-off, stop box
or curb cock is located.
(Prior Code, § 6-202)
§ 52.002 OPERATING AND FUNDING.
   The city owns and operates the Water Department through an operations and
maintenance agreement with PeopleService, Inc. The City Council, for the
purpose of defraying the cost, management and maintenance of the Water
Department, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed
by state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the
tax shall be known as the Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the
City Treasurer. The Council shall by ordinance set the rates to be charged. A
copy of the rates shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 6-201)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-531, 17-534 and 19-1305
§ 52.003 CONSUMER APPLICATION; SERVICE DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Every person desiring a supply of water must make application upon a
form obtained from the City Clerk. A new applicant shall be required to
accompany his or her application with a service deposit which shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the City Council and which is addressed more
thoroughly in §
52.094.
   (B)   An existing consumer with an account in good standing may transfer his
or her water service to a new address upon completion of a new application and
a new contract without any additional fee. For the purpose of this section, an
ACCOUNT IN GOOD STANDING shall mean that a consumer has, for a period of at
least one year, made all payments due to the Water Department on or before the
due date.
   (C)   An existing consumer with an account not in good standing may transfer
his or her water service to a new address upon completion of a new application,
a new contract and the payment of a new service deposit. For the purpose of
this section, an ACCOUNT NOT IN GOOD STANDING shall mean that a consumer has
been delinquent on one or more payments due to the Water Department within the
previous one-year period.
   (D)   The Department shall not supply water service to any person outside
the corporate limits without special permission from the City Council;
provided, that the entire cost of laying mains, service pipe and supply pipe
shall be paid by the consumer. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate
the city to provide water service to nonresidents.
(Prior Code, § 6-203) (Ord. 745, passed 1-12-2021)
§ 52.004 WATER CONTRACT.
   (A)   Conditions.
      (1)   The city shall, through its water system, furnish water to persons
within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a
commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The city may furnish water to
persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or
alley in which a city commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid, and may
also furnish water to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate
limits of the city, as and when, according to law, the City Council may see fit
to do so.
      (2)   The rules, regulations and water rates named in this chapter shall
be considered a part of every application made for water service hereafter and
shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now or
hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of application on the
part of any applicant or the use of water by any current consumer and the
furnishing of water service to said consumer by the city shall constitute a
contract between the consumer and the city, to which both parties are bound. If
the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any
reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt, the
city may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building or premises
or place of such violation. No further connection for water service to said
building, premises or place shall again be made except by order of the city.
      (3)   The city shall consider all requests for connections and extensions
to its water system. If approved, the city and its City Engineer shall design,
bid, construct and operate/maintain the connection and extension mains. The
city shall determine the sizing, capacity and routing of all connections and
extensions.
      (4)   The city may extend its water system into unserved areas in
accordance with all available statutory procedures, including the establishment
of water extension districts. The city shall levy special assessments for the
cost of said extensions upon property specially benefited by such water
extension.
      (5)   The city may extend its water system into unserved areas to serve
new subdivisions and developments in accordance with its water main extension
and pioneering policy.
      (6)   The city shall charge persons or property for connecting to the
city water system and/or for the monthly use of water from the system. The
connection fees and charges and the monthly use fees shall consist of the
following:
         (a)   Installation expense, water connection processing and inspection
fee;
         (b)   Water treatment capital facilities charge;
         (c)   Special water main extension fee, if applicable;
         (d)   Monthly water usage fees; and
         (e)   Water service deposit fee.
(Prior Code, § 6-204)
   (B)   Termination. If any consumer shall sell or otherwise dispose the
premises where service is furnished, or if said premises are destroyed by fire
or other casualty, he or she shall at once inform the city, who shall cause the
water service to be shut off from the premises. If the consumer should fail to
give such notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the premises
until the city is otherwise advised of such circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 6-205)
(Ord. 572, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 745, passed 1-12-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-537
§ 52.005 MANDATORY HOOKUP.
   All persons whose property abuts a water main that is now or hereafter may
be laid shall be required, upon notice of the City Council, to hook up with the
city water system.
(Prior Code, § 6-212)
§ 52.006 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Expense.
      (1)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for water
service, shall pay to the City Water Department a water main tap fee of $300
which compensates the city for the expense of processing the application and
inspecting the connection between the applicant’s private water service pipe
and the city’s public water main. In addition to paying the processing and
inspection fee, the customer shall arrange for and pay all costs of the work
and materials to make the connection. Such connection work shall only be made
by a licensed plumber.
      (2)   No connections smaller than three-fourths-inch shall be allowed.
The customer shall pay to the City Water Department a water meter fee based on
the size of connection required. The fee shall be as approved by the City
Council based on the actual cost of the water meter at the time of connection.
(Prior Code, § 6-213)
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the
purpose of installing pipe or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth must
be removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience
to the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an
excavation made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any time without a
barricade. After service pipes are laid, the streets, alleys and sidewalks
shall be restored to good condition. If an excavation in any street, alley or
sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the city
shall have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred
shall be charged to the consumer.
      (2)   All installations or repairs of pipes require two inspections by
the city. The first inspection shall be made when connections or repairs are
completed and before the pipes are covered. The second inspection shall be made
after the dirt work is completed and the service is restored. It is the
consumer’s responsibility to notify the city at the time the work is ready for
each inspection. All installation shall be done under the supervision of and
strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications
prescribed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-214)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-537
§ 52.007 PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX.
   (A)   Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any
residential or nonresidential facility which is connected to the public water
supply system shall be lead free.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, LEAD-FREE shall mean:
      (1)   Solders and flux, not more than 0.2% lead; and
      (2)   Pipe and pipe fittings, not more than 8% lead.
(Prior Code, § 6-215)
§ 52.008 NEW LINES; CHECK VALVES.
   All new lines shall have check valves installed and such installations shall
be inspected and approved by the city. Water to any premises shall not be
turned on until the plumbing has been made to comply with all statutory
sections.
(Prior Code, § 6-216)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71-5301
§ 52.009 REPAIRS.
   (A)   Repairs to the service pipe shall be made by and at the expense of the
customer. All other repairs to the property of the Water Department shall be
made by the city. If excavation is required to determine what repairs are
necessary, the customer is responsible for and shall bear the expense of such
excavation.
   (B)   If an examination reveals that repairs are necessary to the service
pipe, the customer bears the responsibility for and the expense of all repairs,
as well as the responsibility for and the expense of refilling the excavation
and restoring the property to its original condition. If an examination reveals
that repairs are to be made only to the property of the Water Department, the
city shall be responsible for and bear the expense of refilling the excavation
and restoring the property to its original condition, as well as for the
expense of excavation up to an amount of $100.
   (C)   If the city determines that it is responsible for the repairs, but the
customer makes repairs and/or replacement of the service pipe, the customer
then becomes responsible for and bears the expense of filling in the excavation
and restoring the property to its original condition, plus the entire cost of
the excavation.
(Prior Code, § 6-217)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-537
§ 52.010 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Required. The purpose of this section is to require water meters as a
condition precedent to the use of water from the waterworks of the city, as
authorized by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-542. Any new building or structure erected
or constructed in the city shall contain a water meter with remote readouts and
fittings to accommodate connections thereto of not less than five-eighths-inch.
(Prior Code, § 6-218)
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Every new building or structure hereafter erected or constructed in
the city shall contain the necessary fittings, piping and mechanical
accommodations to permit the installation of a water meter with a remote
readout.
      (2)   In terms of installation, methods of connection and use of
materials in such installation, the water meter shall comply in all respects
with the Uniform Plumbing Code, published by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Professionals (IAMPO).
      (3)   The City Council may fix further specifications for such water
meters from time to time by resolution, and in the event that such
specifications fixed from time to time by resolution are at variance with any
uniform code condition adopted by the city, then and in that event the terms of
the resolution shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 6-219)
   (C)   Purchase and installation.
      (1)   Anyone wishing to install or replace a water meter in the city must
purchase said water meter from the city, which shall charge the current market
price for the meters selected for installation, plus shipping and handling
charges. The city may charge different prices for different size meters and for
meters to be installed in underground pits.
      (2)   The city shall publish and keep on file a list of the current
prices for the purchase of any meters and the current charges for shipping and
handling of said meters. This list shall be kept on file with the City Clerk.
      (3)   All said water meters shall be installed at the customer’s expense
by a licensed plumber, selected by the customer.
(Prior Code, § 6-220)
§ 52.011 APPROVAL OF WATER MAIN CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The size of water mains in the city municipal water system have been
selected based on a number of conditions, including, but not necessarily
limited to, normal domestic water usage, fire protection flows and ability to
serve future undeveloped areas that may eventually desire to receive water
service from the city.
   (B)   In order that these service conditions shall continue to be met, the
city may require that water mains be oversized in capacity above what might be
considered adequate to serve a sole and specific area or development. The
decision on the proper sizing of water mains within the city or within its
planning and service areas shall rest solely with the city.
   (C)   In the event that a development or entity desires to connect to and
extend service from an existing city water main, the city shall determine the
unused capacity of the water main to be connected to or extended, whether or
not a connection or extension can be allowed and the size of the water main
connection and the size of the water main to be extended.
   (D)   If it is determined that the water main has unused capacity to allow a
connection or extension, the city may approve of the connection or extension
and shall determine its size. If there is no possibility of future water
service requests or expansion beyond the development’s or entity’s use, then
the size of the extended main shall be based on that development’s or entity’s
sole use. However, if future water service is possible to areas beyond the
development’s or entity’s use, then the main shall be sized to accommodate that
future use as well. The determination of future use shall rest solely with the
city.
   (E)   The city may extend a water main to serve subdivisions or
developments. The approval of such extension, and the provisions of the
extension, shall be in accordance with the city’s water main extension and
pioneering policy.
   (F)   The city shall charge water treatment capital facilities charges to
all applicants desiring to connect to the city water system. The city shall
also charge, if applicable, special water main extension fees. These charges
and fees are specific for water treatment facilities and special water main
extensions and do not cover any of the applicant’s costs of extending interior
water mains or service lines to the point(s) of usage.
(Prior Code, § 6-221) (Ord. 572, passed 12-9-2008)
§ 52.012 SINGLE PREMISES.
   No consumer shall supply water to other households or allow them to take
water from his or her premises, nor after water is supplied into a building
shall any person make or employ a plumber or other person to make a tap or
connection with the pipe upon the premises for alteration, extension or
attachment without the written permission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-223) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.013 RESTRICTED USE.
   The City Council may order a reduction in the use of water or shut off the
water on any premises in the event of a water shortage due to fire or other
good and sufficient cause. The city shall not be liable for any damages caused
by shutting off the supply of water to any consumer while the system or any
part thereof is undergoing repairs or when there is a shortage of water due to
circumstances over which the city has no control.
(Prior Code, § 6-224)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-537
§ 52.014 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to
be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members
of the Fire Department or employees of the Water Department to open or attempt
to open any public or private hydrant and draw water from the same or in any
manner to interfere with the hydrants. Any person doing so or attempting to do
so may be prosecuted as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-225) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.015 POLLUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute any
stream or source of water for the supply of the City Water Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-230) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.016 INSPECTION.
   Duly authorized agents of the city shall have free access, at any reasonable
time, to all parts of each premises and building to or in which water is
delivered for the purpose of examining the pipes, fixtures and other portions
of the system to ascertain whether there is any disrepair or unnecessary waste
of water.
(Prior Code, § 6-226)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-537
§ 52.017 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or carelessly to break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the City Water Department. No person may deposit anything in a
stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of
any of the above-mentioned property without the written permission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-227) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.018 WELLS, WELLFIELDS; DRILLING OR INSTALLATION OF OTHER FACILITIES.
   (A)   The intent of this section is to establish control by the city over
the location of future potential sources of contamination within the city’s
wellfield, within the city limits or within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction, so as to prevent or minimize any hazard to the safety of the
city’s potable water system.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted or otherwise constructed, screened and cased, for the purpose of
exploring for groundwater, monitoring groundwater or extracting groundwater
from an underground aquifer for public drinking water use.
      WELLFIELD. The area or region under which the city’s drinking water
aquifer is located and which contains the city’s potable water wells for
extraction of groundwater for public drinking water purposes. The city’s
wellfield is described as follows: part of the NE quarter of the NW quarter of
Section 6, T15N, R10E, 6th P.M., Douglas County, Nebraska, the point of
beginning which exists 735.05 feet south of the N quarter corner of Section 6,
T15N, R10E, along the east line of the NE quarter of the NW quarter of Section
6, thence west along a line perpendicular to the east line of the NE quarter of
the NW quarter of Section 6 a distance of 751.95 feet; thence south along a
line parallel to the east line of the NE quarter of the NW quarter of Section 6
a distance of 569.26 feet, thence east along a line perpendicular to the east
line of the NE quarter of the NW quarter of Section 6 a distance of 751.95
feet; thence north along the east line of the NE quarter of the NW quarter of
Section 6 a distance of 569.26 feet to the point of beginning. A plat of the
described wellfield boundary is attached for reference.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, construct or replace any of
the following facilities or structures or to discharge any of the following
materials within a distance of 1,200 feet from any point on the boundary of the
city’s defined wellfield:
      (1)   Water well (drinking, irrigation, geothermal or injection);
      (2)   Chemical storage (dry or liquid);
      (3)   Petroleum storage;
      (4)   Sewage lagoon;
      (5)   Cesspool;
      (6)   Dump;
      (7)   Feedlot, feedlot runoff or animal waste disposal;
      (8)   Corral or animal enclosure;
      (9)   Pit toilet;
      (10)   Septic tank;
      (11)   Sanitary landfill;
      (12)   Sewage treatment plant;
      (13)   Sewage wet well;
      (14)   Absorption of disposal field for waste;
      (15)   Land application of solid or liquid waste; and
      (16)   Sanitary or industrial discharges.
   (D)   Water wells in existence and in use within the restricted area, as of
February 14, 1995, the effective date of this section, shall continue to be
permitted unless such continued existence or use presents a hazard to the
quality of the drinking water available for public use to the city’s water
system. The owner of any existing water well shall have the burden of
establishing the existence and use of such well at the time of the effective
date.
(Prior Code, § 6-229) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.019 FLUORIDE.
   Fluoride shall be added to the water supply of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-228)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES; BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 52.030 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of these backflow regulations is to protect the public
water supply system of the city from the possibility of contamination or
pollution which may backflow into the system. These regulations provide for the
maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection controls which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the
potable water supply system. These backflow regulations shall apply to all
premises serviced by the public potable water system of the city.
   (B)   The duly authorized agent of the city shall be responsible for the
implementation of the backflow prevention program as outlined within these
regulations. If an approved backflow prevention device is required for the
safety of the public water supply system in the judgment of the agent, then he
or she shall give notice in writing to the consumer to install said devices at
each recommended location. The agent shall inspect and approve all
installations of the required backflow prevention devices. The costs for
purchasing, installing and maintaining a backflow prevention device shall be
the responsibility and sole expense of the consumer. The installation of
backflow prevention devices, except for outlet fixture vacuum breakers, shall
be by a licensed plumber. Annual testing of all double check valves and reduced
pressure zone devices shall be performed by the city. If maintenance and
repairs are deemed necessary, the owner shall be contacted and issued an order
to make all necessary repairs or maintenance. The owner shall complete all
maintenance or repairs within 30 days; if not, the owner shall be considered in
violation of the backflow regulations and will be subject to disconnection of
municipal water service.
   (C)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection
containing cross-connections to a public water supply system or a consumer’s
potable water supply system unless such cross-connections are abated or
controlled in accordance with this rule and as required by the laws and
regulations of the State Department of Health.
   (D)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been
constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the
Water Department and the National Standard Plumbing Code (published by IAMPO)
as necessary for the protection of health and safety.
   (E)   For the purposes of these backflow prevention regulations, whenever
the city or its agent is to make any decisions or interpretations or whenever
reference is made to the fact that the city or its agent is to exercise
judgment, such decision, interpretation or judgment shall be in accordance with
the provisions of these backflow prevention regulations and any other
applicable provisions of the municipal code and state and federal laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-231)
§ 52.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the receptacle
and in no case less than one inch.
   ANTI-SIPHON VACUUM BREAKER. A device which restricts the backflow of water
into a potable water system by a simple check valve. The vacuum is broken by
allowing air to enter upstream of the check valve.
   APPROVED. That a backflow prevention device or method has been accepted by
the city as suitable for the intended use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water supply system available to the premises
other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by
such system. These auxiliary water systems may include water from another
owner’s public water supply system, polluted or contaminated water, process
fluids, used water or other sources of water over which the city does not have
sanitary control.
   BACKFLOW or BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the water distribution system from any other source than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. Devices such as an
approved air gap, double check valve assembly, anti-siphon vacuum breaker or a
reduced pressure principle device can be used. These devices must have been
approved by the city or its agent.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water supply system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Any water supply system located on the
consumer’s premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A fire suppression system is also considered to be a
CONSUMER’S WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of water quality by sewage or waste to a degree
which could cause an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any arrangement whereby contamination due to backflow or
backsiphonage can occur.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. A term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to
health and the adverse effects upon the potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK-VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting check valves including 100% closing shutoff ball valves
located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
watertightness of each check valve.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation that creates a real or potential danger to the health and well-being
of the consumer.
   INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION. An arrangement or device that will allow
alternate but not simultaneous uses of two sources of water.
   LICENSED PLUMBER. A person who has obtained the appropriate permit from the
City Council to perform plumbing-related work within the city limits.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking or personal or culinary use
or which does not meet the requirements of the State Department of Health.
   OWNER. The entity delivering water through the public water supply system.
The OWNER is the city operating through PeopleService, Inc.
   PLUMBING HAZARD. A plumbing cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water
system that has not been properly protected by air gap separation or backflow
prevention devices.
   POLLUTION. The presence in water of any foreign substances (organic,
inorganic or biological) that degrade the quality of water to a degree which
does not necessarily cause an actual hazard to the public health but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for any desired use.
   POLLUTION HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or the consumer’s water supply system.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the State Department of Health.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A water supply system designed and intended to
provide potable water to a designated consumer. The water supply shall include
the water supply source and distribution piping network. WATER SUPPLY SOURCE is
defined as any artificial or natural accumulation of water used to supply the
potable water system. The distribution piping network includes all piping,
pumping and treatment devices used to convey an adequate quality and quantity
of potable water to the consumer.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between
these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the
atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at
less than the supply pressure. The unit must include 100% closing shutoff ball
valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service line, then the
SERVICE CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to
the physical properties of the public’s or the consumer’s water supply system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by the public water supply system to a
consumer’s water supply system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water supplier.
(Prior Code, § 6-232)
§ 52.032 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct or
cause to be conducted periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her
premises as necessary to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections in his or her water supply system. The city shall have the
authority to conduct or cause to be conducted periodic surveys and
investigations of water use practices within a consumer’s premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the consumer’s water
supply system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
public water system. The city may conduct these surveys to provide information
in determining what level of protection will be necessary to protect the public
health and safety.
   (B)   On request by the city, the consumer shall furnish information on
water use practices within his or her premises. If the consumer refuses to
submit the proper information or to cooperate in obtaining the proper
information, the city shall treat the premises as if no appropriate cross-
connection survey has been completed, and in such event, the consumer shall be
required to install an approved backflow prevention device as required in §
52.034(C).
   (C)   The duly authorized agent of the city shall have the right to enter
any premises served by the public water supply system at all reasonable times
for the purpose of making surveys and investigations of water use practices. In
order to inspect any premises, said agent shall give notice setting forth a
proposed date and time to the consumer at least ten days in advance. If the
consumer cannot make the premises available for inspection at the proposed date
and time, the consumer shall contact the city and arrange for another date and
time for the inspection. If the city and the consumer cannot agree on a date
and time, then the city shall treat the premises as if no appropriate cross-
connection survey has been completed, and in such event, the consumer shall be
required to install an approved backflow prevention device as required in §
52.034(C).
   (D)   The City Council is hereby appointed as a Hearing Board to hear
differences between its duly authorized agent and any consumer on matters
concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this subchapter by
the agent. Any consumer aggrieved by being required to pay the expense of
installing, furnishing and/or maintaining a backflow prevention device may,
within 14 days of the act or event causing the grievance, request a hearing in
writing to present such grievance to the Hearing Board. Said Board shall
schedule the matter for hearing within 30 days and provide written notice of
the meeting by first class mail to the consumer. The notice shall be mailed to
the consumer at least seven days and not more than 21 days before the hearing.
At the hearing, the consumer shall first state the nature of the grievance and
the city’s agent shall be entitled to respond thereto, whereupon the Hearing
Board shall render its decision which will be binding upon the consumer and the
agent.
(Prior Code, § 6-233)
§ 52.033 PROTECTION REQUIRED; TYPE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   Where protection is required.
      (1)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed between
the service connection and the point of potential backflow into a consumer’s
water supply system when, in the judgment of the city, a health, plumbing,
pollution or system hazard exists.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed when the
following conditions are found by the city to exist:
         (a)   Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as
to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This
shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the owner;
         (b)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment
of the city, are not correctable or there exist intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections
exist;
         (c)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey;
         (d)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established; and
         (e)   Premises having more than one customer service connection, which
could constitute a potential cross-connection.
      (3)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a customer’s water supply system serving the following types of
facilities, unless the city determines that no health, pollution or system
hazard to the public water supply system exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, dental clinics, nursing and convalescent
homes and medical buildings;
         (b)   Testing laboratories, film laboratories and film development
facilities;
         (c)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations;
         (d)   Food or beverage processing plants;
         (e)   Chemical plants;
         (f)   Metal de-greasing, plating industries, machine tool plants, die
and metal processing or productions;
         (g)   Chemical and petroleum processing or storage plants;
         (h)   Car washes and automobile servicing facilities;
         (i)   Lawn irrigation systems and swimming pools;
         (j)   Laundries and dry cleaners;
         (k)   Packing houses;
         (l)   Power plants;
         (m)   Premises having radioactive materials such as laboratories,
industries and hospitals;
         (n)   Rendering plants;
         (o)   Premises having a water recirculating system as used for boilers
or cooling systems;
         (p)   Veterinary establishments, kennels, feedyards, stables, rodeo
grounds, stockyards and pet grooming salons;
         (q)   Beauty salons, barbershops, massage parlors and health clubs;
         (r)   Fire suppression systems;
         (s)   Multi-storied buildings greater than three stories in height;
         (t)   Schools, universities and colleges; and
         (u)   Other commercial or industrial facilities which may constitute
potential cross-connection sites.
(Prior Code, § 6-234)
   (B)   Type of protection required.
      (1)   The type of protection required under §
52.034(C)(1) and (C)(2) shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists, as
follows.
         (a)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where a public water
supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a system
hazard or health hazard.
         (b)   An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where
a public water supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could
cause a pollution hazard.
         (c)   An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device shall be installed at the service connection where a plumbing hazard
exists.
         (d)   In the case of any premises where, because of security
requirements or other prohibitions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey of the consumer’s potable water system, a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the
service connection.
      (2)   An approved anti-siphon vacuum breaker may be used as a backflow
prevention device where it is not subjected to back pressures. This device
shall not be used for applications where water flow is expected to be
continuous for 12 or more hours. The device shall be installed ahead of the
potential source of contamination on the discharge side of the last control
valve. It shall be placed at the least six inches above the highest point
reached by any water passing through the potential source of contamination.
Typically, this type of device is used for such equipment as lawn sprinklers,
water-cooled compressors or other water-cooled equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-235)
§ 52.034 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES; INSTALLATION, TESTING.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Any approved backflow prevention device required by division (C)
below shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the city.
The consumer, at his or her sole expense, shall obtain and install said
approved backflow prevention device within 90 days of notice and as directed by
the city.
      (2)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the city prior to
the effective date of this rule and which are properly maintained shall, except
for inspection, testing and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of division (E) below, but only if the city determines that the
devices will satisfactorily protect the public water supply system. If deemed
necessary for proper testing, 100% closing shutoff ball valves for testing
shall be provided on existing backflow prevention devices. If the city
determines that an existing backflow prevention device requires replacement, it
shall be replaced with an approved backflow prevention device.
(Prior Code, § 6-236)
   (B)   Booster pumps.
      (1)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to
any premises where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within such premises unless such booster pump is equipped with a low pressure
cutoff designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cutoff device in proper working order.
(Prior Code, § 6-237)
   (C)   Yard hydrants.
      (1)   The installation of yard hydrants where water is available or
accessible for drinking or culinary purposes and which have drip openings below
the ground surface is prohibited unless such hydrants are equipped with an
approved device to prevent entrance of groundwater into chambers connected with
the water supply.
      (2)   Yard hydrants or hose bibs which would be used by the consumer to
provide water to mix pesticides, fertilizer or other chemicals for direct use
or aerial application to surface areas shall be equipped with an anti-siphon
vacuum breaker.
      (3)   All underground lawn and garden sprinkler systems shall be equipped
with an approved backflow prevention device.
(Prior Code, § 6-238)
   (D)   Installation.
      (1)   Backflow prevention devices required by this policy shall be
installed at a location and in a manner approved by the city or its authorized
representative. All devices shall be installed at the expense of the consumer
unless the city or its authorized representative agrees otherwise.
      (2)   Backflow prevention devices installed at the service connection
shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water meter (if one is
installed) or the corporation stop, as close to the meter or corporation stop
and prior to any other connection.
      (3)   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed: according to
manufacturer’s recommendations; where conveniently accessible for maintenance
and testing; where protected from freezing; and where no part of the device
will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.
(Prior Code, § 6-239)
   (E)   Testing.
      (1)   Backflow and backsiphonage prevention devices designed to be tested
shall be tested for proper operation annually or when necessary, in the opinion
of the city or its authorized representative. Testing and repair must be done
by a certified (Grade 6) backflow tester. Actual testing shall be at the
expense of the consumer unless the city or its authorized representative agrees
otherwise.
      (2)   Any required maintenance or repairs shall be at the expense of the
consumer and subject to the approval of the city. If testing shall require
entry into the premises, the city’s authorized representative shall give notice
setting forth a proposed date and time to the consumer at least ten working
days in advance by first class mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   If the consumer cannot make the appointment, he or she shall
contact the city’s authorized representative to arrange another date and time.
(Prior Code, § 6-240)
§ 52.035 AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, AUTHORITY.
   The authorized representative shall have the authority to issue any order
consistent with the provisions of these regulations in order to protect the
public health and safety. Any order of the authorized representative shall be
in writing and shall clearly state the nature of the order and compliance
requirements and shall set a reasonable date by which compliance must be met.
All orders will be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested.
(Prior Code, § 6-241)
§ 52.036 APPEALS.
   In the event that it is claimed that: the true intent and meaning of these
regulations has been wrongfully interpreted by the authorized representative;
the time allowed for compliance with any order of the authorized representative
is too short; or conditions peculiar to a particular premises make it
unreasonably difficult to meet the literal requirements prescribed by this
chapter, the owner may file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days after the decision or order of the authorized representative
has been made. When appealed to, the City Council shall hear all appeals and
shall have the power and authority to modify the decision or order of the
authorized representative. Such a decision shall be final, subject only to any
remedy which the aggrieved party may have at law or equity. Any appeal shall be
in writing and shall state the reason for the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 6-242)
§ 52.037 VIOLATIONS.
   The city or its authorized representative shall deny or discontinue water
service to any premises or any consumer wherein any backflow prevention device
required by this subchapter is not installed, tested and maintained in a manner
acceptable to the city or its authorized representative, if it is found that
the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists. Water service to such premises shall not
be restored until the consumer is in compliance with these cross-connection
regulations to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-243)
§ 52.038 LIABILITY CLAIMS.
   The authorized representative shall be relieved from personal liability. The
city shall hold harmless the authorized representative, when acting in good
faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage that may
occur to any person or property as a result of any act required or authorized
by this subchapter or by reason of any act or omission of the authorized
representative in the discharge of his or her duties hereunder. Any suit
brought carrying out the provisions of this subchapter shall be defended by the
city or its insurance carrier, if any, through final determination of such
proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 6-244)
WATER SHORTAGE
§ 52.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC WATER USE. Includes water for drinking, water for cooking, water for
bathing, water for laundry and water for sanitary flushing in residential and
business premises.
   ODD/EVEN WATERING. Includes alternate daily lawn watering throughout the
city and its water service area. During this restriction, residence and
business addresses with odd-numbered addresses shall be allowed to water lawns
on Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday. During this restriction, residence and
business addresses with even-numbered addresses shall be allowed to water lawns
on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Odd/Even watering shall be in place each
year from May 1 through September 30.
   WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but shall not be limited to, leaving hoses run,
leaving faucets run, allowing faucets and toilets to leak, watering of lawns
excessively or continuously, not repairing broken sprinkler heads and the like
or failing to repair a controllable water leak due to defective plumbing.
   WATERWORKS SYSTEM. Includes the municipal water supply wells, treatment
plant, storage reservoirs, water supply pumps and water distribution system.
(Prior Code, § 6-245) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 838, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 52.051 WATCH, WARNING OR EMERGENCY.
   (A)   A water watch, warning or emergency shall be in effect whenever the
city water system operator and/or the City Engineer find that conditions
indicate the probability of a major water supply shortage is rising. The city
water system operator and/or the City Engineer shall notify the Mayor of
conditions which may, pursuant to the city’s water conservation plan, as may be
amended from time to time, trigger a watch, warning or emergency.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be empowered to declare that a water watch, warning or
emergency exists and shall take steps to inform the public and ask for
reductions in water use. Such watch, warning or emergency shall be deemed to
continue until it is declared to have ended. Declaring the existence and end of
a water watch, warning or emergency shall be effective upon posting notice at
the city’s designated areas.
(Prior Code, § 6-246) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 52.052 DECLARATION OF WATCH.
   Upon the declaration of a water watch, the following affirmative measures
may be implemented by the city.
   (A)   Education actions. The city will make occasional news releases or post
notices in designated places encouraging water conservation and shall educate
the public on how to conserve water through social media, mailings and posting
on city website.
   (B)   Management actions.
      (1)   Any repairs or replacements to equipment components of the city
waterworks system shall be completed immediately.
      (2)   Leaks will be repaired immediately.
      (3)   The city will monitor its use of water and will curtail activities
such as hydrant flushing.
   (C)   Regulation actions. The public will be asked to voluntarily curtail
some outdoor water use and to make efficient use of indoor water, i.e., washing
full loads, taking short showers, not letting faucets run and the like.
(Prior Code, § 6-247) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 52.053 DECLARATION OF WARNING.
   Upon the declaration of a water warning, the following affirmative measures
may be implemented by the city:
   (A)   Education actions. The city will make occasional news releases or post
notices in designated places indicating the current water supply situation.
Water conservation articles may be provided to the public on a regular basis.
   (B)   Management actions.
      (1)   Any repairs or replacements to equipment components of the city
waterworks system shall be completed immediately. Water storage volumes shall
be monitored hourly to ensure that reserves are in place for emergency
firefighting operations.
      (2)   Leaks will be repaired immediately.
      (3)   The city will curtail its water usage, including hydrant flushing
and watering of publicly owned parks and other grounds.
   (C)   Regulation actions. The public will be asked to voluntarily curtail
some outdoor water use and to make efficient use of indoor water, i.e., washing
full loads, taking short showers, not letting faucets run and the like.
      (1)   If not already in place pursuant to Valley Municipal Code §
52.050, an odd/even lawn watering system will be imposed on city residents.
These restrictions shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation engaged
in the business of growing or selling plants of any kind.
      (2)   Waste of water will be prohibited, other than what is necessary for
public safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-248) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 838, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 52.054 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Upon the declaration of a water emergency, the following affirmative
measures may be implemented by the city.
   (A)   Education actions. The city will make occasional news releases or post
notices in designated places indicating the current water supply situation. The
city may hold public meetings to discuss the emergency, the status of the water
supply and further actions which need to be taken.
   (B)   Management actions.
      (1)   Any repairs and replacements of equipment components of the city
waterworks system shall be completed immediately and water operating personnel
shall be on site continuously to monitor all operations, usage volumes, storage
volumes for fire protection and the like.
      (2)   Leaks will be repaired immediately.
      (3)   The city will seek additional emergency supplies from other water
suppliers, the state or the federal government.
   (C)   Regulation actions. Outdoor water use will be banned. Waste of water
will be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-249) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 52.055 REPORTS AND REVIEW OF RATIONING.
   The city water system operator and City Engineer will make regular reports
to the Mayor while water restrictions are in effect. The Mayor will review the
reports and consider any changes that may be desirable in the regulations set
out in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-250) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 52.056 VIOLATION; DISCONNECTION.
   If the Mayor learns of any violation of any water use regulation actions
imposed pursuant to this subchapter, a written notice of the violation shall be
affixed to the property where the violation occurred; and the customer of
record or any other person known to the city who is responsible for the
violation or its correction shall be provided with either actual or mailed
notice. Said notice shall describe the violation and order that it be
corrected, cured or abated immediately or within such specified time as the
city determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not
complied with, the city may immediately shut off the water on any premises
until such time as the water watch, warning or emergency has ended.
(Prior Code, § 6-251) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 52.057 EMERGENCY REDUCTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the ability of the City Council to
order a reduction in the use of water or shut off the water on any premises
pursuant to §
52.013.
(Prior Code, § 6-252) (Ord. 776, passed 6-14-2022)
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS
§ 52.070 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all private water supply
systems in the corporate limits of the city and its one-mile zoning
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-801)
§ 52.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector of the city.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County Health Department or his or her
authorized representative.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A water supply system not operated by a
governmental subdivision.
   WELL. The structural assembly constructed for the purpose of extracting
water from the ground.
(Prior Code, § 8-802)
§ 52.072 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   In order to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the people of
the city and the general public, private water supply systems shall be
constructed, used and maintained in accordance with the following standards and
requirements.
   (A)   A well shall be located so as to be no nearer than 100 feet to any
septic tank system, cesspool, privy, feed lot, barnyard or animal or fowl pen,
or any other known source of contamination.
   (B)   A well shall be constructed so as to exclude dust, dirt or foreign
material of any kind and to exclude surface water and any groundwater above a
depth of ten feet.
   (C)   A well shall not be constructed as a driven or sand-point well.
   (D)   If stock or fowl are watered from wells controlled by this subchapter,
all automatic stock or fowl watering devices shall be provided with
backsiphonage devices approved by the health officer. Any cross-connections
between a private water supply system or private well and the city municipal
water supply system are expressly prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 8-803) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.073 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the sanitation requirements for private water supply systems
listed above, all such systems shall be constructed, altered, maintained and
used in accordance with the regulations and standards set forth in Title 178,
Department of Health and Environmental Control Council, Chapter 12: Regulations
Governing Water Well Construction, Pump Installation and Water Well Abandonment
Standards, including future amendments. A copy of said regulations and
standards shall be available for public inspection at the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 8-804)
§ 52.074 QUALITY OF WATER.
   The sanitary quality of water from private water supply systems shall be
determined by the bacteriological, chemical and physical standards as
promulgated by the most recent edition of the Public Health Service Drinking
Water Standards.
(Prior Code, § 8-805)
§ 52.075 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or modify
private water supply systems without first obtaining a valid permit issued by
the County Health Department, which shall be in addition to the building permit
or any other required permit. A permit for a private water supply system may be
denied where the municipal water supply is available within 300 feet from the
property to be served. Appropriate fees for said permit shall be payable to the
County Health Department. In addition, an electrical permit must be obtained
from the city.
   (B)   The fee for an electrical permit in conjunction with the County Health
Department permit to construct a private water supply shall be payable to the
city in an amount determined by resolution by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-806) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.076 INSPECTIONS.
   The health officer is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with these
regulations and standards.
(Prior Code, § 8-807)
§ 52.077 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this subchapter, the city may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same in the manner provided
by law. Whenever in any action it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgment in the case.
(Prior Code, § 8-809)
§ 52.078 WATER SERVICE AND DRAIN LAYER; LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall tap water mains, install curb stops, install water
service lines or construct, lay, install, replace or repair sanitary sewer
lines, septic tank systems or septic tank fields within the city’s corporate
limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction without first having obtained from the
City Building Inspector a water service and drain layer’s license.
   (B)   A water service and drain layer’s license shall be issued to an
applicant by the City Building Inspector upon fulfillment of the following:
      (1)   Completion of a water service and drain layer’s license application
form provided by the city;
      (2)   Submission of documentation that the applicant has three years’
experience as an apprentice plumber or equivalent;
      (3)   A written endorsement of a master plumber who is registered as a
master plumber with the city; and
      (4)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
   (C)   A water service and drain layer’s license shall be valid from the date
of issuance up to and including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked,
and shall be renewed before the expiration date thereof by submitting the
required application form, documentation and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-810) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.079 LAWN SPRINKLER INSTALLER; LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall install lawn sprinkler systems from the backflow
prevention device in and through any lawn or yard within the city’s corporate
limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction without first having obtained a lawn
sprinkler installer’s license from the City Building Inspector.
   (B)   A lawn sprinkler installer’s license shall be issued to an applicant
by the City Building Inspector upon fulfillment of the following:
      (1)   Completion of a lawn sprinkler installer’s license application form
provided by the city;
      (2)   Submission of documentation that the applicant has two years’
experience in lawn sprinkler installations; and
      (3)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
   (C)   A lawn sprinkler installer’s license shall be valid from the date of
issuance up to and including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and
shall be renewed before the expiration date thereof by submitting the required
application form, documentation and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-811) Penalty, see §
10.99
RATES AND FEES
§ 52.090 FEES AND COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
paid by consumers for the use of water from the Water Department. All such fees
shall be on file for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The utility clerk shall bill the consumers, collect all money received
by the city on the account of the Water Department and account for and pay to
the City Treasurer all revenue collected, making receipts in duplicate, keeping
one and filing the other in the Water Department’s official records.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-540
§ 52.091 WATER BILLS.
   (A)   Water bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
utility clerk. The Mayor shall direct the collector to charge and collect from
each customer for the amount of the water bill, together with any other
charges, properly itemized, due the Water Department. Bills shall be due on the
first day of each month and payable by the fifteenth of each month. The gross
amount of all bills shall be due after the fifteenth day of each month and no
discount will be allowed. Bills not paid by the fifteenth day of the following
month shall be deemed to be delinquent. Upon being deemed to be delinquent, as
herein defined, the utility clerk shall give a written notice as set forth in §
50.02 to the customer of such delinquency and shall demand payment immediately.
In the event that the bill is not paid within seven days after the sending of
said notice, service may be discontinued at any time.
   (B)   Disconnection of water service shall be made only after 12:00 p.m. on
any business day Monday through Thursday. There shall be no disconnection of
service unless the outside temperature is above 20°F. In the event service has
been disconnected because of a delinquent bill, before service can be restored,
the customer must pay the delinquent bill, the current amount owed and a
reconnection charge. If service is restored prior to 3:00 p.m. on any non-
holiday Monday through Friday, the reconnection fee shall be $50, and if after
3:00 p.m., the reconnection fee shall be $75.
   (C)   If service is reconnected at any time other than as above stated, the
reconnection fee shall be $75. The city shall make no reconnection of water
service after 9:00 p.m. on any day.
(Prior Code, § 6-207) (Ord. 692, passed 4-12-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-542 and 70-1605
§ 52.092 WATER USAGE RATES.
   (A)   All water consumers shall be liable for the monthly base charge and
the monthly usage charge set forth below unless and until the consumer shall,
by written order, direct the city to shut off the water at the stop box, in
which case the consumer shall not be liable thereafter for water service until
the water service is re-established.
      (1)   Residential property inside city limits.
 
Monthly base charge                      $22.50
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $2.50
 
      (2)   Residential users outside city limits.
 
Monthly base charge                      $29.50
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $3.00
 
      (3)   Commercial and industrial users inside or outside of city limits.
 
Monthly base charge                      $33.75
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $3.00
 
   (B)   The rates fixed by this section shall be reviewed periodically by the
City Council and shall be adjusted for the purpose of providing for the payment
of expenses of maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the components
of the water system.
   (C)   Bills for water charges shall be rendered following each month’s usage
and shall become delinquent after the fifteenth of each month. A delinquency
fee of $10 shall be added to any delinquent bill to cover the additional
expenses incurred by the city.
   (D)   The Mayor and City Council members hereby find and determine that the
charges established by this section are just and equitable rates and charges to
be paid to the city by each consumer using the system.
(Prior Code, § 6-208) (Ord. 674, passed 4-4-2015; Ord. 784, passed 1-10-2023;
Ord. 793, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 807, passed 2-13-2024; Ord. 828, passed 12-10-
2024; Ord. 830, passed 1-14-2025)
§ 52.093 WATER TREATMENT CAPITAL FACILITIES CHARGE.
   (A)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for water
services, shall pay to the Water Department a water treatment capital
facilities charge to compensate the city for the expense of providing the
capital facilities needed to process and treat the potable water supply to be
used by the customer.
   (B)   The water treatment capital facilities charges shall be in accordance
with the following schedule.
 
For each acre of commercial or industrial property $3,000
For each acre of park, common area or outlots*     $3,000
For each acre of residential multi-family property $3,300
For each residential, duplex lot                   $1,480
For each residential, single-family lot            $1,100
*Any outlot that is an existing lake will not pay water treatment capital
facilities charges. In the event that a new lake is intentionally created as
part of a new development, the City Council shall determine if water treatment
capital facilities charges will be due for the lake outlot.
 
   (C)   The water treatment capital facilities charge shall be collected by
the City Treasurer at the time of the application for water service, provided
that:
      (1)   Credit shall be given for the amount of prepayment, if any, for the
property being connected; and
      (2)   The applicant furnishes proof of prepayment made on the property
sought to be connected.
   (D)   The water treatment capital facilities charges connection policy for
new subdivisions and developments shall be as follows.
      (1)   The first one-half of the water treatment capital facilities
charges for all residential, commercial and industrial property shall be
collected by the City Clerk/Treasurer from the developer of the subdivision’s
owner prior to the signing of the subdivision’s final plat.
      (2)   The final one-half of the water treatment capital facilities
charges for all residential, commercial and industrial property shall be
collected from the applicant at the time the application for water service is
made.
      (3)   One hundred percent of the water treatment capital facilities
charges for park, common area or outlots shall be collected from the developer
of the subdivision’s owner prior to the signing of the subdivision’s final
plat.
   (E)   The city may consider an alternate method of determining the water
treatment capital facilities charges for commercial and industrial properties
which exceed five acres in size, and where the water demand and impact on the
city’s infrastructure is not commensurate with large land areas needed for the
commercial or industrial entity to function. Examples of large area
requirements would include storage of raw and finished materials or staging of
transportation loading and unloading activities. The alternate calculation
would be based on water main taps needed for fire protection. The alternate
charge system would be as follows:
      (1)   Capital facility charge.
Meter Size Charge
Meter Size      Charge
5/8-inch        $1,100
1/2-inch        $1,650
1-inch          $2,750
1 1/2-inch      $5,500
2-inch disc     $8,800
2-inch turbo    $17,600
3-inch compound $17,600
3-inch turbo    $38,500
 
      (2)   Connection tap charge.
 
Size Tap Charge
4-inch   $1,400
6-inch   $1,600
8-inch   $1,800
 
         (3)   Notes. The above charges would apply to each meter in each
building. The minimum capital facility charge would be $15,000 (i.e., five
acres at $3,000 per acre).
         (4)   Alternative method. The use of the alternative method of
determining water capital facilities charges is not an elective of the
commercial or industrial property and is reserved solely for use by the city if
needed. The implementation of the alternative method and the sizing of meters
and connections to sewer mains will be determined by the City Engineer and City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-209) (Ord. 567, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 572, passed 12-9-2008;
Ord. 658, passed 5-13-2014)
§ 52.094 DEPOSIT.
   (A)   All new applicants for service from the city water system shall be
required to pay a deposit in the amount of $150 to the Water Department before
such water service is supplied. From such deposit, the city may, without
notice, deduct all delinquent water rents or any unpaid claims due to the Water
Department.
   (B)   The Water Department shall refund the water deposit to each water
consumer after a period of not less than one year; provided, that the water
consumer’s account is in good standing.
   (C)   If the water deposit has been refunded after one year and if, anytime
thereafter, the consumer is late paying his or her water charges two
consecutive times, an additional water deposit of $150 will be required by the
city, to be held pursuant to the terms of this section.
   (D)   In the event that a water consumer’s account has not been an account
in good standing at any time during a period of five years or more from the
date of the original deposit, the deposit shall immediately be forfeited to the
city and the water consumer shall not be entitled to a refund.
   (E)   In the event that a water consumer’s account is inactive, no water
service is being provided in connection therewith and, after reasonable
attempts, the water consumer cannot be located, the deposit shall immediately
be forfeited to the city, and the water consumer shall not be entitled to a
refund.
(Prior Code, § 6-210) (Ord. 522, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 745, passed 1-12-2021)
§ 52.095 RENTAL UNIT BILLING.
   (A)   Existing single-family dwelling unit. All single-family dwelling
rental units that have individual meters and curb stops shall be billed
directly to the tenant/resident upon the owner’s request. However, the owner/
landlord is responsible for the collection of the water and sewer deposit fee
and is ultimately responsible for payment of the water and sewer bill. In the
event that the owner/landlord does not pay a delinquent water and sewer bill,
the city shall have the right to place a lien upon the property or pursue any
other remedy available.
   (B)   Existing multi-family dwelling units. Owners/landlords will be
responsible for the payment of the water and sewer base fee and water and sewer
usage fee for each separate living unit, even though there may be only one
meter supplying the multi-family dwelling unit. In the event that the owner/
landlord does not pay a delinquent water and sewer bill, the city shall have
the right to place a lien upon the property or pursue any other remedy
available.
   (C)   Existing duplexes. All existing duplexes that have individual meters
and curb stops for each unit shall be billed directly to the tenant(s) upon the
owner’s/landlord’s request or to the resident owner. In any case, the owner/
landlord is responsible for payment of the deposit fee for each rental unit and
ultimately responsible for the payment of the basic water/sewer fee and water
usage fee for each rental unit. In the event that the owner/landlord does not
pay a delinquent water and sewer bill, the city shall have the right to place a
lien upon the property or pursue any other remedy available.
   (D)   Existing townhome rental units. All existing townhome rental units
that have their own water meters and curb stops shall be billed directly to the
tenant(s) upon request of the owners/landlords. In any case, each owner/
landlord is responsible for the payment of the deposit fee and ultimately
responsible for the payment of the basic water/sewer fee and water usage fee.
In the event that the owner/landlord does not pay a delinquent water and sewer
bill, the city shall have the right to place a lien upon the property or pursue
any other remedy available.
(Prior Code, § 6-211)
§ 52.096 SPECIAL WATER MAIN EXTENSION FEE.
   (A)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for water
service, shall pay to the City Water Department, if required, a special water
main extension fee. The fee shall only be charged to customers seeking to
connect to the municipal water system in areas whose property was not charged,
by way of special assessments, for the benefit of the water extension made in
that district.
   (B)   The amount of the special water main extension fee shall be based upon
the balance of the cost of construction of the water extension improvements not
assessed to other property and apportioned to the applicant according to the
area to be benefited by connection to the system. The entire amount of the
special water main extension fee shall be paid in full before a water
connection shall be approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-222)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Operation and funding
   
53.002   Definitions
   
53.003   Sewer contract not transferable
   
53.004   Connections and extensions
   
53.005   Service to nonresidents
   
53.006   Repair and replacement
   
53.007   Manholes; access; unlawful deposits
   
53.008   Destruction of property
   
53.009   Compliance; inspections; injury liability
Public Sewers Required
   
53.020   Mandatory hook-up
   
53.021   Unlawful discharge of waste
   
53.022   Cesspools, privies and septic tanks prohibited
Building Sewer Installation
   
53.035   Permit required
   
53.036   Procedure
   
53.037   Installation expense; licensed plumber
   
53.038   Plumbing regulations
   
53.039   Plumber’s liability
   
53.040   Single premises
   
53.041   Use of existing sewers
   
53.042   Construction codes
Private Sewage Disposal
   
53.055   When applicable
   
53.056   Permit required
   
53.057   Specifications
   
53.058   Maintenance
   
53.059   Additional requirements
Wastewaters
   
53.070   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, cooling water and process
water
   
53.071   Flammable, toxic, corrosive and obstructive substances
   
53.072   Special prohibitions
   
53.073   City’s discretion
   
53.074   Special exceptions permitted; use fee surcharge
   
53.075   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
53.076   Preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities; maintenance by
owner
   
53.077   Control manholes/sampling stations
Rates and Fees
   
53.090   Classification
   
53.091   Special collection system extension fee
   
53.092   Rate setting; charges; review of rates; appeals
   
53.093   High-strength waste surcharge
   
53.094   Sewage Treatment Works Fund
   
53.095   Sewage processing capital facilities charges
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city owns the sewer system and operates the same through an operations
and maintenance agreement with PeopleService, Inc. The City Council, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the management and maintenance of the sewer
system, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by
state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the
tax shall be known as the Sewer Maintenance Fund and shall remain in the
custody of the City Treasurer. The Council shall by ordinance set the rates to
be charged. A copy of the rates shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 6-301)
§ 53.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at
20°C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE SEWER. The extension from the building drain to its
connection with the main sewer.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer that receives both surface runoff and sewage.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   LOCAL VENTILATING PIPE. Any pipe through which foul air is removed from a
room or fixture.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PLUMBING FIXTURES. Receptacles intended to receive and discharge water or
water-carried wastes into the sewer system with which they are connected.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWER SYSTEM or SEWERAGE FACILITIES. All facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds more than
five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes.
   SOIL PIPE. Any pipe which conveys the discharge of water closets with or
without the discharge from other fixtures to the house or building drain.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension, in water, sewage or other liquids, and are removable by laboratory
filtering.
   TRAP. A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of air or
gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of sewage or waste
through it.
   TRAP SEAL. The vertical distance between the crown weir and the dip of the
trap.
   VENT PIPE. Any pipe provided to ventilate a house or building drainage
system and to prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
   WASTE PIPE. Any pipe which receives the discharge of any fixture, except
water closets and conveys the same to the house drain, soil pipe or waste
stack.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs
either continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 6-302)
§ 53.003 SEWER CONTRACT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   The city, through the Sewer Department, shall furnish sewer services
to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in
which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid. The rules, regulations
and sewer rental rates in this chapter shall be considered a part of every
application hereafter made for sewer service and the contract between every
customer now or hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of an
application on the part of any applicant or the use of sewer service by present
customers shall constitute a contract between the customer and the city, to
which said contract both parties are bound.
   (B)   Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing
to move from one location to another in the city shall make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any customer shall sell, dispose of or move from
the premises where service is furnished, or if the premises are destroyed by
fire or other casualty, he or she shall at once inform the city, who shall
cause the sewer service to be shut off from the premises. If the customer
should fail to give notice, he or she shall be charged for that period of time
until the city is otherwise advised of such circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 6-303)
§ 53.004 CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The city shall approve all connections and extensions to its sanitary
sewer system. The city shall determine the capacity of all existing public
sewers and the suitability of new connections and shall approve the capacity,
sizing and routing of all new public sewers proposed for connection or
extension to the sanitary sewer system. The city shall also determine the
service area of all trunk and interceptor sewers and may require oversizing of
any sewer to accommodate future projected growth.
   (B)   The city may extend its sanitary sewer system into unserved areas in
accordance with all available statutory procedures, including the establishment
of sanitary sewer extension districts. The city shall levy special assessments
for the cost of said extensions upon property specially benefited by the sewer
extension.
   (C)   The city may allow a private development or entity to extend the city
sanitary sewer system into unserved areas. Any such extension shall be in
accordance with approval by the city and the State Department of Environmental
Quality. The city shall approve all sewer extension main sizes, including
oversizing as determined solely by the city. The costs of the extension shall
be borne by the private development or entity. Upon completion and final
acceptance, the extension shall become the property of the city. No pioneering
rights or provisions to recoup any portion of the costs of the extension shall
be granted or allowed for the private development or entity making the
extension.
(Prior Code, § 6-307)
§ 53.005 SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS.
   (A)   Any person whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of
the city and who desires to install a house or building sewer that will be
connected with the city sewer system shall file a written application with the
City Clerk for a permit for such connection, setting forth the name of the
owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, the use to which the property is
devoted and such other information as the city may require.
   (B)   The City Council may approve or deny such application in its absolute
discretion. If the Council approves the application, it may do so by attaching
to such approval whatever conditions it determines necessary.
(Prior Code, § 6-308)
§ 53.006 REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The Sewer Department may require the owner of any property which is
within the city and connected to the public sewers or drains to repair or
replace any connection line which serves the owner’s property and is broken,
clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The property owner’s
duty to repair or replace such a connection line shall include those portions
upon the owner’s property and those portions upon public property or easements
up to and including the point of junction with the public main.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such connection
line. If within 30 days of mailing such notice the property owner fails or
neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the city may cause
such work to be done and assess the cost upon the property served by such
connection.
(Prior Code, § 6-325)
§ 53.007 MANHOLES; ACCESS; UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Entrance into a manhole or other opening for any purpose except by
authorized persons is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
receptacle connected with the sewer system any substance which is not the usual
and natural waste carried by the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 6-326) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.008 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the city sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 6-327) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.009 COMPLIANCE; INSPECTIONS; INJURY LIABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   The duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing of the sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   The city shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   The duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on the private property of any
company, the duly authorized employees or agents of the city shall observe all
safety rules established by said company which are applicable to the premises.
The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to any city employees or
agents, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by city employees or agents and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
(Prior Code, § 6-342)
PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 53.020 MANDATORY HOOK-UP.
   (A)   Upon written notice by the city, the property owner, occupant or
lessee of any premises within 300 feet of any sewer main shall cause the
building to be connected with the sewer system and equipped with inside
sewerage facilities. Every building hereafter erected shall be connected with
the sewer system at the time of its construction.
   (B)   In the event that any property owner, occupant or lessee shall
neglect, fail or refuse to make connection with the city sewer system within a
period of ten days after notice to do so has been given by registered mail or
by publication in a newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, the
City Council shall have the power to cause the same to be done, to assess the
cost thereof against the property and to collect the assessment thus made in
the manner provided for collection of other special taxes and assessments.
(Prior Code, § 6-304)
§ 53.021 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any sewage or other polluted waters to any
natural outlet within the city or within one mile of the corporate limits
thereof, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-305) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.022 CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in §§
53.055 through
53.059, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
(Prior Code, § 6-306) Penalty, see §
53.999
BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION
§ 53.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person wishing to connect with the sewer system shall make application
to the City Clerk. In the event the building to be connected is new
construction, the application shall be a combined application for utility
service and a building permit. If the building is already in existence, the
applicant shall be required to submit a separate application for connection of
the sewer and/or water service. The City Clerk may require any applicant to
make a service deposit in such amount as he or she deems necessary, subject to
the review of the City Council. Sewer service may not be supplied to any house
or building except upon application and acceptance of city water service and
upon the order of the city. The Department shall not supply sewer service to
any person outside the corporate limits without special permission from the
City Council; provided, that the entire cost of pipe and other installation
charges shall be paid by such consumer.
(Prior Code, § 6-317)
§ 53.036 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose
of installing pipe or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth must be
removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to
the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an
excavation made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any time without a
barricade. After service pipes are laid, the streets, alleys and sidewalks
shall be restored to good condition. If the excavation in any street, alley or
sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the city
shall have the duty to finish or correct the work and all expenses so incurred
shall be charged to the consumer.
   (B)   All installations or repairs of pipes require two inspections by the
city. The first inspection shall be made when connections or repairs are
completed and before the pipes are covered. The second inspection shall be made
after the dirt work is completed and the service is restored. It is the
consumer’s responsibility to notify the city at the time the work is ready for
each inspection. All installation shall be done under the supervision of and
strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications
prescribed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-318)
§ 53.037 INSTALLATION EXPENSE; LICENSED PLUMBER.
   (A)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for sewer
service, shall pay to the Sewer Department a sewer connection processing and
inspection fee to compensate the city for the expense of processing the
application and inspecting the connection between the applicant’s private
building sewer and the city’s public sewer main. The customer shall, in
addition to the processing and inspection fee, arrange for and pay for all
costs of the work and materials to make the connection. Such connection work
shall only be made by a licensed plumber.
   (B)   The sewer connection processing and inspection fee shall be $300 per
connection.
(Prior Code, § 6-319)
§ 53.038 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:
      (1)   Engage in or conduct the business of sewer connection and house
drainage;
      (2)   Excavate a trench for any sewer pipe;
      (3)   Open, uncover or in any manner make connection with or lay any
sewer drain; or
      (4)   Attach to, modify or repair any appurtenances without complying
with the rules and regulations of the city.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to persons, firms or
corporations under special contract with the city for the construction,
extension or repair of the city sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 6-320) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.039 PLUMBER’S LIABILITY.
   The licensed plumber who connects with the public sewer shall be held
responsible for any damage to the sewers or the public ways and property. He or
she shall restore all streets that he or she has excavated and make good any
settlement of the ground or pavement caused by such excavation to the complete
satisfaction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-321)
§ 53.040 SINGLE PREMISES.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway.
   (B)   The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not
and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection.
(Prior Code, § 6-322)
§ 53.041 USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found to meet all requirements of this chapter upon examination and
testing by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-323)
§ 53.042 CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in the
A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city
before installation.
(Prior Code, § 6-324)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 53.055 WHEN APPLICABLE.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
53.020, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter. At such time as a public
sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal
system, as provided in herein, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer within 60 days in compliance with this chapter. Any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 6-328)
§ 53.056 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required; application. Before commencement of construction of a
private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as is deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee
shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 6-329)
   (B)   When effective; inspections. A permit for a private sewage disposal
system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the city or its agent, who shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24
hours of the receipt of notice by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-330)
§ 53.057 SPECIFICATIONS.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Health.
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities when the area of the lot is less than
10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 6-331)
§ 53.058 MAINTENANCE.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-332)
§ 53.059 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in §§
53.055 through
53.058 shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by the health officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-333)
WASTEWATERS
§ 53.070 STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER, GROUNDWATER, COOLING WATER AND PROCESS
WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage including interior
and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated heating or cooling water or
unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
water may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6-334) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.071 FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, including, but not
limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to
the public sewer;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 6-335) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.072 SPECIAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
judgment of the city or its agent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance. The city or its agent, in forming a judgment as to the acceptability
of these wastes, will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F (0° and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor with three-fourths’
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by city for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues; or of
dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions;
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters;
      (10)   Sand, mud, metal, rags, paper, whole blood, paunch manure, hair or
fleshings, entrails or other solid capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer system or injure the sewage
treatment process;
      (11)   Toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to interfere
with or injure the sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans,
animals or fish or create any hazard in the receiving area of the sewage
treatment plant;
      (12)   Suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual
attention or expense is required to handle such materials;
      (13)   Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having other corrosive properties capable of causing damage to the structures,
equipment and personnel of the City Sewer Department;
      (14)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (15)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or explosive liquid,
solid or gas;
      (16)   Any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) greater than 300 parts per million by weight; containing more than 350
parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or having an average daily
flow greater than 2% of the average sewage flow of the city shall be subject to
review. Where necessary in the opinion of the city or its agent, the owner
shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million by weight; reduce the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or control the quantities
and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and
other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city, and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in
writing; and
      (17)   Any interior and exterior foundation drains and cooling water.
(Prior Code, § 6-336) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.073 CITY’S DISCRETION.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
53.072 and which, in the judgment of the city or its agent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
53.074.
   (B)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city or its agent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-337)
§ 53.074 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED; USE FEE SURCHARGE.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 6-338)
§ 53.075 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
judgment of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
or its agent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-339)
§ 53.076 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY
OWNER.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 6-340)
§ 53.077 CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS.
   (A)   When required by the city or its agent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the city. Such manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of any
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
(Prior Code, § 6-341)
RATES AND FEES
§ 53.090 CLASSIFICATION.
   The City Council may classify the customers of the Sewer Department for the
purpose of establishing rental fees; provided, that such classifications are
reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any consumer or group of
consumers.
(Prior Code, § 6-310)
§ 53.091 SPECIAL COLLECTION SYSTEM EXTENSION FEE.
   (A)   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for sewer
service, shall pay a special collection system extension fee to the City Sewer
Department, if required. Such fee shall be charged only to customers seeking to
connect to the municipal sewer system in areas whose property was not included
within a previously created Sanitary Sewer Extension District and was not
charged by way of special assessments for the benefit of the sanitary sewer
extension made in that District.
   (B)   The amount of the special collection system extension fee shall be
based on the balance of the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer
extension improvements not assessed to other property and apportioned to the
applicant according to the area to be benefited by the connection to the
system. The entire amount of the special collection system extension fee shall
be paid in full before a sewer connection shall be approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-309)
§ 53.092 RATE SETTING; CHARGES; REVIEW OF RATES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL. Customers, except small business, residential, institutional
and industrial, using 10,000 gallons or more per month of metered water.
      INDUSTRIAL. Customers engaged in manufacturing of goods or products.
      INSTITUTIONAL. Schools, nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
      RESIDENTIAL. Single-family units, individual apartments, duplex units,
multi-family units and individual mobile home units.
      SMALL BUSINESS. Customers, except residential, institutional and
industrial, using 10,000  gallons or less per month of metered water.
(Prior Code, § 6-311)
   (B)   Charges; review of rates; appeals.
      (1)   Customers, as defined in division (A) above, of the Sewer
Department shall be charged the following monthly base charge and the monthly
usage charge for the use of sewer services.
         (a)   Residential and small business.
 
Monthly base charge                      $42.25
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $6.50
 
         (b)   Institutional and commercial.
 
Monthly base charge                      $86.75
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $6.50
 
         (c)   Industrial.
 
Monthly base charge                      $173.25
Monthly usage charge (per 1,000 gallons) $6.50
 
      (2)   For residential and small business customers inside and outside the
city limits, the monthly charge for the 12-month period beginning with the
March 31 invoice each year shall be computed from average water consumption
during the preceding months of December, January and February for that property
based on water meter readings. Until consumptive history is properly
established, the pre-charge shall be based on a predetermined monthly average
residential and small business water usage of similar type.
      (3)   Institutional and commercial users shall have their monthly sewer
charges based on actual water consumption for each month, based on water meter
readings. Industrial users shall have their monthly sewer charges based on
metered readings.
      (4)   The rates fixed by this section shall be reviewed periodically by
the City Council and shall be adjusted for the purpose of providing for the
payment of expenses of maintenance, operation and repair of the sewer system.
      (5)   A water metered customer who has had a water leak, causing heavy
usage during the rate setting months, may with proper documentation, appeal to
the City Administrator for a rate adjustment within 60 days after the April
billing. The City Administrator, Utility Billing Clerk and an appointed Council
member will meet with the customer and review the customer usage history to
determine if a rate adjustment is warranted. A rate adjustment would defer to
the prior year’s rate, or the rate of the average customer/household of the
customer’s size whichever is lower. The customer will be informed of the
decision in writing. The new rate will become effective with the next month’s
billing. A listing of rate adjustments will be provided to the Mayor and City
Council periodically.
      (6)   Bills for sewer charges shall be rendered following each month’s
usage and shall become delinquent after the fifteenth of each month. A
delinquency fee of $10 shall be added to any delinquent bill to cover the
additional expenses incurred by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-312)
(Ord. 562, passed 4-8-2008; Ord. 565, passed 8-12-2008; Ord. 621, passed 4-12-
2011; Ord. 645; passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 675, passed 4-4-2015; Ord. 691, passed 4-
12-2016; Ord. 789, passed 4-11-2023; Ord. 793, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 808,
passed 2-13-2024; Ord. 828, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 53.093 HIGH-STRENGTH WASTE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Customers of the Sewer Department shall be assessed a high-strength
waste surcharge for pollutant levels as a minimum, BOD and suspended solids,
which exceed the levels contained in the domestic strength wastewater of the
service area of the sewage treatment works.
   (B)   The following discharge concentrations for BOD and suspended solids
above which the surcharge shall be assessed and a formula for calculation of
such surcharge shall be as follows.
SC=/Bu (Bi - Bn) + Su (Si - Sn) + Ru (Ri - Rn) x 8.34 x V
   Concentration of BOD discharged from user during billing period, mg/l (this
Bi shall be an average over the billing period unless high-strength slugs add
   to OM&R expense)
Bn BOD concentration limit for surcharge, 200 mg/l
Bu OM&R costs to treat per unit of BOD, $0.089 per pound
Ri Concentration of additional substance discharged from user during billing
   period, mg/l
   Additional substance concentration limit for surcharge, 0 mg/l (this will be
Rn established upon the introduction of any additional substance to the plant
   influent)
   OM&R cost to treat per unit of any additional substance adding to expense to
Ru operate treatment works, $0/lb. (this will be established upon the
   introduction of any additional substance to the plant influent)
SC High-strength waste surcharge, $/billing period
   Concentrations of SS discharged from user during billing period, mg/l (this
Si shall be an average over the billing period unless high-strength slugs add
   to OM&R expense)
Sn SS concentration limit for surcharge, 250 mg/l
Su OM&R cost to treat per unit of SS, $0.068 per pound
V  Volume discharged from user during billing period, million gallons
The formula herein provided shall read:
SC = /0.089 (Bi - 200) + 0.068 (Si - 250)/ x 8.34 x V
 
(Prior Code, § 6-313)
§ 53.094 SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS FUND.
   (A)   All amounts billed and collected for sewage service from all users
shall be segregated in a separate fund designated as the Sewage Treatment Works
Fund, and amounts within such Fund shall be credited to said accounts. Within
this Fund, there are hereby established three accounts: Sewage Works Operation
and Maintenance Account; Sewage Treatment Replacement Account; and Sewage
Treatment Works Debt Service Retirement Account.
      (1)   Sewage Treatment Works Operation and Maintenance Account. Fifty-
four and one-half percent of all amounts credited to the Sewage Treatment Works
Fund shall be designated for this Account and used only for the purpose of
paying the costs of the operation, maintenance and administration of the sewage
treatment works of the city, including any minor replacements to the system not
otherwise provided for in the Sewage Treatment Works Replacement Account.
      (2)   Sewage Treatment Works Replacement Account. Fifteen and fourteen
hundredth percent of all amounts credited to the Sewage Treatment Works Fund
shall be designated for this Account and shall be used only to meet the
replacement needs of the treatment works, including any necessary upgrading in
the process of replacements to the sewage treatment works. Credits to this
Account from the Sewage Treatment Works Fund shall be made at least annually.
      (3)   Sewage Treatment Works Debt Service Retirement Account. Thirty and
eighty-one hundredths percent of all amounts credited to the Sewage Treatment
Works Fund shall be designated for this Account and shall be used only to meet
the debt service retirement requirements of the treatment works. Credit to this
Account from the Sewage Treatment Works Fund shall be made not less than
annually.
   (B)   Should a balance remain in any account within the Sewage Treatment
Works Fund after payment of the items hereinbefore provided, then said balance
shall be carried over within the same account and used for the same purposes in
the following year. Transfers of funds to meet temporary shortages in any
account within this Fund shall be returned to the appropriate accounts
following an adjustment in the user charge for operation and maintenance,
replacement and debt service retirement.
(Prior Code, § 6-315)
§ 53.095 SEWAGE PROCESSING CAPITAL FACILITIES CHARGES.
   (A)   Every customer, upon approval of his or her application for sewer
service, shall pay to the Sewer Department a sewage processing capital
facilities charge to compensate the city for the expense of providing the
capital facilities needed to process and treat the sewage generated by the
customer.
   (B)   The sewage processing capital facilities charges shall be in
accordance with the following schedule.
 
For each acre of commercial or industrial property $3,600
For each acre of park, common area or outlots*     $3,000
For each acre of residential multi-family property $3,900
For each residential, duplex lot                   $1,780
For each residential, single-family lot            $1,300
*Any outlot that is an existing lake will not pay sewer processing capital
facilities charges. In the event that a new lake is intentionally created as
part of a new development, the City Council shall determine if sewer treatment
capital facilities charges will be due for the lake outlot.
 
   (C)   The sewage processing capital facilities fee shall be collected by the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer at the time of the application for sewer
service, provided that:
      (1)   Credit shall be given for the amount of prepayment, if any, for the
property being connected; and
      (2)   The applicant furnishes proof of the prepayment made on the
property sought to be connected.
   (D)   The sewage processing capital facilities charges connection policy for
new subdivisions and developments shall be as follows.
      (1)   The first one-half of the sewage processing capital facilities
charges for all residential, commercial and industrial property shall be
collected by the City Clerk/Treasurer from the developer of the subdivision’s
owner prior to the signing of the subdivision’s final plat.
      (2)   The final one-half of the sewage processing capital facilities
charges for all residential, commercial and industrial property shall be
collected from the applicant at the time the application for water service is
made.
      (3)   One hundred percent of the sewage processing capital facilities
charges for park, common area or outlots shall be collected from the developer
of the subdivision’s owner prior to the signing of the subdivision’s final
plat.
   (E)   (1)   The city may consider an alternate method of determining the
sewage processing capital facilities charges for commercial and industrial
properties which exceed five acres in size, and where the sewer demand and
impact on the city’s infrastructure is not commensurate with large land areas
needed for the commercial or industrial entity to function. Examples of large
area requirements would include storage of raw and finished materials or
staging of transportation loading and unloading activities. The alternate
calculation would be based on water meter sizing and size of sewer main taps to
serve the entity.
      (2)   The alternate charge system would be as follows:
         (a)   Capital facility charge.
Meter Size Charge
Meter Size      Charge
5/8-inch        $1,300
3/4-inch        $1,950
1-inch          $3,250
1-1/2-inch      $6,500
2-inch disc     $10,400
2-inch turbo    $20,800
3-inch compound $20,800
3-inch turbo    $45,500
 
         (b)   Connection tap charge.
 
Meter Size   Charge
Up to 4-inch $1,400
6-inch       $1,600
8-inch       $1,800
 
         (c)   Notes.
            1.   The above charges would apply to each building where sanitary
sewer wastes are generated.
            2.   The minimum capital facility charge would be $19,000 (i.e.,
five acres at $3,600 per acre).
         (d)   Alternative method. The use of the alternative method of
determining sewage processing facilities charges is not an elective of the
commercial or industrial property and is reserved solely for the use by the
city if needed. The implementation of the alternative method and the sizing of
meters and connections to sewer mains will be determined by the City Engineer
and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-316) (Ord. 567, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 568, passed 10-28-
2008; Ord. 659, passed 5-13-2014)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the terms and conditions of any of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a sum of not more
than $500 for each offense. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-501)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Enforcement of rules and laws
   
70.03   Failure or refusal to obey order
   
70.04   Traffic officers
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   State Rules of the Road, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-601
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions and the other
definitions in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-606 through 60-676 shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-607)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Such fire department vehicles, police
vehicles, rescue vehicles and ambulances as are publicly owned, such other
publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated by the Director of Motor
Vehicles, and such publicly owned military vehicles of the National Guard as
are designated by the Adjutant General pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 55-133.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-610)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations or public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet
of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of a highway.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-613)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road,
avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-624)
   MANUAL. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the
Department of Transportation pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,118.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-631)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails,
except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by persons who are disabled
and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-638)
   PEACE OFFICER. The Police Chief or other chief law enforcement official, any
city police officer or any other person authorized to enforce city ordinances.
With respect to directing traffic only, PEACE OFFICER shall also include any
person authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-646)
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-654)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two
or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-656)
   SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE. The area of a roadway designated to the public by the
state Department of Transportation or City Council as a school crossing zone
through the use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the City
Council in conformity with the Manual but does not include any area of a
freeway. A SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE starts at the location of the first sign or
traffic control device identifying the school crossing zone and continues until
a sign or traffic control device indicates that the SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE has
ended.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-658.01)
   SHOULDER. The part of the highway contiguous to the roadway and designed for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and for lateral
support of the base and surface courses of the roadway.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-661)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-669)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking or other device not
inconsistent with the State Rules of the Road placed or erected by authority of
the City Council or any official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-670)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any signal, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-671)
   TRAFFIC INFRACTION. The violation of any provision of the State Rules of the
Road or of any law, ordinance, order, rule or regulation regulating traffic
which is not otherwise declared to be a misdemeanor or a felony or, in this
title, an offense.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-672)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved solely by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-676)
§ 70.02 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND LAWS.
   (A)   All peace officers are hereby specifically directed and authorized and
it shall be deemed and considered a part of the official duties of each of such
officers to enforce the provisions of State Rules of the Road and this title,
including the specific enforcement of maximum speed limits, and any other state
or city law regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways.
   (B)   To perform the official duties imposed by this section, peace officers
shall have the power:
      (1)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any of the provisions of the Motor Vehicle
Operator’s License Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-489 or this title or of any
other law regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways, if
and when designated or called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (2)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any provision of the laws of this state relating
to misdemeanors or felonies or of similar city ordinances if and when
designated or called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (3)   At all times to direct all traffic in conformity with law or, in
the event of a fire or other emergency, or in order to expedite traffic or
ensure safety, to direct traffic as conditions may require;
      (4)   When in uniform, to require the driver of a vehicle to stop and
exhibit his or her operator’s license and registration certificate issued for
the vehicle and submit to an inspection of such vehicle and the license plates
and registration certificate for the vehicle and to require the driver of a
motor vehicle to present the vehicle within five days for correction of any
defects revealed by such motor vehicle inspection as may lead the inspecting
officer to reasonably believe that such motor vehicle is being operated in
violation of the statutes of the state, the rules and regulations of the
Director of Motor Vehicles or any city ordinance or regulation;
      (5)   To inspect any vehicle of a type required to be registered
according to law in any public garage or repair shop or in any place where such
a vehicle is held for sale or wrecking;
      (6)   To serve warrants relating to the enforcement of the laws
regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways; and
      (7)   To investigate traffic accidents for the purpose of carrying on a
study of traffic accidents and enforcing motor vehicle and highway safety laws.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-683)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Act, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-462
§ 70.03 FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO OBEY ORDER.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly fails or refuses to obey any lawful order of
any peace officer who is controlling or directing traffic shall be guilty of a
traffic infraction.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly fails to obey any lawful order of a peace
officer shall be guilty of an offense whenever such order is given in
furtherance of the apprehension of a person who has violated the State Rules of
the Road or this title or of a person whom such officer reasonably believes has
violated the Rules or this title.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,110) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
   The City Council or the city police may at any time detail officers, to be
known as “traffic officers,” at street intersections. All traffic officers
shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at the
intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the
movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any order or signal of any such traffic officer
notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or signal device that may have
been placed at any such intersection.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this title for which no other penalty is imposed shall, upon conviction, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined in a sum of not more than $500 for
each offense. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-501)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Truck routes
   
71.02   Engine brakes prohibited
   
71.03   Turning generally; U-turns
   
71.04   Right-of-way generally; emergency vehicles
   
71.05   Position of vehicle on highway
   
71.06   Signs; signals
   
71.07   Stop signs
   
71.08   Signs; unauthorized display
   
71.09   Interference with traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals
Prohibitions and Enforcement
   
71.20   Speed; electronic detector
   
71.21   Careless driving
   
71.22   Reckless driving
   
71.23   Backing
   
71.24   Stops; mandatory
   
71.25   Unnecessary stopping
   
71.26   Driving abreast
   
71.27   Following distance
   
71.28   Funeral processions
   
71.29   Glass; pointed objects
   
71.30   Littering
   
71.31   Crowding; front seat
   
71.32   Riding outside vehicle
   
71.33   Clinging to motor vehicles
   
71.34   Driving in sidewalk space
   
71.35   Vehicle; muffler
   
71.36   Emergency regulations
   
71.37   Vehicle loads
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a TRUCK shall be defined as a motor
vehicle that is designated, used or maintained primarily for the transportation
of property and having a gross vehicle weight of 20,000 pounds or more.
   (B)   The City Council may by resolution designate certain streets in the
city that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of
such a truck to travel on streets other than those so designated except to pick
up or deliver goods, wares or merchandise, and in such events, the operator of
such vehicle shall return to such truck routes as soon as possible in traveling
through or about the city. The City Council shall cause notices to be posted or
shall erect signs indicating the streets so designated as restricted routes.
(Prior Code, § 3-102) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to make or cause
to be made loud or disturbing noises with any mechanical device operated by
compressed air and used for purposes of assisting braking on any semi-tractor;
provided, however, that it shall be permitted to use engine brakes in an
emergency situation. Proper notices shall be posted by the city notifying the
public of such prohibition.
(Prior Code, § 3-103) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 TURNING GENERALLY; U-TURNS.
   (A)   Turning; U-turns. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the
opposite direction except at a street intersection or other designated area. No
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any
intersection where a sign is posted indicating that U-turns are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)
   (B)   Turning; signals. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 50 feet traveled by any
vehicle before turning. The signals herein required shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by a signal device of a type approved by the
Department of Roads.
(Prior Code, § 3-105)
   (C)   Turning; generally. Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting
street shall approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the
right-hand side of the street and must turn the corner as near the right-hand
curb as possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the
intersection of the two streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to
the left shall approach the centerline of the street and in turning shall pass
as near as possible to the center of the intersection, passing as closely as
practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For
the purpose of this section, the CENTER OF THE INTERSECTION shall mean the
meeting point of the medial lines of the highways intersecting one another.
(Prior Code, § 3-106)
   (D)   Turning; caution. The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping,
turning or changing the course of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient
space to make such movement in safety. If any pedestrian might be affected by
such movement, the operator shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the
horn, and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such
movement, he or she shall give some other unmistakable signal to the driver of
all other vehicles of the intention to make such movement.
(Prior Code, § 3-107)
§ 71.04 RIGHT-OF-WAY GENERALLY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles
intersect and there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a
law enforcement officer stationed at the intersection. The driver of a vehicle
intending to turn to the left within an intersection, or into an alley, private
road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver of a vehicle entering a city
street from a private road or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on such streets.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way
to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk or at
any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on
any sidewalk. Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other than a
pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or intersection shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles upon the street.
(Prior Code, § 3-108)
   (B)   Emergency vehicles. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency
vehicle signaling an emergency by lights and/or siren, all vehicles within one
block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately stop unless they
are on or crossing a street intersection, in which event such vehicles shall
drive clear of the street intersection and then stop. All vehicles along the
route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a position as near
the right-hand curb as possible and remain there until such authorized
emergency vehicle has passed.
(Prior Code, § 3-109)
§ 71.05 POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Generally. Upon all highways of sufficient width, the driver of a
vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing or
meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one-half of the
main traveled portion of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-110)
   (B)   Passing. A vehicle shall not be driven to the left of the centerline
of the highway in overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and free from oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be
made in safety.
(Prior Code, § 3-111)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 SIGNS; SIGNALS.
   The City Council may by resolution provide for the placing of stop signs,
restricted parking or other signs, signals, standards or mechanical devices in
any street or alley for the purpose of regulating or prohibiting traffic and
parking thereon. Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or
alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited, the regulation or
prohibition, the location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical
device shall be placed and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall
be effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with such regulation or prohibition. The placement of any such
regulatory sign shall be prima facie evidence of the restricting resolution.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 STOP SIGNS.
   Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign
erected in accordance with ordinances prescribed heretofore, cause such vehicle
to come to a complete stop with the front wheels of said vehicle parallel with
said stop sign.
(Prior Code, § 3-116)
§ 71.08 SIGNS; UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon or in view
of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be, is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign,
signal or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police
officer is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed,
without notice.
(Prior Code, § 3-124) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any traffic control device, any railroad
sign or signal or any part of such a device, sign or signal.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,129) Penalty, see §
70.99
PROHIBITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 71.20 SPEED; ELECTRONIC DETECTOR.
   (A)   The speed of any motor vehicle within the city may be determined by
the use of radio microwaves or other electronic device. The results of such
determinations shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such
motor vehicle in any court or legal proceedings where the speed of the motor
vehicle is at issue.
   (B)   The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant
under the authority herein granted if the arresting officer is in uniform or
displays his or her badge of authority; provided, that such officer shall have
observed the recording of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio
microwaves or other electronic device, or had received a radio message from the
officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle recorded by the radio
microwaves or other electronic device.
   (C)   In the event of an arrest based on such a message, such radio message
must have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle was
recorded and must include a description of the vehicle and the recorded speed.
(Prior Code, § 3-125)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,192
§ 71.21 CARELESS DRIVING.
   No person shall operate a vehicle on any highway, street or alley within the
city in such a manner as to endanger the safety of others, disregard the
property of others and/or cause immoderate wear and damage to any street or
alley. Any person so operating a motor vehicle within the city limits shall be
deemed guilty of careless driving. It shall be prima facie evidence that a
person has operated a motor vehicle in a careless manner if he or she has
operated such vehicle in a manner contrary to the duly published rules and
regulations of the State Department of Roads governing the use of state
highways.
(Prior Code, § 3-126) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.22 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)    Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such manner as to indicate
an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall
be deemed to be guilty of reckless driving.
(Prior Code, § 3-127)
   (B)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate
a willful disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be deemed to be
guilty of willful, reckless driving and shall be punished as provided by
statute.
(Prior Code, § 3-128)
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-6,213 and 60-6,214 through 60-
6,218
§ 71.23 BACKING.
   Before backing, ample warning shall be given and, while backing, unceasing
vigilance must be exercised not to injure those behind. The driver of a parked
vehicle about to back shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 3-112)
§ 71.24 STOPS; MANDATORY.
   (A)   All vehicles, before crossing a sidewalk or emerging from a garage,
alley, gas station or other place shall come to a complete stop and, after
giving sufficient warning, shall proceed slowly and with extreme caution while
crossing such sidewalk or leaving such garage, alley, gas station or other
place.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, SLOWLY shall be construed to mean
such rate of speed as is reasonable and proper under the circumstances and the
condition of the street and traffic thereon.
(Prior Code, § 3-114)
§ 71.25 UNNECESSARY STOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public street
or alley other than in permitted parking areas, except when such stop is
necessary due to emergency, to comply with traffic control devices and
regulations or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 3-117) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.26 DRIVING ABREAST.
   Two or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing or when
traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; provided, that motorcycles may be
driven no more than two abreast in a single lane.
(Prior Code, § 3-134)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-6,139 and 60-6,308
§ 71.27 FOLLOWING DISTANCE.
   (A)   Generally. The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicles and the amount of traffic and condition of the street.
(Prior Code, § 3-120)
   (B)   Fire apparatus. No driver of any vehicle shall follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive
into or park such vehicle within the block where said fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 3-121)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,183
§ 71.28 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral possession or cortege, except
ambulances, police vehicles or Fire Department vehicles when responding to
emergency calls; vehicles carrying United States mail; or with the permission
of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 3-119)
§ 71.29 GLASS; POINTED OBJECTS.
   No person shall throw, cast, lay or place upon any street any thorns, nails,
tacks, glass, bottles, window glass or other articles made of or containing
glass; and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any
street, the owner or person in charge of such glass or the person responsible
for such breakage shall at once remove or cause the same to be removed from the
street.
(Prior Code, § 3-122) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.30 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in a motor vehicle to drop or cause to
be left upon any city highway, street or alley, except at places designated by
the City Council, any rubbish, debris or waste, and any person so doing shall
be guilty of littering.
(Prior Code, § 3-133) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.31 CROWDING; FRONT SEAT.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is
in the front such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the
driver’s control over such vehicle. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in
such a position as to interfere with the driver’s control over such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-136) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.32 RIDING OUTSIDE VEHICLE.
   No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board, hood,
top or fenders of any motor vehicle, nor shall any person ride on the running
board, hood, top or fenders of any motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-135) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.33 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, roller skates, coaster, sled, skis or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon
any roadway, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to permit
any person traveling upon any bicycle, roller skates, coaster, sled, skis or
toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her bicycle,
roller skates, coaster, sled, skis or toy vehicle to such vehicle so driven and
operated by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 3-404) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,316
§ 71.34 DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE.
   No motor vehicle, including motorcycles or scooters, shall be driven on any
sidewalk or within any sidewalk space, except on a permanent or temporary
driveway and except for snow removal purposes.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,178
§ 71.35 VEHICLE; MUFFLER.
   Every motor vehicle operated within this city shall be provided with a
muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise. It shall
be unlawful to use a “muffler cut-out” on any motor vehicle upon any streets;
provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 3-137) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.36 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   The city police are hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 3-129)
§ 71.37 VEHICLE LOADS.
   (A)   Loads; projecting. When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner
that any portion of the load extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the
bed or the body of such vehicles, a red flag shall be exhibited by day and a
red light after sunset on such load.
(Prior Code, § 3-138)
   (B)   Loads; spilling. All vehicles used for carrying coal, earth, sand,
gravel, rock, asphalt, tar or any similar substance shall be so constructed as
to prevent the sifting or spilling of any of the contents.
(Prior Code, § 3-139)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Regulation or prohibition authorized
   
72.02   Roadway outside business or residential district
   
72.03   General prohibitions; exceptions
   
72.04   Parking near schools and theaters
   
72.05   Obstructing street, intersection or entrance
   
72.06   Intersections
   
72.07   Parking on left side of curb
   
72.08   Alleys
   
72.09   Truck parking, loading and unloading
   
72.10   Parking of detached trucks or trailers
   
72.11   Display or repair of vehicle
   
72.12   Time limits
   
72.13   Snow; weather emergencies; highway maintenance
   
72.14   Parallel, angle and center parking
   
72.15   Backing freight vehicle to curb
   
72.16   Painting of curbs
   
72.17   Removal of illegally stopped vehicles; liability for costs
Parking for Handicapped or Disabled Persons
   
72.30   Definitions
   
72.31   Designation of on-street parking spaces; display of permits
   
72.32   Designation of off-street parking stalls or spaces
   
72.33   Permit issuance
   
72.34   Motor vehicle permit issuance
   
72.35   Removal of unauthorized vehicles
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 REGULATION OR PROHIBITION AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The City Council, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction and
within the reasonable exercise of the police power, may regulate or prohibit
stopping, standing or parking.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-680)
   (B)   If the City Council regulates or prohibits stopping, standing or
parking all vehicles or a particular kind or class of vehicles on a highway or
a portion of a highway, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle subject
to such regulation or prohibition on the highway or portion thereof longer than
a period of time necessary to load and unload freight or passengers.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 ROADWAY OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon a roadway outside of a business or residential
district when it is practicable to stop, park or leave such vehicle off such
part of a highway, but in any event an unobstructed width of the roadway
opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a
distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway. Such parking,
stopping or standing shall in no event exceed 24 hours.
   (B)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on a freeway
except in areas designated or unless so directed by a peace officer, except
that when a vehicle is disabled or inoperable or the driver of the vehicle is
ill or incapacitated, such vehicle shall be permitted to park, stop or stand on
the shoulder facing in the direction of travel with all wheels and projecting
parts of such vehicle completely clear of the traveled lanes, but in no event
shall such parking, standing or stopping upon the shoulder of a freeway exceed
12 hours.
   (C)   No person, except law enforcement, Fire Department, emergency
management, public or private ambulance or authorized Department of
Transportation or local authority personnel, shall loiter or stand or park any
vehicle upon any bridge, highway or structure which is located above or below
or crosses over or under the roadway of any highway or approach or exit road
thereto.
   (D)   Whenever a vehicle is disabled or inoperable in a roadway or for any
reason obstructs the regular flow of traffic for reasons other than an
accident, the driver shall move or cause the vehicle to be moved as soon as
practical so as to not obstruct the regular flow of traffic.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the roadway in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in
such position until such time as it can be removed pursuant to division (D)
above.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,164) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park any vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the
City Council indicates a different length by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure over a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad track; or
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or
other traffic control device located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance when properly signposted; or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as shall be
unlawful.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,166) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARKING NEAR SCHOOLS AND THEATERS.
   The City Council may by resolution prohibit the parking or stopping of
vehicles at the curb on streets directly in front of any entrance to a school
house, school building, fire station or theater, and such curbs adjacent to the
entrance of said school house, school building, fire station or theater shall
be painted red or yellow to indicate such prohibition.
(Prior Code, § 3-308)
§ 72.05 OBSTRUCTING STREET, INTERSECTION OR ENTRANCE.
   No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency, stop any
vehicle in any location where stopping will obstruct any street, intersection
or entrance to an alley or public or private drive.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 INTERSECTIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall park a vehicle or leave a vehicle standing for any
purpose, except momentarily to load or discharge passengers, within 25 feet of
the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines, or where the curb lines are painted red or
another color specified by the City Council to indicate such prohibition.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF CURB.
   (A)   No vehicle shall park on any street with its left side to the curb
unless said street has been designated to be a one-way street by the City
Council.
   (B)   Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as to
prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.
(Prior Code, § 3-310) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-680
§ 72.08 ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle with any portion thereof projecting
into any alley entrance.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in any alley, except for the purpose of
loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall
not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in an alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 TRUCK PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck with an overall
length of more than 20 feet to park or stop such vehicle on a street within the
business district except to load or unload when loading or unloading in an
alley is impossible and then only for the period of time reasonably necessary
to load or unload.
   (B)   If the City Council provides truck parking areas adjoining or adjacent
to the business district, all truck operators shall use such parking areas for
all parking purposes.
   (C)   Except in an area provided for by the City Council by resolution, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, including an oil tanker, to
park or stop for any period of time within the limits of any street outside the
business district except for the purpose of loading or unloading the cargo
thereof in the ordinary course of business.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING OF DETACHED TRUCKS OR TRAILERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a truck, utility
trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer or other trailer designed to be pulled
behind a motor vehicle to park such trailer detached from its motor vehicle on
the streets in a business or residential district of the city, except when such
owner or operator is performing a service for an adjacent or abutting property
owner and only then for a period of no longer than eight hours; provided, that
the detached trailer does not impede the safe flow of traffic. A detached
trailer belonging to a contractor with a current building permit may be parked
in an area where vehicles can legally park on the street longer than eight
hours as long as the contractor is actively working on the property with the
building permit and the detached trailer does not impede the safe flow of
traffic. A placard issued by the Building Inspection Department showing the
address of the permit, issuance date and expiration date shall be attached to
the trailer and be visible from the traffic side.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SEMI-TRAILER. Any vehicle with or without motive power, designed to carry
persons or property and to be drawn by a motor vehicle; and so constructed that
some part of its weight rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
      TRAILER. Any vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to carry
persons or property and to be drawn by a motor vehicle; and so constructed that
no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
      TRUCK-TRACTOR. Any motor vehicle designed and primarily used for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved solely by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 3-312) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OR REPAIR OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any highway or public place
within the city any vehicle displayed for sale. Except when necessary due to a
breakdown or other emergency, no person shall adjust or repair, or race the
motor of, any motor vehicle or motorcycle while standing on the highways of the
city. No person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use
sidewalks or highways in the vicinity of the garage or shop for the purpose of
working on vehicles of any description.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   Time limit. The City Council may by resolution entirely prohibit or
fix a time limit for the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street or
district designated by such resolution, and the parking or stopping of any
vehicle on any such street or district for a period of time longer than fixed
in such resolution shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-315)
   (B)   Maximum time limit.
      (1)   The parking of a vehicle on a public street for over 48 consecutive
hours is unlawful except where a different maximum time limit is posted. In
determining the maximum time limit, Saturday and Sunday of each week are
excluded from such limitation, as well as the following legal holidays: New
Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day; and
Christmas Day.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, VEHICLE shall mean every device
in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 3-316)
Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-680
§ 72.13 SNOW; WEATHER EMERGENCIES; HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, it is unlawful to park or
stand any vehicle on any highway in the city at any time within 12 hours after
a snowfall of three inches or more has occurred within a 24 hour period if the
snow has not been removed within that time.
   (B)   The Police Chief, the city police or any other designated person may
order any highway or portion thereof vacated for weather emergencies or highway
maintenance. Notice shall be given by personally notifying the owner or
operator of a vehicle parked on such highway or by posting appropriate signs
along the highway not less than four hours prior to the time that the vacation
order is to be effective. It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a highway or
portion thereof vacated in accordance with this division (B).
   (C)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed and
parked, under the supervision of the city police, to a suitable nearby location
without further notice to the owner or operator of such vehicle.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 PARALLEL, ANGLE AND CENTER PARKING.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway where parking is permitted shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or edge of such roadway. No vehicle shall be parked upon a
roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway which is available for
parking.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by the City Council, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or edge of such roadway.
   (C)   The City Council may permit angle or center parking on any roadway,
except that angle or center parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid
highway or on any part of the state highway system unless the Director-State
Engineer has determined that such roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle or center parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The City Council may prohibit or restrict stopping, standing or
parking on highways under its jurisdiction and erect and maintain proper and
adequate signs thereon. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,167)
   (E)   Where stalls are designated either on the curb or pavement, vehicles
shall be parked within those stalls.
   (F)   Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as to
prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.15 BACKING FREIGHT VEHICLE TO CURB.
   The operator of a vehicle of an overall length of less than 20 feet,
including load, while loading or unloading freight may back the vehicle to the
curb but shall occupy as little of the street as possible.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.16 PAINTING OF CURBS.
   (A)   The curb space within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant
shall be painted red, or another color specified by the City Council, to
indicate that parking is prohibited in such area.
   (B)   If the City Council adopts a resolution regulating or prohibiting the
parking or stopping of vehicles at the curb on highways in front of certain
facilities or at certain locations, the curbs adjacent to any such facility or
location shall be painted in such manner as directed by the City Council to
indicate such regulation or prohibition.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Council or its agent to cause the
curb space to be painted and to keep the same painted as provided in this
chapter or as specified by the City Council. The marking or designating of
portions of highways where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited
shall be done only by the city through its proper officers, at the direction of
the City Council. No person shall paint the curb of any highway or in any
manner set aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in, any highway
or part thereof, except at such places where the parking of vehicles is
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted by the
City Council.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.17 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Whenever any peace officer, or any authorized employee of a law
enforcement agency who is employed by the city and specifically empowered by
ordinance to act, finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, the individual may remove the vehicle, have
such vehicle removed or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off the roadway of the highway or
from the highway.
   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of any
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle prior
to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be entitled
to retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid. The lien
provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any vehicle.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,165)
PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS
§ 72.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any individual:
      (1)   With a severe visual or physical impairment which limits personal
mobility and results in an inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet
without the use of a wheelchair, crutch, walker or prosthetic, orthotic or
other assistant device;
      (2)   Whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems;
      (3)   Who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or her
functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or Class
IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association; and
      (4)   Who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.
   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION. The violation of any section of this
subchapter regulating the use of parking spaces designated for use by
handicapped or disabled persons.
   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any handicapped or disabled
person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such manner for no
longer than one year.
(Prior Code, § 3-321)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1741.01, 60-331.01 and 60-
331.02
§ 72.31 DESIGNATION OF ON-STREET PARKING SPACES; DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council may designate parking spaces for the exclusive use
of:
      (1)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons
pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-3,113 through 60-3,113.07;
      (2)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a
distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person by
another state;
      (3)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose vehicles
display the permit specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-3,113 through 60-
3,113.07; and
      (4)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the city, which display
such permit.
   (B)   All such permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the
motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be displayed on
the dashboard.
   (C)   If the city so designates a parking space, it shall be indicated by
posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each space a sign which is in
conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices issued by the
Federal Highway Administration. In addition to such sign, the space may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street
adjacent to the space.
(Prior Code, § 3-319)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1736 and 18-1737
§ 72.32 DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING STALLS OR SPACES.
   (A)   The City Council and any person in lawful possession of any off-street
parking facility may designate stalls or spaces at such facility for the
exclusive use of:
      (1)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 60-3,113 through 60-3,113.07;
      (2)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose vehicles
display the permit specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-3,113 through 60-3,113.07;
and
      (3)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the city, which display
such permit.
   (B)   Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and
visible from each stall or space a sign which is in conformance with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(Prior Code, § 3-320)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1737
§ 72.33 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall take an application from a handicapped or
disabled or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent,
legal guardian or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder
thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting
such holder to park in those spaces provided for by this subchapter. A person
applying for a permit shall complete such forms as are provided to the City
Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City Clerk that he or she is handicapped or disabled. The
City Clerk may require medical certificates and proof of a handicap or
disability.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the
name, address and license number of all persons applying for permits pursuant
to this section. The DMV, upon receipt of a completed application form and
completed medical form from an applicant for a handicapped parking permit under
this section from the City Clerk, shall verify that the applicant qualifies for
such permit and, if so, shall issue the same by delivering the permit to the
applicant in person or by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, as
circumstances permit. Upon issuing such permit, the Department shall provide
the basic issuing data to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3-322)
§ 72.34 MOTOR VEHICLE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall take an application from any person for a motor
vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving the
motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled persons,
or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, to park in those spaces
provided by this section, if the motor vehicle is used primarily for the
transportation of such persons. Such parking permit shall be used only when the
motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the transportation of
handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily handicapped or disabled
persons.
   (B)   Persons applying for permits pursuant to this section shall apply for
a permit for each motor vehicle used for the transportation of handicapped or
disabled persons, or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, shall
complete such forms as are provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and
shall demonstrate to the City Clerk that each such motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons, or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the
name, address and license number of all persons applying for permits pursuant
to this section. The Department of Motor Vehicles, upon receipt of a completed
application form and completed medical form from an applicant for a handicapped
parking permit under this section from the City Clerk, shall verify that the
applicant qualifies for such permit and, if so, shall issue the same by
delivering the permit to the applicant in person or by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, as circumstances permit. Upon issuing such
permit, the Department shall provide the basic issuing data to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3-323)
§ 72.35 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking
facility, after notifying the Police or Sheriff’s Department and the city, if
it provides on-street parking or owns, operates or provides an off-street
parking facility, may cause the removal from a stall or space designated
exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, or motor vehicles for the transportation of such persons, of
any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the distinguishing license
plates specified in this subchapter if there is posted immediately adjacent to
and visible from such stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously
states the area so designated as a tow-away zone.
   (B)   Anyone who parks a vehicle in any on-street parking space which has
been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons, or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, or motor vehicles for the transportation of
such persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any off-
street parking facility, without properly displaying the proper permit or when
the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom the license plate or
permit is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the
designated space, shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction as
defined in §
72.30 and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures set forth in this
subchapter. The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or
permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly
constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete
defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of
the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this section cannot be
readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and shall be guilty
and subject to the penalty provided for in this subchapter.
   (C)   In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility, the
owner or person in lawful possession of such facility shall inform the city of
a violation of this section prior to taking any action pursuant to this
section.
(Prior Code, § 3-324) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   The violation of any offense listed in the table below shall be
punished by a fine as listed for such offense in such table. The city may
conduct studies on a periodic basis to consider adjustments to the fines
provided for under this section and contained in the table below.
Blocking alley, driveway or sidewalk            $25
Improper parking (general)                      $25
No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.               $25
Off-street (September 15 to March 15)           $5
Parking left of curb                            $25
Parking of detached trailers                    $5
Parking over 48 hours                           $25
Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant          $25
Parking within 20 feet of fire station driveway $25
Posted no parking                               $25
 
(Ord. 792, passed 6-13-2023)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.001   Operation
   
73.002   Lights
Motorcycles
   
73.015   Operation
   
73.016   Lights
Snowmobiles
   
73.030   Registration; equipment
   
73.031   Unlawful operation
   
73.032   Unlawful acts
   
73.033   Operation on public lands
   
73.034   Enforcement
All-Terrain Vehicles and Utility-Type Vehicles
   
73.045   Definitions
   
73.046   Operation; restrictions
   
73.047   Lights
   
73.048   Equipment
   
73.049   Modification prohibited
   
73.050   Competitive events; exemptions
   
73.051   Accidents; report required
   
73.052   Enforcement
Mini-Bikes
   
73.065   Unlawful operation
   
73.066   Traffic laws inapplicable
   
73.067   Emergencies and parades
   
73.068   Operation on public lands
Mopeds
   
73.080   Operation generally
   
73.081   Use of traffic lanes
   
73.082   Equipment
 
   
73.999   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 73.001 OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public
highway of this city with another person on the handlebars or in any position
in front of the operator.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
operator and any other persons upon the streets and public highways.
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at
all stop signs.
   (D)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a street or highway shall not
ride more than single file, except on parts of streets or highways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (E)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under conditions then
existing shall ride as near to the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the
roadway as practicable except when:
      (1)   Overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
      (2)   Preparing for a left turn onto a private road or driveway or at an
intersection;
      (3)   Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions that make it unsafe to
continue along the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway, including
fixed or moving objects, stopped or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians or
animals or surface hazards;
      (4)   Riding upon a lane of substandard width which is too narrow for a
bicycle and vehicle to travel safely by side within the lane; or
      (5)   Lawfully operating a bicycle on the paved shoulders of a highway
included in the state highway system as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,142.
   (F)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway with a posted speed
limit of 35 mph or less on which traffic is restricted to one direction of
movement and which has two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near to the
right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable. Whenever a
person operating a bicycle leaves the roadway to ride on the paved shoulder or
leaves the paved shoulder to enter the roadway, such person shall clearly
signal his or her intention and yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
   (G)   No person shall park a bicycle on any sidewalk unless a bicycle stand
is located on said sidewalk.
   (H)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks within the Business
District.
(Prior Code, § 3-401) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-6,315, 60-6,317 and 60-6,318
§ 73.002 LIGHTS.
   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public roadway from
sunset to sunrise without a headlight firmly attached to such bicycle, visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less than
500 feet indicating the approach or presence of such bicycle, and operated with
said headlight properly lighted, or a yellow or red light reflector attached to
and visible under normal atmospheric conditions from distances between 100 feet
and 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlights on a motor vehicle. The headlight shall emit a clear, white light.
(Prior Code, § 3-402) Penalty, see §
73.999
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.015 OPERATION.
   (A)   Any person who operates a motorcycle shall have all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who operates a motorcycle shall ride only upon a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry any other person, nor
shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed
to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the
permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat
firmly attached to the motorcycle to the rear or side of the operator.
   (C)   Any person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package,
bundle or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both hands on
the handlebars.
   (E)   No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a
position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or
the view of the operator.
   (F)   A motorcycle shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any
highway, and no vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any
motorcycle of the full use of such lane. This division (F) shall not apply to
motorcycles operated two abreast in a single lane.
   (G)   The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same
lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken.
   (H)   No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or
between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
   (I)   Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single
lane.
   (J)   Divisions (G) and (H) above shall not apply to police officers in the
performance of their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 3-405) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-6,306 through 60-6,308
§ 73.016 LIGHTS.
   No person shall ride a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys or highways from
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise unless the same
shall be equipped and operated with: at least one and not more than two
headlights, plainly visible from the front; and a light on the rear exhibiting
a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the rear thereof; provided, that said lamps shall comply with
the requirements and limitations of state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 3-406) Penalty, see §
73.999
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.030 REGISTRATION; EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every snowmobile operated within the city shall be registered with the
state as required by law. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street
or highway unless it is equipped with at least one headlamp, one tail lamp,
reflector material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on each side
forward of the handle bars, and with brakes as prescribed by the Department of
Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   All laws applying to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply
to snowmobiles, except those relating to required equipment and those which by
their nature have no application.
(Prior Code, § 3-407) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,335
§ 73.031 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon any street
or highway within the corporate limits of the city; provided, that snowmobiles
may be operated within the city when, due to severe weather conditions, they
provide the only practical method of safe vehicular travel. When such
conditions do exist, the snowmobile shall be operated only in a manner and at a
speed that is reasonable or proper under the surrounding circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 3-408) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.032 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile,
either owned or operated by him or her, to be operated:
   (A)   Within the city unless weather conditions are such that it provides
the only practicable method of safe vehicular travel, or said snowmobile is
engaged in responding to an emergency;
   (B)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances;
   (C)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person
or property;
   (D)   Without a lighted headlight and taillight when such would be required
by conditions;
   (E)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock; and
   (F)   Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the
owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
(Prior Code, § 3-409) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,337
§ 73.033 OPERATION ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   Snowmobiles shall be prohibited upon the public lands owned by the city
except where allowed by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-410) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,338
§ 73.034 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any law enforcement officer, including a conservation officer, may enforce
the provisions relating to snowmobiles.
(Prior Code, § 3-411)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,343
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES
§ 73.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
      (1)   Is 50 inches or less in width;
      (2)   Has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less;
      (3)   Travels on three or more non-highway tires; and
      (4)   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one
passenger.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any
street, road, avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE (UTV).
      (1)   Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
         (a)   Is 74 inches in width or less;
         (b)   Is not more than 180 inches in length, including the bumper;
         (c)   Has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and
         (d)   Travels on four or more non-highway tires.
      (2)   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE does not include a golf cart or a low-speed
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-412) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 671, passed 3-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-624 and 60-6,355
§ 73.046 OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   An ATV and a UTV may be operated on streets and highways within the
corporate limits of the city only if the operator and the vehicle comply with
the provisions of this section.
   (B)   (1)   An ATV or a UTV may be operated only between the hours of
sunrise and sunset and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 30 mph.
      (2)   When in operation as authorized herein, the headlight and taillight
of the ATV or UTV shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle
safety flag which extends not less than five feet above ground attached to the
rear of such vehicle.
      (3)   The flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than
30 square inches and shall be day-glow in color.
   (C)   Any person operating an ATV or a UTV as authorized in division (A)
above shall have:
      (1)   A valid Class O operator’s license or a farm permit as provided in
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-4,126; and
      (2)   Liability insurance coverage for the ATV or a UTV while operating
the vehicle on a street or highway. The person operating the vehicle shall
provide proof of such insurance coverage to any peace officer requesting such
proof within five days of such a request.
   (D)   ATVs and UTVs may be operated without complying with divisions (B) and
(C) above on streets and highways in parades which have been authorized by the
state or any department, board, commission or political subdivision of the
state.
   (E)   (1)   An ATV or a UTV shall not be operated on any controlled-access
highway with more than two marked traffic lanes, and the crossing of any
controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes shall not be
permitted.
      (2)   Divisions (A) through (C) and (F) of this section authorize and
apply to operation of an ATV or a UTV only on a street or highway other than a
controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes.
   (F)   Subject to division (E) above, the crossing of a street or highway
shall be permitted by an ATV or a UTV without complying with divisions (B) and
(C) above only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of the street or highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another highway; and
      (5)   Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the
crossing is made.
   (G)   No passengers shall be allowed in the cargo area of an ATV or a UTV.
(Prior Code, § 3-413) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,356
§ 73.047 LIGHTS.
   Every ATV and UTV shall display a lighted headlight and taillight during the
period of time from sunset to sunrise and at any time when visibility is
reduced due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions.
(Prior Code, § 3-414) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,357
§ 73.048 EQUIPMENT.
   Every ATV and UTV shall be equipped with a brake system maintained in good
operating condition; an adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
a U.S. Forest Service-qualified spark arrester.
(Prior Code, § 3-415) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,358
§ 73.049 MODIFICATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall equip the exhaust system of an ATV or a UTV with a cutout,
bypass or similar device, operate an ATV or a UTV with an exhaust system so
modified or operate an ATV or a UTV with the spark arrester removed or modified
except for use in closed-course competition events.
(Prior Code, § 3-416) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,359
§ 73.050 COMPETITIVE EVENTS; EXEMPTIONS.
   ATVs and UTVs participating in competitive events may be exempted from §§
73.047 through
73.049 at the discretion of the State Director of Motor Vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 3-417) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,360
§ 73.051 ACCIDENTS; REPORT REQUIRED.
   If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any
person which requires treatment of the person by a physician, the operator of
each ATV or UTV involved in the accident shall give notice of the accident in
the same manner as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-699.
(Prior Code, § 3-418) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,361
§ 73.052 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any law enforcement officer of the state or of any political subdivision,
including conservation officers of the Game and Parks Commission, shall be
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-420) (Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
MINI-BIKES
§ 73.065 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for any mini-bike or similar two-, three- or four-wheeled
miniature vehicle whose visibility, power and equipment are inadequate for
mixing with normal vehicular traffic upon the streets and highways to be
operated on any such street or highway. For the purpose of this section, MINI-
BIKE shall mean a two-wheeled motor vehicle which has a total wheel and tire
diameter of less than 14 inches, an engine-rated capacity of less than 45 cubic
centimeters displacement or a seat height less than 25 inches from the ground,
or any other two-wheeled motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer
for off-road use only.
(Prior Code, § 3-421) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60,6,352, 60-6,353 and 60-2107
§ 73.066 TRAFFIC LAWS INAPPLICABLE.
   The provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. Ch. 60, art. 1, 3, 4, 5 and Ch. 77 shall
not be applicable to the owners and operators of any mini-bike.
(Prior Code, § 3-422)
§ 73.067 EMERGENCIES AND PARADES.
   Mini-bikes shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter during any
public emergency or while being used in parades by regularly organized units of
any recognized charitable, social, educational or community service
organization.
(Prior Code, § 3-423)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,348
§ 73.068 OPERATION ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   Mini-bikes shall be prohibited upon the public lands owned by the city
except where allowed by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-424) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-678
MOPEDS
§ 73.080 OPERATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent,
regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry any other person, nor shall
any other person ride on a moped unless it is designed by the manufacturer to
carry more than one person.
   (B)   Any person shall ride a moped only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward. Further, no person shall operate a moped while carrying any
package, bundle or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both
hands on the handlebars. No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any
person ride, in a position that will interfere with the operation and control
of the moped or the view of the operator. No person who rides upon a moped
shall attach himself or herself or the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-425) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.081 USE OF TRAFFIC LANES.
   A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any street or
highway with an authorized speed limit of 45 mph or less, and no vehicle shall
be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of such
lane. This section shall not apply to mopeds or motorcycles operated two
abreast in a single lane. No person shall operate a moped between lanes of
traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. Mopeds shall not be
operated more than two abreast in a single lane. Any person who operates a
moped on a roadway with an authorized speed limit of more than 45 mph shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable and shall not ride
more than single file.
(Prior Code, § 3-426) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.082 EQUIPMENT.
   Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for
such passenger. No person shall operate any moped with handlebars more than 15
inches above the mounting point of the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 3-427) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any rule or regulation dealing with
snowmobiles shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 3-411)
   (C)   Any violation of §§
73.046 through
73.051 which is also a violation under Neb. Rev. Stat. Ch. 60 may be punished
under the penalty provisions of such chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-419)
(Ord. 614, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-6,343 and 60-6,362
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Weight restrictions
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley or other place
at a rate of speed greater than 20 mph within the Central Business District as
designated on the official zoning map, and 25 mph on any other street within
the city; provided, that the speed limits on the following streets shall be as
follows:
Street Location Speed Limit
Street          Location                                      Speed Limit
               All streets within the city park              10 mph
               All non-hard surfaced streets within the city 10 mph
264th Street    From E. Meigs Street to W. Maple Road         45 mph
E. Meigs Street East of S. Center to 261st Circle             45 mph
Gardiner Street West of West Street                           10 mph
N. West Street  North of Reichmuth Road to 276th Street       40 mph
Reichmuth Road  West of 288th Street to 300th Street          55 mph
Reichmuth Road  West to 288th Street                          40 mph
S. Center       South of Meigs Street to W. Maple Road        45 mph
W. Maple Road   From 264th Street to 270th Street             45 mph
 
(Prior Code, § 3-118) (Ord. 559, passed 3-11-2008; Ord. 752, passed 6-8-2021)
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   No vehicle weighing in excess of 12,000 pounds shall travel on or over the
following streets.
 
Street            Location                       Exception
                                                 Such restriction shall not
                  Beginning at the junction of   apply to vehicles making
Meigs Streets     Meigs Street and Center Street deliveries of goods or
                  and ending at the western city services to persons or
                  limits                         businesses within the city
                                                 limits
                  Beginning at the junction of
                  Ida Street and North West
North West Street Street and ending at the        
                  junction of North West Street
                  and State Street
 
(Prior Code, § 3-140) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   LEISURE AND RECREATION
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: LEISURE AND RECREATION
Section
Parks and Recreational Facilities
   
90.01   Operation
   
90.02   Injury to property
   
90.03   Hours; camping rules
   
90.04   Trails and pedestrian bridge
Municipal Swimming Pool
   
90.15   Operation and funding
   
90.16   Admission charge
   
90.17   Rentals
   
90.18   Rules and regulations
Library
   
90.30   Funding
   
90.31   Library Board; general powers and duties
   
90.32   Books
   
90.33   Rules and regulations
   
90.34   Damaged and lost books
   
90.35   Cost of use
   
90.36   Annual report
   
90.37   Improper book removal
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 90.01 OPERATION.
   (A)   The city owns and operates the city parks and other recreational areas
through the City Council, which shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient management ofthe city parks and other
recreational areas of the city.
   (B)   There may exist a Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee, to be
governed as follows.
      (1)   Creation and composition. The Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee shall consist of at most five members and at least three members who
will be appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council.
      (2)   Appointment and terms of members; compensation. Each member shall
serve for period of three years from and after the date of his or her
appointment; provided that the initial terms shall be shortened in order to
provide for staggered terms with one term ending at the end ofthe first year,
two terms ending at the end of the second year and two terms ending at the end
of the third year. No member shall be a member of the City Council. All members
of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve as such without
compensation.
      (3)   Organization; quorum; meetings; records. At the first meeting in
each calendar year, members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
shall elect one oftheir own members as chairperson. The Committee shall adopt
all necessary rules providing for regular and special meetings and for the
conduct of its business. All proceedings shall have minutes taken; the minutes
shall be submitted to the City Clerk and copies given to the Mayor and City
Council. The Committee shall comply with all requirements ofthe Nebraska Open
Meetings Act, including but not limited to the Act’s requirements of advance
published notice of meetings, meetings open to the public, advanced available
agendas, roll call votes, closed sessions and minutes of meetings.
      (4)   Powers and duties. The City Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
shall consider all matters concerning the city’s parks and recreational
facilities referred to it by the Mayor, City Council, the City Administrator or
the Public Works Superintendent. The Committee shall review the matters
referred to it and make such studies based on the referred matters as it may
deem necessary and appropriate and shall tender recommendations to the
originator of the referral. The matters may include, but are not limited to,
matters concerning future parkland acquisition and development, rules, and
regulations for use of the parks and recreational areas, and maintenance and
operational considerations. Each year, on or before June 1, the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Committee shall submit to the Mayor and City Council a
report on the status of the city’s parks and recreational areas. The Committee
shall have no authority to enter into financial obligations or expend funds of
any kind, but the City Council, as it may deem necessary and appropriate, may
provide funds for use by the Committee. The Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee does not constitute a Board of Park Commissioners or a Board of Park
and Recreation Commissioners pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-952 nor does the
Committee have the powers or duties granted by said statute.
(Ord. 798, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 90.02 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down,
injure or destroy any tree, plant or shrub in any city park or recreational
facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded
or planted area or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence,
bench, table or any other property of any city park or recreational area. No
person shall commit any waste on or litter the city parks or other public
grounds.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Littering of public and private property, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-523
§ 90.03 HOURS; CAMPING RULES.
   (A)   All public parks within the corporate limits of the city shall be
closed daily to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00
a.m. of the following day. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon,
remain in, loiter, wander, stroll, loaf, play in or in any manner utilize the
public parks in the city during such hours. Persons utilizing the camping
facilities in the park, having paid all applicable fees, are exempt from the
regulations in this division (A).
   (B)   Camping in the city park is a privilege afforded to the citizens by
the city and is subject to strict compliance with the following rules.
      (1)   Use of sites is on a first come, first served basis through the
online reservation system or walk-up access. Sites reserved online will be
marked as reserved.
      (2)   One camper unit is allowed per site.
      (3)   No tents shall be allowed except that one tent will be allowed with
paid camper unit for children under the age of 18.
      (4)   Campers must register within one hour of arriving. Campers who
reserved a spot online must submit payment within one hour of arriving.
      (5)   Registration fee is $10 per night, per site.
      (6)   To register in person, fill out the provided envelope and attach
the tag to the post at the site being occupied.
      (7)   All campers and vehicles must display valid license plates and be
registered in accordance with applicable state law.
      (8)   No open fires.
      (9)   All pets must be kept on a leash and cleaned up after.
      (10)   Quiet hours are in effect from 10:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m.
      (11)   Camping or occupying sites is permitted for a maximum of seven
days, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Clerk.
      (12)   Campers or visitors found in violation of these rules may be
evicted without refund. Campers will be allowed 24 hours to vacate and exit the
premises after being provided with written notice of such violation. After such
time, police escort may result in the event the site has not yet been vacated.
      (13)   Failure to exit the premises after the written notice set forth in
division (B)(12) above, failure to pay the registration fee under division (B)
(6) above or occupying a camping site longer than seven days under division (B)
(11) above could result in the violator being deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and resulting fines pursuant to §
10.99.
      (14)   All other city park rules apply.
      (15)   Direct any questions to City Hall at (402) 359-2251, Monday
through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. or online at valleyne.org.
(Prior Code, § 1-1103) (Ord. 699, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 728, passed 12-10-2019;
Ord. 729, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 750, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-949
§ 90.04 TRAILS AND PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE.
   (A)   Trail hours and use. The trails and pedestrian bridge shall be closed
from sunset to sunrise each day. Trail users must follow all state bicycle laws
and trail guidelines for safety. Use of the trail at any time is at the user’s
own risk, and they must take precautions during every use.
   (B)   Authorized trail users. Trails are multi-use in nature with various
acceptable shared activities and users. Authorized trail users include:
      (1)   Walkers;
      (2)   Joggers;
      (3)   Runners;
      (4)   Skateboards and rollerblades;
      (5)   Pet owners, with their licensed animal(s) on a leash; and
      (6)   Bicyclists (includes the use of all e-bikes and e-scooters).
   (C)   Unauthorized trail users. Unauthorized trail uses include:
      (1)   Gas, natural gas or electric powered motor vehicles;
      (2)   Motorcycles;
      (3)   Utility vehicles;
      (4)   Go-carts;
      (5)   ATVs and UTVs;
      (6)   Snowmobiles; and
      (7)   Any other type of motorized vehicle used as transportation.
   (D)   Pets. Pets are allowed on the trail; however, every pet must be
properly licensed and leashed at all times. Pet owners are responsible for any
pet behavior relating to damage or harm to other animals or users. Owners are
responsible for any waste made by their pets.
   (E)   Trail etiquette.
      (1)   Show courtesy to all other trail users.
      (2)   Use the right side of the trail unless otherwise designated.
      (3)   Always pass on the left, with an audible warning to the user(s)
being passed.
      (4)   Listen for audible signals and allow faster trail users to pass
safely.
   (F)   Alcohol. Alcohol is not allowed at any time.
   (G)   Contact. Questions may be directed to City Hall at (402) 359-2251 or
through the “Contact Us” form on the city website or app. Office hours are
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 1-1108) (Ord. 777, passed 7-12-2022)
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
§ 90.15 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city owns and manages the city swimming pool through the City Council,
which shall have the power and authority to hire and supervise the swimming
pool manager and such employees as may be deemed necessary. The Council shall
pass such rules and regulations for the operation of the swimming pool as may
be proper for its efficient operation.
(Prior Code, § 1-1104)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-948, 17-951 and 17-952
§ 90.16 ADMISSION CHARGE.
   The City Council may, for the purpose of defraying the expenses involved in
maintaining, improving, managing and beautifying the swimming pool, set
reasonable admission charges for use of the city swimming pool. The charges
shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place at the swimming pool for public inspection. Such rates may be
structured for classes of persons in a reasonable manner; provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to permit or allow discrimination on the
basis of race, creed, color or national origin in the classification of persons
for admission charges.
(Prior Code, § 1-1105)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-949
§ 90.17 RENTALS.
   The City Council shall have the authority to rent the city swimming pool to
such organizations and other persons as it may see fit in its discretion. The
Council shall prescribe rules and regulations for such rentals and shall
require an appropriate number of qualified lifeguards to be in attendance
during the rental period. Such fees and other costs shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place at the swimming
pool.
(Prior Code, § 1-1106)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 7-949
§ 90.18 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council shall have the power and authority to enact bylaws, rules
and regulations for the protection of those using the swimming pool and for the
efficient management thereof. Suitable penalties may be provided for the
violation of such bylaws, rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-1107)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 7-949
LIBRARY
§ 90.30 FUNDING.
   (A)   (1)   If the City Council has established a public library free of
charge for the use of the inhabitants of the city or contracted for the use of
a public library already established, the Council may levy a tax of not more
than $0.105 on each $100 upon the taxable value of all the taxable property in
the city annually to be levied and collected in like manner as other taxes in
the city. The levy shall be subject to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-3442 and 77-3443.
The amount collected from such levy shall be known as the Library Fund.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-201)
      (2)   The Fund shall also include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance,
bequests or other valuable income-producing property and real estate from any
source for the purpose of endowing the public library.
   (B)   All taxes levied or collected and all funds donated or in any way
acquired for the erection, maintenance or support of the public library shall
be kept for the use of the library separate and apart from all other funds of
the city, shall be drawn upon and paid out by the City Treasurer upon vouchers
signed by the President of the Library Board and authenticated by the secretary
of the Board, and shall not be used or disbursed for any other purpose or in
any other manner. The city may establish a public library sinking fund for
major capital expenditures.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-209)
   (C)   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over at least
monthly by the Librarian to the City Treasurer along with a report of the
sources of the revenue.
§ 90.31 LIBRARY BOARD; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Library Board shall have the power to make and adopt such bylaws,
rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the
library and reading room as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent with Neb.
Rev. Stat. §§ 51-201 through 51-219.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-205)
   (B)   The Library Board shall have exclusive control of expenditures, of all
money collected or donated to the credit of the Library Fund, of the renting
and construction of any library building and of the supervision, care and
custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for
that purpose.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-207)
   (C)   The Library Board may erect, lease or occupy an appropriate building
for the use of such a library and appoint a suitable librarian and assistants,
fix the compensation of such appointees and remove such appointees at the
pleasure of the Board. The governing body of the city shall approve any
personnel administrative or compensation policy or procedure before
implementation of such policy or procedure by the Library Board.
   (D)   The Library Board may establish rules and regulations for the
government of the library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation and
to maintain its usefulness and efficiency. The Library Board may fix and
impose, by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses upon or
injury to the library grounds, rooms, books or other property, for failure to
return any book or for violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation. The Board
shall have and exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit
and intent of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-201 through 51-219 in establishing and
maintaining the library and reading room.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-211)
   (E)   The city owns and manages the library through the Library Board, which
shall consist of five residents of the city appointed by the City Council. Each
member of the Board shall serve a four-year term of office. No member of the
City Council shall serve as a member of the Library Board while serving a term
of office on the Council. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation and may be required, at the discretion of the City Council, to
give a bond in a sum set by resolution and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties.
   (F)   At the time of the Board’s first meeting in June of each year, the
members shall organize by selecting from their number a chairperson and
secretary. No member of the Board may serve as both chairperson and secretary.
It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and
records of all meetings and to file the same with the City Clerk, where they
shall be available for public inspection and any reasonable time. A majority of
the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
The Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may designate. Special
meetings may be held upon the call of the chairperson or any three members of
the Board.
(Ord. 797, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 90.32 BOOKS.
   The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete or duplicate books in the library.
Records shall be kept of any such books so disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 1-1203)
§ 90.33 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of
the library for the preservation and efficient management thereof. The Board
shall fix and impose penalties and forfeitures for injury to the library
grounds, rooms, books or other property or for failure to return a book. All
fees, penalties and forfeitures may be collected in civil action in the event
of failure, neglect or refusal to pay the assessments.
(Prior Code, § 1-1204)
§ 90.34 DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS.
   Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the library
shall forfeit and pay to the library not less than the value of the book, in
addition to any replacement cost and penalty which the Library Board may
assess.
(Prior Code, § 1-1206) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.35 COST OF USE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, the library and reading room
shall be free of charge for the use of the inhabitants of the city, subject
always to such reasonable regulations as the Library Board may adopt to render
the library of the greatest use to the inhabitants. The Library Board may
exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person who willfully
violates or refuses to comply with rules and regulations established for the
government thereof.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-212)
   (B)   The public library shall make its basic services available without
charge to all residents of the city. The Board may fix and impose reasonable
fees, not to exceed the library’s actual cost, for nonbasic services.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-211)
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASIC SERVICES. Include, but are not limited to, free loan of circulating
print and nonprint materials from the local collection and general reference
and information services.
      NONBASIC SERVICES. Include, but are not limited to, use of:
         (a)   Photocopying equipment;
         (b)   Telephones, facsimile equipment and other telecommunications
equipment;
         (c)   Media equipment;
         (d)   Personal computers; and
         (e)   Videocassette recording and playing equipment.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-201.01)
§ 90.36 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Library Board shall, on or before the second Monday in February in each
year, make a report to the City Council of the condition of its trust on the
last day of the prior fiscal year. The report shall show all money received and
credited or expended; the number of materials held, including books, video and
audio materials, software programs and materials in other formats; the number
of periodical subscriptions on record, including newspapers; the number of
materials added and the number withdrawn from the collection during the year;
the number of materials circulated during the year; and other statistics,
information and suggestions as the Library Board may deem of general interest
or as the City Council may require. The report shall be verified by affidavit
of the President and secretary of the Library Board.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-213)
§ 90.37 IMPROPER BOOK REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made
by the Library Board to take a book from the public library without the consent
of the Librarian or an authorized employee of the library. Any person removing
a book from the library without properly checking it out shall be deemed to be
guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Public nuisances declared
   
91.03   Abatement; notice of noncompliance; appeal
   
91.04   Appointment of hearing officer
   
91.05   Cost of work done; responsibility
Abandoned Vehicles
   
91.20   Abandoned vehicles prohibited
   
91.21   Enforcement
   
91.22   Notice
   
91.23   Disposition
   
91.24   Transfer of title
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Includes, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags and ashes;
      (2)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building rubble;
      (3)   Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation;
      (4)   Offal and dead animals;
      (5)   Any machine, vehicle or parts of a machine or vehicle which have
lost their identity, character, utility or serviceability as such through
deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to
perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded or thrown away or
left as waste, wreckage or junk; or
      (6)   Any motor vehicle not housed in a storage or other building that is
not operable and currently licensed.
   UNSAFE BUILDING or UNSAFE STRUCTURE. Includes, but not be limited to any
building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which is dangerous to the
public health because of its condition and which may cause or aid in the spread
of disease or injury to the health of its occupants or those of neighboring
structures; because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any
other cause is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire
hazard; by reason of faulty construction or any other cause is liable to cause
injury or damage by the collapse or fall of all or any part of such structure;
because of its conditions or because of lack of doors or windows is available
to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful
occupants of such building or structure; any partially constructed building or
structure which has lost or is unable to perform its intended function, or is
cast off, discarded or abandoned; or as determined in the latest adopted
edition of the International Building adopted by the city, as the same may from
time to time be amended. It shall be the responsibility of the Building
Inspector or Fire Chief to make a determination of the condition of any
building or structure in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction whether
it is an unsafe building or unsafe structure.
   WEEDS. Includes, but is not limited to, bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis),
puncture vine (Tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), Canada
thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (Lepidium draba), Russian
knapweed ( Centaurea picris ), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense ), nodding or
musk thistle, quack grass (Agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (Sonchus
arvensis), horse nettle (Solanum carolinense), bull thistle (Cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthom (Rhamnus sp.) (toum), hemp plant (Cannabis sativa) and
ragweed (Ambrosiaceae).
   WEEDS, GRASSES OR WORTHLESS VEGETATION. Any weed, grass, or worthless
vegetation growth of more than 12 inches in height, or more than eight inches
within the same calendar year, after the city has previously acted to remove
weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation exceeding 12 inches in height on the
same lot or piece of ground.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 91.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DECLARED.
   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to permit weeds,
grasses or worthless vegetation to grow in excess of 12 inches within the
corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
      (2)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to permit weeds,
grasses or worthless vegetation to grow in excess of eight inches within the
corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
during any calendar year if, within the same calendar year, the city has
previously acted to remove weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation exceeding 12
inches in height on the same lot or piece of ground.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to permit the
accumulation oflitter on any property within the corporate limits of the city
and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
   (C)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for the owner of an
unsafe building or unsafe structure to maintain, permit the existence of, or
allow persons to occupy the same within the corporate limits of the city and
its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ABATEMENT; NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE; APPEAL.
   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each owner or
owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any. Notice shall be
given to the owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and occupant by certified
mail, return receipt requested or by personal service upon said owner, owner’s
duly authorized agent and occupant, if any. Within five days after receipt of
such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a
hearing with the city to appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance by
filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the
appeal shall be held within 14 days after the filing of the appeal and shall be
conducted by the hearing officer subsequently appointed herein. The hearing
officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after
the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the city may have such work
done. Within five days after receipt of such notice, if the owner or occupant
of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the city or fails
to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have
such work done.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 91.04 APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER.
   The City Administrator is hereby appointed as the hearing officer for any
appeal taken by the owner or occupant under this subchapter.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 91.05 COST OF WORK DONE; RESPONSIBILITY.
   A statement of the cost of such work shall be forwarded to the City Council,
and if unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may levy the
cost as a special assessment against the lot or real estate upon the lot or
piece of ground so benefited or on which the building or structure is located,
such special assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and collected in the
manner provided for special assessments; or collect the cost from the owner of
the lot or piece of ground so benefited or on which building or structure is
located and enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 91.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization
of any kind shall abandon any vehicle, as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-1901,
within the city. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle if
left unattended:
      (1)   With no number plates affixed thereto, for more than six hours on
any public property;
      (2)   For more than 24 hours on any public property, except any portion
thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
      (3)   For more than 48 hours, after the parking of such vehicle shall
have become illegal if left on a portion of public property on which parking is
legally permitted; and/or
      (4)   For more than seven days on private property, if left initially
without the permission of the owner or after permission of the owner shall be
terminated.
   (B)   No person in charge or control of any private property, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on
such property longer than seven continuous days. Any vehicle described in this
division (B) shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle for purposes of this
subchapter.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY shall mean:
      (1)   Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or other
city-owned property; and
      (2)   Any privately owned property which is not included within the
definition of public property.
   (D)   A vehicle in an enclosed building, appropriate storage pound or
depository licensed by the city, or owned and being restored or repaired with
satisfactory progress being shown by the controller of the real property where
said vehicle is located, is specifically excluded from this section.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to the premises for which a permit to
operate a junkyard has been obtained, nor shall it apply to any premises where
a licensed motor vehicle dealer or a farm implement dealer conducts a business.
It shall not apply to racing vehicles stored on licensed trailers.
(Prior Code, § 3-201) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city police shall remove or cause to be removed any abandoned
vehicle. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
as provided in §
91.23; provided, that any such abandoned vehicle which is located on private
property shall not be removed or impounded until the city police have given
written notice of intent to remove said abandoned vehicle ten days prior
thereto to the property owner upon whose property said abandoned vehicle is
located. The city police may enter upon private property at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of inspecting any abandoned vehicle, posting notice
thereon and/or removing or impounding such vehicle.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the city police from
entering on private property for the purpose of carrying out their duties.
Neither the city nor the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which
any abandoned vehicle shall be removed shall be liable for any loss or damage
to such abandoned vehicle which occurs during its removal, while in the
possession of the city, or as a result of any subsequent disposition.
(Prior Code, § 3-202) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 NOTICE.
   (A)   Except for vehicles automatically becoming the property of the city as
set forth in §
91.24, the Council shall make an inquiry concerning the last registered owners
of such abandoned vehicles as follows:
      (1)   Abandoned vehicles with numbered plates affixed: to the
jurisdiction which issued said plates; or
      (2)   Abandoned vehicles with no numbered plates affixed: to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   The city police shall notify the last registered owner, if any, that
the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if
unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after five days from the date that
such notice was mailed. If the agency described in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2)
above also notifies the city police that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice
shall also be sent to the lien holder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such
vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of its removal and storage. In the
event the owner does not appear within the time prescribed herein, or in the
event that the owner cannot be determined, such abandoned vehicle shall be
disposed of as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-203)
§ 91.23 DISPOSITION.
   The city police shall sell said abandoned vehicle at public auction to the
highest bidder within 60 days from the date that title to such abandoned
vehicle is vested in the city as provided in §
91.24. Such sale and the time and place thereof shall be advertised for one
week in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any proceeds from the
sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses incurred by the city, shall be
held by the city without interest for the benefit of the owner of such
abandoned vehicle for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-
year period, such proceeds shall be paid into the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
§ 91.24 TRANSFER OF TITLE.
   If an abandoned vehicle at the time of abandonment has no numbered plates of
the current year affixed and is of a wholesale value of $250 or less, taking
into consideration the vehicle’s condition as determined by the City Council,
title shall immediately vest in the city and the Council is not required to
follow §
91.22. With respect to those abandoned vehicles governed by §
91.22, title to such vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the city five days
from the date the notice referred to therein is mailed or, if the last
registered owner cannot be determined, when notice of that fact is received by
the Council. Upon the sale of an abandoned vehicle at auction, the city shall
furnish the purchaser with the requisite affidavit to provide to the County
Clerk where the vehicle was last registered as proof that said vehicle was
abandoned and became the property of the city prior to the sale.
(Prior Code, § 3-205)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 247 NE ADC Ch. 3, § 003
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground or owner of the
property on which the unsafe building or unsafe structure is located shall,
upon conviction of violating §§
91.01 through
91.05 be subject to a fine of $100. Whenever in any action it is established
that a nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty
imposed, enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case. Each
day’s violation of this chapter after the expiration of the five days’ notice
as provided in §
91.02 shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Penalties for such violation
shall not exceed $500 and/or imprisonment for a time not to exceed three
months, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 815, passed 8-13-2024)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Running at large; tethering
   
92.03   Cruelty
   
92.04   Killing, poisoning and injuring
   
92.05   Abandonment, neglect and cruelty
   
92.06   Livestock banned within city; exception for chickens
   
92.07   Keeping of chickens; license requirements; restrictions
   
92.08   Interference with police
Dogs
   
92.20   Definition
   
92.21   License
   
92.22   License tags
   
92.23   Wrongful licensing
   
92.24   Uncollared or unharnessed
   
92.25   Running at large
   
92.26   Capture impossible
   
92.27   Vicious dogs
   
92.28   Removal of collar, harness or tags
   
92.29   Liability of owner
   
92.30   Barking and chasing; complaints
   
92.31   Impounding
   
92.32   Kennels
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom other than an uncaptured
wild creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person authorized by law or employed or
appointed for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any
other law or ordinance relating to the licensing, control, seizure or
impoundment of animals.
   OWNER.
      (1)   Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, harbors or has charge,
custody or control of an animal or permits an animal to habitually remain or be
lodged or fed within his or her house, store, building, enclosure, yard, lot,
grounds or premises.
      (2)   OWNER does not include any veterinarian or kennel operator
temporarily maintaining on his or her premises an animal owned by another
person for not more than 30 days.
   RUN AT LARGE. Not being under the actual control of the owner by means of:
      (1)   A leash, cord, chain or other suitable means of physical restraint
which is securely fastened or tethered in a manner sufficient to keep the
animal on the premises where tethered;
      (2)   A leash, cord, chain or other suitable means of physical restraint
of six feet or less in length physically held by the owner;
      (3)   Being confined within a cage, receptacle, enclosed vehicle, fenced
enclosure or shelter; or
      (4)   Being within the real property limits of the owner and in the
owner’s presence and under direct and effective voice or other control.
§ 92.02 RUNNING AT LARGE; TETHERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cow, hog, horse, mule,
sheep, goat, dog, chicken, turkey, goose or other animal except a cat to permit
the animal to run at large at any time on any of the public ways and property
or the property of another in the city or to be tethered or staked out in such
a manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way or
property or any property of another.
   (B)   The owner of a cat may permit the cat to run at large within the
corporate limits subject to any restrictions or prohibitions otherwise imposed
by the City Council.
   (C)   Any animal found running at large or tethered or staked out in
violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be impounded or
destroyed as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit anyone to own an
animal in the corporate limits of the city that is prohibited by the City
Council.
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-526 and 17-547
   Fine for permitting collarless dog to run at large, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §
54-607
§ 92.03 CRUELTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly, inhumanely or unnecessarily
beat, injure, overwork or insufficiently shelter and feed any animals.
(Prior Code, § 2-310) (Ord. 55, passed 12-5-1978) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 KILLING, POISONING AND INJURING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, administer or cause to be
administered poison of any sort to, or in any manner injure, maim or destroy or
attempt to injure, maim or destroy any animal or to place any poison or
poisoned food where it is accessible to an animal, except that:
   (A)   This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or animal
control officer acting within his or her power and duty;
   (B)   This section shall not apply if the animal is vicious, dangerous or
showing characteristics of rabies and cannot be captured without danger to the
persons attempting to effect a capture of the animal; and
   (C)   Any owner of a dog that he or she wishes to be destroyed may place the
dog in an animal pound or shelter or with a licensed veterinarian to be
humanely destroyed and disposed of according to the provisions in this chapter
or other provisions of law.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.
      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not
include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this
section.
      BOVINE. A cow, an ox or a bison.
      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal’s health.
      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the State Patrol, any county or
deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of the city or any other city or
village or any other public official authorized by the city or any other city
or village to enforce state or local animal control laws, rules, regulations or
ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also includes a special investigator
appointed as a deputy state sheriff as authorized pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §
81-201 while acting within the authority of the Director of Agriculture.
      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds or poultry.
      OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises owned or
occupied by such person.
      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1008)
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for or
impound the animal.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of a law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or
cruelly mistreated to make prompt investigation of such violation. A law
enforcement officer may, in lieu of making an arrest, issue a citation to the
owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 29-422 through 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer’s
negligence.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1012)
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1009)
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit cruelty to animals, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-138
   Exemptions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1013
   Serious illness or injury to animal; death of animal; felony, see Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 28-1008 and 28-1009
§ 92.06 LIVESTOCK BANNED WITHIN CITY; EXCEPTION FOR CHICKENS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the corporate
limits of the city any horse, mule, sheep, cow, goat, swine or other livestock
or any poultry, including, but not limited to, turkeys, geese, ducks or other
fowl, and except that chickens may be kept pursuant to the terms of §
92.07.
(Prior Code, § 2-501) (Ord. 739, passed 1-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 KEEPING OF CHICKENS; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or maintain within
the corporate limits of the city any chicken without a valid license issued by
the city pursuant to the following regulations:
      (1)   Application shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be on a form
furnished by the city;
      (2)   The fee for such license shall be established by the city;
      (3)   No license shall be assignable or transferable either as to
licensee or location; and
      (4)   A license issued pursuant to this section may be administratively
revoked for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this section or
any other applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule
or regulation as determined by the City Police Department or the City Building
Inspector.
   (B)   The requirements for the issuance of a license by the city to own,
keep, harbor or have custody or control over chickens are as follows.
      (1)   Chickens shall not be permitted on any multi-family lot.
      (2)   No more than six chickens shall be permitted on any single-family
lot.
      (3)   The chickens must be housed in a chicken facility maintained in
compliance with all of the city’s requirements as a condition of the license.
The requirements for the chicken facility include:
         (a)   Must be in good repair, capable of being maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, free of vermin, obnoxious smells and substances;
         (b)   Shall not constitute a nuisance or disturb neighboring residents
due to noise, odor or threats to public health;
         (c)   Shall prevent chickens from roaming at large and prevent entry
by predators and members of the general public;
         (d)   Shall only be located in the rear yard of a lot, not in the
front or side yards of a lot; and
         (e)   Shall be located so as to be at least 30 feet from any dwelling,
street, public sidewalk, public building and park or recreational area;
provided, however, that the chicken facility may be located within 30 feet of
an alley.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any chicken to
run or fly at large within the corporate limits of the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or have under
his, her or its care, custody or control any cock or rooster chicken. The
unlawful keeping or harboring of cocks or roosters is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
   (E)   Offal, manure and waste material shall not be permitted to accumulate
nor be confined in any manner that is conducive to the breeding or attraction
of flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or in any manner that endangers
the public health or safety.
   (F)   The slaughtering or destruction of chickens within the corporate
limits of the city shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 2-506) (Ord. 739, passed 1-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or interfere with any
city police officer who is performing any duty enjoined upon him or her by the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-309) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-906
DOGS
§ 92.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be in or about his
or her house, store or enclosure or to remain to be fed for ten days or more
shall be deemed the OWNER and possessor of such dog and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 2-304)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 54-606 and 71-4401
§ 92.21 LICENSE.
   Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog over the age of four months
within the city shall, within ten days after acquisition of the dog, obtain a
license for each such dog annually by and before March 31. Such license fee
shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
The tax shall be delinquent from and after March 31; provided, that the
possessor of any dog brought into or harbored within the corporate limits
subsequent to March 31 of any year shall be liable for the payment of the dog
tax levied herein and such tax shall be delinquent if not paid within ten days
thereafter. Licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon the payment of a
license fee fixed by resolution of the City Council. Said license shall not be
transferable, and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale or other
disposition of the licensed dog. The owner shall state at the time the
application is made, upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his or her
name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog. When the
license is applied for, the owner shall present a certificate showing that each
dog has had a rabies shot pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 71-4401 through 71-
4412, effective for the ensuing year of the license. No license or tag shall be
issued until such certificate is shown.
(Prior Code, § 2-301) (Ord. 55, passed 12-5-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-526, 54-603 and 71-4412
§ 92.22 LICENSE TAGS.
   (A)   Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue to a dog
owner a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The tag shall be properly
attached to the collar or harness of each dog so licensed and shall entitle the
owner to keep or harbor the dog until March 31 following such licensing. All
license fees and collections shall be immediately credited to the General Fund.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to issue lifetime tags of a
suitable design renewed annually. In the event that a tag is lost, and upon
request of the owner, the Clerk shall issue a duplicate tag for a fee of $1.
(Prior Code, § 2-302) (Ord. 720, passed 3-12-2019; Ord. 801, passed 12-12-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-526 and 54-603
§ 92.23 WRONGFUL LICENSING.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog to permit
or allow such dog to wear any license, metallic tag or other city
identification than that issued by the City Clerk for dogs.
(Prior Code, § 2-303) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-526 and 54-603
§ 92.24 UNCOLLARED OR UNHARNESSED.
   (A)   All dogs found running at large upon the streets and public grounds of
the city without a collar or harness are hereby declared a public nuisance.
   (B)   Uncollared or unharnessed dogs found running at large by city
personnel shall be destroyed or impounded at a dog boarding kennel as
designated by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-305) (Ord. 431, passed 7-10-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 54-605
§ 92.25 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow it to run at
large at any time within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be the duty
of the city police to cause any dog found to be running at large within the
city to be captured and impounded.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a dog found RUNNING AT LARGE shall
mean it has been found off the premises of the owner and not under control of
the owner or a responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope,
cage or other suitable means of physical restraint.
(Prior Code, § 2-306) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-526 and 54-607
§ 92.26 CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE.
   The city police shall have the authority to kill any animals showing vicious
tendencies or characteristics of rabies which make capture impossible because
of the danger involved.
(Prior Code, § 2-307)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-526
§ 92.27 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PIT BULL.
         (a)   Bull Terrier breed of dogs;
         (b)   Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs; or
         (c)   American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dogs.
      UNCONFINED. Such dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the person
owning, harboring or having the care of such vicious dog. Such pen or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom
secured to the sides, then the sides must be imbedded in the ground no less
than two feet.
      VICIOUS DOG.
         (a)   Any dog of a dangerous or ferocious disposition that habitually
snaps or manifests a disposition to bite;
         (b)   Any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to
cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or domestic animals;
or
         (c)   Any dog which attacks a human or a domestic animal on two or
more occasions without provocation.
   (B)   No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious dog
shall permit such dog to go unconfined on his or her premises.
   (C)   No person owning, harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall
suffer or permit such dog to go beyond his or her premises unless such dog is
secured with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit
a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its
kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs
may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings and the
like. In addition, all vicious dogs on a leash outside the animal’s kennel must
be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting
persons or other animals.
   (D)   No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house
or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own
volition. In addition, no such dog may be kept in a house or structure when the
windows are open or when screened windows or screen doors are the only
obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
   (E)   Every owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog within the city shall
display in a prominent place on his or her premises a sign easily readable by
the public, bearing the words “vicious dog.” In addition, a similar sign is
required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
   (F)   (1)   Every owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog must provide to
the City Clerk proof of public liability insurance in a single incident amount
of $50,000 per bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage
to property owned by any person which may result from the owning, keeping or
maintaining of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no
cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten days’ written notice is
first given to the City Clerk.
      (2)   If any vicious dog is allowed to run at large, the city police
shall have the authority to put the dog to death.
(Prior Code, § 2-308) (Ord. 212, passed 7-12-1988; Ord. 431, passed 7-10-2001)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 REMOVAL OF COLLAR, HARNESS OR TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, the
collar, harness, metallic license tag or rabies tag from any dog without the
consent of the owner of the dog.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to injure or destroy any
real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner of the dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, may be
made to be liable to the person injured in an amount equal to the value of the
damage sustained.
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against injuries or annoyances, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-
526
   Statutory liability for damages, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 54-601, 54-606 and
56-602
§ 92.30 BARKING AND CHASING; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to annoy or disturb
any neighborhood or person by loud, continued or frequent barking, howling or
yelping or to habitually bark at or chase pedestrians, drivers or owners of
horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets or alleys in
the city.
   (B)   Upon the written complaint of two or more affected persons from
different households, filed within any 30-day period with the City Clerk or
animal control officer, that any dog owned by the person named in the complaint
is an annoyance or disturbance, or otherwise violates the provisions of this
section, the city police or animal control officer shall investigate the
complaint and, if in his or her opinion the situation warrants, notify the
owner to silence and restrain the dog.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to any
city animal shelter.
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against annoyances, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-526
§ 92.31 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of designated city personnel to capture, secure
and remove in a humane manner any dog requiring impoundment for violating any
of the provisions of this chapter. Notice of impoundment of any animal,
including any significant marks or identifications, shall be posted at City
Hall within 24 hours after impoundment as public notification of such
impoundment.
   (B)   Any dog may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment
by payment of fees charged by the designated impound facility and any other
fees set by resolution of the City Council. The owner shall then be required to
comply with the licensing and rabies vaccination requirements within 72 hours
after release. If any dog is not claimed at the end of three days after public
notice has been given, the city shall acquire legal title to such unlicensed
dog impounded for a period longer than three days after giving notice. If the
city disposes of any dog, such disposition shall be accomplished by a duly
licensed doctor of veterinary medicine at the expense of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-315) (Ord. 178, passed 5-6-1986; Ord. 431, passed 7-10-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-548 and 71-4408
§ 92.32 KENNELS.
   (A)   Definitions; fee.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         KENNEL. Any premises on which three or more dogs at least four months
old or more are maintained or kept.
      (2)   A fee of $25 shall be paid each year to the City Clerk by the owner
of a dog kennel. The licensing year shall be the same as that for individual
dogs, and the owner shall be liable for the entire fee even though his or her
premises qualifies as a kennel for only part of a licensing year. The owner
shall not be required to pay a license fee for each dog in the kennel in
addition to the kennel fee and no license certificate and tag shall be required
for each dog in the kennel.
(Prior Code, § 2-401)
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept
any dog kennel upon any premises occupied by him or her or under his or her
charge or control without having first obtained a kennel permit from the
Council. Kennel permits may be issued by the Council upon written application,
setting forth a description of the premises and location of the same and such
other information as the Council may require.
      (2)   No kennel permit shall be issued for any premises until the Council
has first determined upon actual viewing and inspection that the operation of
such kennel will not constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
The holder of any kennel permit shall allow the inspection of such premises at
any reasonable time by an authorized agent of the city to determine that the
premises for which the permit is issued is maintained in a humane and sanitary
manner. Such permit is subject to revocation if the premises are found to be
maintained otherwise.
      (3)   The Council shall have power and authority to revoke any kennel
permit at any time in its sole discretion by refunding the kennel permit fee to
the holder thereof.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any animal
shelter or animal hospital operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in
the State of Nebraska.
(Prior Code, § 2-402)
(Ord. 801, passed 12-12-2023)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
92.27 shall be fined not more than $500. In addition, any vicious dog which
attacks a human being or another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when,
in the court’s judgment, such vicious dog represents a continuing threat of
serious harm to human beings or domestic animals. In addition, any person found
guilty of violating §
92.27 shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for
identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and
veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection
of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction
of any such dog.
(Prior Code, § 2-308) (Ord. 212, passed 7-12-1988; Ord. 431, passed 7-10-2001)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Fire Prevention Code
   
93.02   Fire Code enforcement
   
93.03   Lawful entry
   
93.04   Violation notice
   
93.05   Smoking in public places
   
93.06   Homemade stove; prohibited fuels
   
93.07   Burning prohibited; exceptions; permits
   
93.08   Stoves, furnaces and chimneys
   
93.09   Open burning ban; waiver
   
93.10   Building repair; noncombustible material required
   
93.11   Lumber yards; combustible materials
   
93.12   Rapid entry key lockbox
Fireworks
   
93.25   Purpose
   
93.26   Definitions
   
93.27   Fireworks sales permit required
   
93.28   Application procedure
   
93.29   Number of permits limited
   
93.30   Sales regulations
   
93.31   Location and site regulations
   
93.32   Proximity to certain businesses or activities
   
93.33   Screening
   
93.34   Fire safety
   
93.35   Removal
   
93.36   Report
Hazardous Materials and Explosives
   
93.50   Poisonous or flammable gas
   
93.51   Explosive material; storage
   
93.52   Explosive material; bullets
   
93.53   Explosive material; blasting permits
   
93.54   Explosive material; registration
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire
Marshal relating to fire prevention are incorporated by reference into this
code and made a part of this chapter as though spread at large herein, together
with all subsequent amendments thereto. Three copies of the Fire Prevention
Code shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be available for public
inspection during office hours.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
§ 93.02 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated Fire
Code provisions, and all infractions shall be reported immediately to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
§ 93.03 LAWFUL ENTRY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire
Inspector, as designated by the City Council, to inspect the structure for
purposes of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are likely
to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the city ordinances
in regard to the possibility of fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)
§ 93.04 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
structure that was lawfully inspected as herein prescribed, and who receives
written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the city
ordinances, to correct the condition within five days of the date of receipt of
such notice.
(Prior Code, § 7-104)
§ 93.05 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite a lighter, strike a match or
indulge in the smoking of tobacco on or in any building or structure at which
any public meeting is held to which the general public is entitled to be
present.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 HOMEMADE STOVE; PROHIBITED FUELS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow crank case drainings, oil or
other flammable substances, other than wood, to be burned in a homemade stove.
(Prior Code, § 7-107) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to start or build or cause to start or build or
to maintain any fire on public or private property; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   For recreational purposes or for outdoor cooking of food for human
consumption on other than commercial premises if no nuisance or hazard is
created;
      (2)   For essential agricultural operations in the growing of crops if no
nuisance or traffic hazard is created;
      (3)   Fires set in the operation of smokeless flare stacks for the
combustion of waste gases; provided, that emissions therefrom:
         (a)   Are not of a shade or density equal to or darker than that
designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart or its equivalent; and
         (b)   Are not of such opacity as to obscure an observer’s view to a
degree equal to or greater than that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Chart or equivalent.
      (4)   When a burn permit has been obtained from the City Clerk for:
         (a)   Destroying organic materials when the materials to be burned
originate only from the site stated in the permit; or
         (b)   Training public or industrial firefighting personnel.
   (B)   No application for a burn permit to be issued by the city shall be
accepted unless it is accompanied by a current and valid site-specific burn
permit from City Suburban Fire District No. 5.
   (C)   An application for a burn permit from the city shall be made in the
following manner.
      (1)   Application shall be made and filed on such form as shall be
prescribed by the City Clerk.
      (2)   An application fee shall be paid to the City Clerk with the
application. None of the application fee will be refunded. Said fee shall be as
set by resolution by the City Council and kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
      (3)   Burn permits shall be of two types, residential and commercial. A
residential burn permit shall be issued when the site stated in the permit is a
residential lot; all other burn permits shall be commercial burn permits.
   (D)   Any burn permit issued by the city shall be deemed to incorporate and
include any conditions or restrictions imposed by the burn permit issued by
City Suburban Fire District No. 5.
(Prior Code, § 7-108) (Ord. 787, passed 4-11-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 STOVES, FURNACES AND CHIMNEYS.
   (A)   All furnaces, stoves and other heating devices shall be installed at a
proper distance from combustible materials and portions of the building. Any
combustible materials or portions of the building that are dangerously close to
such heating devices shall be protected by noncombustible material.
   (B)   This section shall apply both to existing structures and those which
may hereafter be erected.
(Prior Code, § 7-109)
§ 93.09 OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.
   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under division (A) above
for an area under the City Fire Department’s jurisdiction by issuing an open
burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct open burning. The
permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to conduct open burning
shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Chief and on a form provided by the
State Fire Marshal.
   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the City Fire
Department’s jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior to
starting the burn.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions acceptable
for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under division (B) above.
   (E)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for each such
permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the City Council for inclusion in
the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds shall not
reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee shall be
collected from any state or political subdivision to which such a permit is
issued to conduct open burning under division (B) above in the course of that
state’s or political subdivision’s official duties.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-520.01) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.10 BUILDING REPAIR; NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permitted repairs; application, permit. It shall be unlawful for any
person to repair, alter or add to any building where the repair is less than
50% of the building unless the person shall first submit an application to the
City Administrator to make such repairs, alterations or to add to any building
and shall state on the application that the material used will be
noncombustible and approved by the Building Inspector. Repairs in the form of
patching and other minor repairs shall not require a permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-111)
   (B)   Removal required. In the event that any wooden or combustible building
or structure, or any noncombustible building is damaged to the extent of 50% or
more of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall not be repaired or
rebuilt but shall be taken down and removed within 15 days from the date of
such fire or other casualty.
(Prior Code, § 7-112)
   (C)   Removal or repair required.
      (1)   In the event that a building becomes damaged by fire, wind, flood,
vandalism or any other cause to the extent of less than 50% of its value,
exclusive of the foundation, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or
occupant to remove or repair the building in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a building to stand in
such damaged or decayed condition. Any such building shall be removed or
repaired within 30 days after receiving notice to do so by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-113)
Penalty, see §
93.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-550
§ 93.11 LUMBER YARDS; COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish or maintain any
lumber yard or place for the piling, storing, keeping or selling lumber, or to
keep any lime, lath, shingles, hay, straw or other combustible materials on any
lot or parcel of ground, unless the same are securely kept in a building
constructed of brick, stone, concrete or other noncombustible material;
provided, that the foregoing shall not apply to lumberyards now established and
in use.
(Prior Code, § 7-114) Penalty, see §
93.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-549
§ 93.12 RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCKBOX.
   (A)   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system or automatic suppression system, or such structures that are secured in
a manner that restricts access during an emergency, shall be equipped with an
approved KnoxBox brand key lockbox at or near the main entrance or such other
location required by the City Fire Department.
   (B)   All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have
the approved KnoxBox brand key lockbox installed and operational prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit.
   (C)   All structures in existence on the effective date of this section and
subject to this section shall have three years from the effective date of this
section to have a KnoxBox brand key lockbox installed and operational.
   (D)   When a property is accessed through a locked fence, a locked gate or
cross arm that impedes ingress through required fire lanes by means of a key or
swipe card, it shall be equipped with a KnoxBox brand key lockbox at a location
approved by the City Fire Department or shall be equipped with a security
padlock utilizing a key code approved by the City Fire Department.
   (E)   The owner or operator of a structure required to have a KnoxBox brand
key lockbox shall at all times keep in the lockbox the following:
      (1)   Labeled keys to locked points of entry, whether in interior or
exterior of such buildings;
      (2)   Labeled keys to any locked mechanical rooms;
      (3)   Labeled keys to any fenced or secured areas;
      (4)   Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by the City
Fire Department; and
      (5)   A card containing the names of emergency contact persons and phone
numbers for each such person.
   (F)   Owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings may install a KnoxBox
brand key lockbox but shall not be required to do so.
(Prior Code, § 7-115) (Ord. 783, passed 11-8-2022)
FIREWORKS
§ 93.25 PURPOSE.
   The sale of any fireworks increases the risk of danger to public health and
safety. The city, however, recognizes the historic role of fireworks as a means
of celebration within the United States and the state and therefore allows the
sale of consumer fireworks upon compliance with the following regulations,
which are enacted to protect public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 7-301) (Ord. 600, passed 12-28-2009; Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 93.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY BETTERMENT. Taking actions which generally better or enhance the
community of the city, such as:
      (1)   The acquisition, improvement and maintenance of parks and
recreational facilities, public equipment and other items for community use and
enjoyment or to be used by the city in service to the community;
      (2)   The recruitment and attraction of new businesses and jobs to the
city community;
      (3)   Athletic programs for the community; and
      (4)   Other acquisitions, services or programs of general benefit to the
city community.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. As defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1241, as amended.
   CONTRACTOR. A corporation, organization or individual having a valid license
or permit from the state for the retail sale of consumer fireworks which has a
contract with a not-for-profit corporation or organization to sell consumer
fireworks within the city and which not-for-profit corporation or organization
shall use the net proceeds from the sale of such consumer fireworks for
community betterment in the city.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation and which
meets the definition of consumer or special fireworks set forth by the United
States Department of Transportation in 49 C.F.R.
   FIREWORKS SEASON. Cumulatively, the periods during which consumer fireworks
may be sold at retail during any given year, namely June 24 through July 5
inclusive.
   NET PROCEEDS. Gross sales less the cost of fireworks, application and permit
fees, rental or lease expense, advertising and similar costs of operation of
the fireworks stand. Volunteer salespersons shall be used and any remuneration
paid or given to persons performing services in connection with the sale of
fireworks shall not be deemed a cost of operation.
(Prior Code, § 7-302) (Ord. 600, passed 12-28-2009; Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011;
Ord. 620, passed 4-12-2011)
§ 93.27 FIREWORKS SALES PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, offer for sale
or hold for sale any fireworks in the city unless and until such person or
entity shall have first obtained a permit therefor from the City Council and
shall have complied with this subchapter in all respects. Such a permit shall
be valid for only one fireworks season, and the issuance of a permit for one
particular fireworks season does not create any expectation of or property
interest in the issuance of a permit for another fireworks season. Each
separate location for the sale of fireworks shall be required to have a
separate permit from the city.
   (B)   In instances where a not-for-profit corporation or organization has
contracted with a contractor for the retail sale of fireworks at a particular
location, the permit from the city shall list both the not-for-profit
corporation or organization and the contractor as the permit holders at such
location. A contractor shall be required to have a separate permit for the
retail sale of fireworks from the State Fire Marshal for each location in the
city at which it proposes to sell fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 7-303) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 620, passed 4-12-2011)
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.28 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application for a fireworks sales permit shall be made in the
following manner:
      (1)   Application shall be made on such form as shall be prescribed by
the City Clerk and shall be filed with the Clerk only from January 1 through
January 31 of the year for which the permit is sought.
      (2)   Only the following organizations, associations or entities shall be
eligible for a permit:
         (a)   Nonprofit organizations and associations using volunteer
salespersons and which will use the net proceeds from the sale of fireworks for
community betterment purposes within the city; and
         (b)   Contractors, as such term is defined in §
93.26.
      (3)   The application shall include all of the following:
         (a)   A site and floor plan, drawn to scale in a manner acceptable to
the City Building Inspector, showing location of the stand or tent, setback
from rights-of-way, distance to nearest building or structure, placement of
fire extinguishers, all entrances and exits, dock storage areas, pedestrian
traffic flow, parking areas and vehicular traffic flow and nature of occupants
of nearest buildings;
         (b)   A sign plan showing the location and size of all planned
signage. A temporary sign permit shall be obtained separately, if required;
         (c)   Detailed information on the tent or stand to be erected on the
site;
         (d)   Detailed information regarding the plan for storage of all
fireworks during both open and closed hours;
         (e)   If the applicant has held a permit in any of the three preceding
years, it must file with its application a written statement of the income and
expenses from the sale of its fireworks within the city for each of such years,
together with a statement of its community betterment expenditures made from
the net proceeds from the sale of fireworks in each said year;
         (f)   The applicant shall state in detail the nature of the community
betterment purpose for which the net proceeds from the current year’s sale of
fireworks will be utilized if the permit is granted;
         (g)   A signed statement from the owner of the property upon which the
sales will be conducted, granting the applicant permission to so utilize the
property;
         (h)   An application fee of $50 shall be paid to the City Clerk with
the application. None of the application fee will be refunded; and
         (i)   If the applicant is a contractor, the following information
shall be supplied: the full name, address, phone number and e-mail address of
the contractor; and a copy of the signed contract with the not-for-profit
corporation or organization.
   (B)   After the application filing period, the City Clerk shall review the
applications and submit recommended point tallies on the same to the City
Council. The City Building Inspector shall review the applications and, if
necessary, consult with other city departments and forward general
recommendations on the applications to the City Clerk and to the City Council
regarding issues relevant to the applications. Applications will be evaluated
on the following criteria point system.
      (1)   Each year all applications will start out with a total of 20
points.
      (2)   Applications shall be automatically disqualified if they are
received after January 31 or if the applicant is a prior-year permit holder
that has displayed and/or sold or attempted to sell illegal fireworks or has
otherwise violated the law regarding the operation of its fireworks stand.
      (3)   Applications that are not disqualified will be reviewed by the City
Clerk and will lose points according to the following schedule:
Infraction Point Deduction
Infraction                                                    Point Deduction
Concerns with proposed location based on recommendation from  5
city departments
Lack of sufficient detail or inadequacy regarding previous    5
years income and expenditures
Lack of sufficient detail or inadequacy regarding proposed    5
community betterment expenditures
Missing information regarding the fireworks sales application 2
Missing information regarding the sign plan                   2
Missing information regarding the site plan                   2
Missing information regarding the storage of fireworks        2
Missing information regarding the tent or stand to be used    2
 
   (C)   In the event of a tie or ties after ranking, first preference shall be
given to those eligible applicants that identify community betterment
acquisitions or services programs which will benefit the city as a whole. Those
that benefit only particular areas or neighborhoods of the city shall have
second preference. If all other application requirements are met, special
consideration will be given to applicants agreeing to relocate and operate a
fireworks stand.
   (D)   After the application filing period and after the City Clerk’s
submission of recommendations, the City Council shall review all applications
and by resolution either approve, approve with conditions or deny each such
application.
   (E)   Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant shall pay to the city a
permit fee of $250 and shall supply to the City Clerk a copy of a certificate
of insurance issued by an insurance company in good standing, authorized to do
business in the state, providing the applicant with combined liability coverage
for bodily, injury and property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000 per
occurrence and $1,000,000 in aggregate coverage and naming the city as an
additional insured.
   (F)   The permit may be obtained at the office of the City Clerk only after
an inspection of the fireworks stand or place of sale by the City Building
Inspector to determine if such stand or place of sale conforms to all city
laws, building codes, electrical codes, fire safety codes and land use
regulations. The applicant shall request the city to make such inspection not
later than ten days prior to the opening day of the particular period of the
fireworks season, and such inspection shall be made by the city within a
reasonable time after the request
   (G)   Permits will be valid only for the period specified in this subchapter
for the particular fireworks sales season and will automatically terminate on
the specified ending date. A permit shall allow sales at only one location in
the city. Permit holders shall not have any property right to or expectation of
receiving a permit or operating a fireworks stand in the city in any future
year or period.
   (H)   The City Council may revoke a permit if it determines that the permit
holder has violated this code or any of the terms or conditions of the permit.
Such revocation shall be effective immediately.
(Prior Code, § 7-304) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 620, passed 4-12-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.29 NUMBER OF PERMITS LIMITED.
   Permits for the sale of fireworks shall be limited to two in number for a
fireworks season, this number being the maximum number of permits that may
normally be safely regulated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-305) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.30 SALES REGULATIONS.
   Persons holding a permit to sell fireworks shall comply with the following
regulations.
   (A)   Permit holders may sell only consumer fireworks.
   (B)   Permit holders may sell consumer fireworks only during the fireworks
season. Within the fireworks season, consumer fireworks may be sold only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (C)   Permit holders shall, during such times in which consumer fireworks
are being sold, have an adult in charge of its stand or retail outlet and shall
display therein the required permit in a conspicuous manner and place.
   (D)   Permit holders shall at all times comply with all regulations in this
subchapter or elsewhere in this code and with state and federal laws.
   (E)   Permit holders shall at no time sell any fireworks to any person under
12 years of age.
   (F)   Any persons actually selling or offering for sale any fireworks shall
be at least 16 years of age.
   (G)   The permit holder shall issue a fireworks use safety pamphlet,
approved by the city, to each person purchasing any fireworks.
   (H)   The permit holder shall maintain sufficient security personnel on the
site of the sales facility at all times when fireworks are stored on the site
while the sales facility is closed. Between the salespersons on the site while
the facility is open and the security personnel on the site while the sales
facility is closed, the site shall be supervised and monitored 24 hours per
day.
   (I)   The permit holder shall obtain all licenses or permits required by the
state.
(Prior Code, § 7-306) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.31 LOCATION AND SITE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to all other requirements and regulations of the city, all
temporary fireworks stands or places of sale of fireworks shall be located and
set back at least 25 feet from the nearest public right-of-way and be separated
from any permanent structure by a minimum of 50 feet.
   (B)   Parking for the sales facility shall be provided on a surface approved
by the City Building Inspector.
   (C)   Any structure in which fireworks are sold and to which pedestrian
traffic is allowed shall have a minimum of two points of ingress/egress located
so that each point serves approximately one-half of the structure. Both
ingress/egress locations shall be unobstructed at all times that the facility
is open.
(Prior Code, § 7-307) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.32 PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN BUSINESSES OR ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Stands and areas where fireworks are to be sold shall be located at
least 300 feet from any gasoline or liquid propane gas dispensing station or
repair shop using flammable materials and at least 20 feet from any other
establishment selling fireworks. Such distance shall be measured from the
closest point where fireworks are sold or stored to the closest point where
gasoline, liquid propane gas or combustible materials are dispensed or stored
above ground or from the closest point where other fireworks are sold or
stored, as the case may be.
   (B)   Stands and areas where fireworks are to be sold shall be located at
least 50 feet from any childcare center, school (any governmental or privately
supported place or institution of education or physical instruction) or
playground associated with any daycare center or school. Such distance shall be
measured from the closest point where fireworks are sold or stored to the
closest point of the daycare center, school or playground. Fireworks shall not
be sold in an area zoned residential or in any zoning district which does not
permit retail sales.
(Prior Code, § 7-308) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 620, passed 4-12-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.33 SCREENING.
   All stands and places for the sale of fireworks shall screen all supplies
sold and stored so as to prevent other fireworks from being tossed or thrown
into such supplies.
(Prior Code, § 7-309) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.34 FIRE SAFETY.
   Fire extinguishers and “No Smoking” signs shall be placed on the site as
required by the city’s fire code regulations on retail display and sale of
fireworks. The permit holder shall comply with the rules for retail sales of
consumer fireworks contained in that most recent edition of the National Fire
Protection Association (“NFPA”) Standard 1124, Chapter 7, which has been
adopted by the State Fire Marshal. In the event of conflict between a provision
of NFPA 1124, Chapter 7, and another rule in this code, the stricter or more
restrictive rule shall apply. A copy of the NFPA 1124, Chapter 7, shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(Prior Code, § 7-310) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.35 REMOVAL.
   Immediately after the fireworks sale season, the permit holder shall clean
the area in and around any stand where fireworks were sold and remove any
portable tent or stand from its temporary location. Such work shall be
completed within three days of the closing of the particular period of the
fireworks season.
(Prior Code, § 7-311) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
§ 93.36 REPORT.
   Each permit holder shall, on or before December 1 of the year for which the
permit is held, file with the City Clerk a written statement of the income and
expenses from the sale of its fireworks within the city for such year, together
with a detailed statement of its community betterment expenditures made from
the net proceeds from the sale of fireworks in such year.
(Prior Code, § 7-312) (Ord. 617, passed 2-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1237, 28-1239.01, 28-1243 and
28-1249
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 93.50 POISONOUS OR FLAMMABLE GAS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep in the city
any form of poisonous or flammable gas or liquefied petroleum gas in excess of
100 gallons or to add to, enlarge or replace any facility used for the storage
of such gases must first get permission from the City Council. The Council
shall require the name of the gas, the place of storage and the amount of gas
stored. If permission is granted, the City Council shall prescribe such rules,
regulations and precautionary actions as may be deemed necessary.
   (B)   Permit requirements for the initial construction or location of
storage facilities shall not apply to those facilities in existence on the
effective date of this section; provided, that any such present use that is
discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not be revived without a permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-105)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-549
§ 93.51 EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL; STORAGE.
   Dynamite and other explosives shall be stored in a proper receptacle made of
concrete, metal or stone, which shall be closed at all times except when
actually in use. Such receptacle shall not be located in any room where there
is a flame or flammable materials.
(Prior Code, § 7-201)
§ 93.52 EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL; BULLETS.
   Cartridges, shells and percussion caps shall be kept in their original
containers away from flame, flammable materials and high explosives.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
§ 93.53 EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL; BLASTING PERMITS.
   Any person wishing to discharge high explosives must first secure a permit
from the City Council and shall discharge such explosives in conformance with
such directives and precautions as may be prescribed under the direction and
supervision of the Council. In no case shall any person perform blasting
operations unless operating under the direct supervision of a person in
possession of a valid user’s permit issued by the State Patrol.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-556
§ 93.54 EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL; REGISTRATION.
   Any person keeping or storing dynamite, nitroglycerin, gun powder or other
high explosives in any quantity shall register such information as the City
Council may require with the City Clerk, who shall forward such information to
the local fire official.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, whether set forth at full length
herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and fined in a sum of not more than $500. Each day’s maintenance of the same
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
   (B)   Any person or entity who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of §
93.07 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined as follows. For a
violation related to a residential burn permit and commercial burn permit, a
fine shall be levied in a sum of not more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 7-108) (Ord. 787, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-520.01
TITLE XI: BUSINESS LICENSING
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   SALVAGE YARDS
      
113.   SELF-SERVE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING STATIONS
      
114.   AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
      
115.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
      
116.   RAILROAD COMPANIES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Occupation Taxes
   
110.01   Levies authorized
   
110.02   Collection dates
   
110.03   Certificates
   
110.04   Failure to pay
   
110.05   Registration fees
Nonresident Sales
   
110.20   Regulation
   
110.21   Hours of solicitation
   
110.22   Exceptions
General Contractors
   
110.35   Licensing, registration, insurance and fees
   
110.36   Exceptions
 
   
110.99   Penalty
OCCUPATION TAXES
§ 110.01 LEVIES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The city shall have power to raise revenue by levying and collecting a
license tax on any occupation or business within the limits of the city and
regulate such occupation or business by ordinance. Any occupation tax imposed
pursuant to this section shall make a reasonable classification of businesses,
users of space or kinds of transactions for purposes of imposing such tax,
except that no occupation tax shall be imposed on any transaction which is
subject to tax under Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140,
66-4,145, 66-4,146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 or which is exempt from tax under Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 77-2704.24. The occupation tax shall be imposed in the manner
provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1208, except that Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1208
does not apply to an occupation tax subject to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 86-704. All
such taxes shall be uniform in respect to the classes upon which they are
imposed. All scientific and literary lectures and entertainments shall be
exempt from such taxation, as well as concerts and other musical entertainments
given exclusively by the citizens of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-525)
   (B)   The City Council shall have authority by ordinance to impose an
occupation tax of not more than $5 per annum on each fire insurance
corporation, company or association, doing business in the city, for the use,
support and benefit of volunteer Fire Departments, regularly organized under
the laws of the state regulating the same. The City Clerk shall collect with
diligence the occupation tax so imposed. Upon the receipt of the tax, the Clerk
shall pay over the proceeds thereof to the City Treasurer who shall credit the
same to a fund to be known as special occupation tax fund for benefit of the
volunteer Fire Department. Upon proper claim filed by the Chief of the Fire
Department and allowed by the City Council, the Treasurer shall pay over the
proceeds of the tax in the fund from time to time for the use of the Fire
Department, as hereinbefore provided.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 35-106)
   (C)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm or
corporation licensed under the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§ 53-101 et seq. and doing business within the corporate limits of the city in
any sum which exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be
paid under the Act to obtain such license.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-132)
Statutory reference:
   Occupation taxes generating more than $300,000; imposition or increase;
election required, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1208
§ 110.02 COLLECTION DATES.
   Unless provided otherwise or levied daily, any occupation taxes imposed by
the City Council shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year, except that
any occupation taxes collected from Class C liquor licensees shall be due and
payable on November 1 of each year. Upon payment of an occupation tax by any
person to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall give a receipt, properly dated,
specifying the person paying the tax and the amount paid. Any revenue collected
shall be deposited into the General Fund by the City Treasurer except as
otherwise specifically provided. The Treasurer shall keep an accurate account
of all revenue turned over to him or her. All forms and receipts herein
mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall then be kept by each
party in the transaction.
§ 110.03 CERTIFICATES.
   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The certificate shall specify the amount of the tax
and the name of the person and business that paid the tax. The occupation tax
certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place or carried in such a
way as to be easily accessible while business is being conducted.
§ 110.04 FAILURE TO PAY.
   If any person, company or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided in this chapter on the day they become due and
payable, the city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due.
All delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until
paid.
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION FEES.
   The annual fees for registration of certain contractors and workers are as
follows.
Apprentice plumber            $5
Arborist                      $25
Electrical apprentice         $5
Electrical contractor         $25
Electrical journeyman         $10
Fire alarm installer          $10
General contractor            $25
Journeyman plumber            $10
Lawn sprinkler installer      $25
Master plumber                $25
Mechanical contractor         $25
Mechanical journeyman         $10
Water service and drain layer $25
 
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
NONRESIDENT SALES
§ 110.20 REGULATION.
   (A)   All nonresident individuals or businesses going door to door with the
intent to sell any goods, service, product or insurance shall, before doing
business within the city, make application for and be issued a license. This
registration and licensing is to prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous and
unhealthful goods and services, to protect the public by maintaining records of
the products sold and the persons and companies responsible for such sales, to
designate a place of trade if on public property and for the purpose of raising
revenue.
   (B)   (1)   Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk upon
blank forms supplied by the city, which shall contain all the necessary
information and documents required for the protection of the residents of the
city. Any person or persons granted a license shall be subject to any fees,
occupation taxes and other rules and regulations which the City Council deems
appropriate for the purposes stated herein.
      (2)   Any license so granted shall be subject to revocation in the event
that the information provided is inaccurate or misleading.
(Prior Code, § 4-301)
§ 110.21 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any license holder to solicit any individual
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless they have a previous
appointment with the resident of the premises solicited. It shall be unlawful
at any hour for any person to solicit without having a proper license on his or
her person at all times.
(Prior Code, § 4-302) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.22 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any person selling produce
raised within the county, to wholesale salespeople soliciting merchants
directly, to residential route salespersons or to persons canvassing residents
within the city for religious, political or other noncommercial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 4-303)
GENERAL CONTRACTORS
§ 110.35 LICENSING, REGISTRATION, INSURANCE AND FEES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of general contracting within
the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction unless he or she
shall have first registered with the City Building Inspector.
   (B)   Engaging in the business of general contracting consists of
contracting for a certain price, fee, percentage or other compensation with the
owner or tenant of any property to build, construct, alter, repair, remodel or
demolish any building or structure upon such property or any portion thereof
for which a building permit is required. Engaging in the business of general
contracting does not encompass the performance of any work within a licensed
trade pursuant to a city trade license or registration pursuant to this code
and does not encompass any subcontractor performing work under a contract with
a general contractor registered with the city.
   (C)   Registration with the City Building Inspector shall require:
      (1)   Completion of a general contractor registration application form as
provided by the city;
      (2)   Submission of a current certificate of insurance which provides
coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000;
and
      (3)   Payment of the registration fee as provided in §
110.05.
   (D)   Each license shall be current from the date of issuance, up to and
including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed
before its expiration date by submission of the required application form,
documentation and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-610)
§ 110.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   Any work by a homeowner shall be excepted from the license and registration
requirements of this subchapter if such work is performed by a homeowner on a
single-family dwelling which he or she owns and in which he or she resides;
provided, however, that such work by homeowner shall still be subject to all
other applicable provisions and requirements of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-611)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter for which no other penalty is imposed shall, upon conviction,
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined in a sum of not more than $500
for each offense. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-1101)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person prohibited
   
111.03   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions
   
111.04   Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasi-public property
Licenses Required
   
111.15   Manufacture, sale, delivery and possession; general prohibitions;
exceptions
   
111.16   Retail licensing standards
   
111.17   Licenses; city powers and duties
   
111.18   License renewal; city powers and duties
   
111.19   Catering licenses
   
111.20   Licensed premises; inspections
   
111.21   Display of license
   
111.22   Citizen complaints
   
111.23   Form for citizen complaints
Retail Establishments
   
111.35   Sanitary conditions
   
111.36   Hours of sale
   
111.37   Credit sales prohibited
   
111.38   Spiking beer
   
111.39   Change of premises
   
111.40   Gambling
   
111.41   Sale for resale
   
111.42   Transportation of liquor by retail licensees
   
111.43   No delivery after closing hours
   
111.44   Restrictions on conduct of other business
   
111.45   Conduct prohibited on licensed premises
   
111.46   Advertisements and sales
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§
53-103.01 through 53-103.42 shall be used.
§ 111.02 SALE OR GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver,
or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any
minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-180) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except when the State Liquor Control Commission has issued a license
as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §
60-6,211.08, it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon
property owned or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision
thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such
property.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or
conducting any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-106.01. It is unlawful for any person
to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any
place open to the general public except as permitted by a license issued for
such premises pursuant to the Act. This division (B) does not apply to a retail
licensee while lawfully engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages or to
limousines or buses operated under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-186.01)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic
violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the
officer dangerous to himself, herself or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an
intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable
effort to take the intoxicated person to his or her home or to place the person
in any hospital, clinic or mental health substance use treatment center, or
with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent
injury. The effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer
contacts such facilities or doctor which have previously represented a
willingness to accept and treat such individuals and which regularly do accept
such individuals. If these efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the
officer may then place the intoxicated person in civil protective custody,
except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary
to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than
24 hours.
   (B)   The placement of the person in civil protective custody shall be
recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to
the person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.
   (C)   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section
shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and
shall not be criminally or civilly liable for these actions.
   (D)   The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this
section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be
made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MENTAL HEALTH SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT CENTER. Has the same meaning as in
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71-423.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or city-owned property.
      QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private or publicly owned property utilized for
proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which
invites public ingress and egress.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-1,121) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSES REQUIRED
§ 111.15 MANUFACTURE, SALE, DELIVERY AND POSSESSION; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport,
deliver, furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes except
as specifically provided in this chapter and the State Liquor Control Act.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent:
      (1)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in
this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and his or her
family or guests;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the product thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the maker
and his or her family and guests;
      (3)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing
or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any
hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from
possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients
of that hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed
pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the compounding of
prescriptions of licensed physicians;
      (4)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an
authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of
worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual or
ceremony;
      (5)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying alcoholic
liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person not a
minor;
      (6)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling alcoholic
liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
      (7)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and disposing
of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and
customers in the course of their employment;
      (8)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from completing a transaction
for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment if they are
not handling or serving alcoholic liquor; or
      (9)   Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving or selling
alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-168.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.16 RETAIL LICENSING STANDARDS.
   The City Council adopts the following licensing standards and criteria for
consideration by the Liquor Control Commission of any applicant for a retail
alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic
liquor, or for the expansion or change in location of the premises, in
accordance with the State Liquor Control Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-132(3)(a)
and § 7 of LB 911, 89th Legislature, Second Session, 1986:
   (A)   The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in the
area;
   (B)   Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of
the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems and the
proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
   (C)   Zoning restrictions;
   (D)   Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises;
   (E)   The existing population and projected growth, both city-wide and
within the area to be served;
   (F)   Existing liquor licenses, the class of such licenses and the distance
and time of travel to such licenses;
   (G)   The nature and needs of the neighborhood or community where the
proposed premises is located as well as its projected growth; and
   (H)   Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated in
conjunction with the proposed license is and will be consistent with the public
interest.
(Prior Code, § 4-203)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134
§ 111.17 LICENSES; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the State Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail,
bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery licensees carried on within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134.03)
   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail or
electronic delivery from the State Liquor Control Commission notice and a copy
of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a craft
brewery license or a microdistillery license, the City Council may make and
submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or refusal to
grant the license to the applicant.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-131)
   (C)   The City Council, with respect to licenses within the corporate limits
of the city, has the following powers, functions and duties with respect to
retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery licenses:
      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or bottle club
licenses issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the
right of appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under the State Liquor Control Act to
determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation adopted by the City Council has been or is being violated, and at
that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection with such
determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of
the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or
any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the local governing
body has been or is being violated shall report such violation in writing to
the Executive Director of the Commission:
         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such violation has
occurred;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing police
investigation; or
         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution related to
such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney determines
that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would jeopardize such
prosecution, whichever is later.
      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to
act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
      (4)   To receive retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the
same, after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the City
Treasurer;
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail,
bottle club, craft brewery or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
except as otherwise provided for bottle club licensees under state law, and to
hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the City
Council may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided in §
111.22, it determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the State Liquor Control Act or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation duly enacted, adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic
liquor. The order of cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the
Commission within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of
appeal with the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in the
manner provided for hearing on an application in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-133;
      (7)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
application as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-131, to fix a time and place
for a hearing at which the City Council shall receive evidence, either orally
or by affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the
propriety of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in
the city, one time not less than seven and not more than 14 days before the
time of the hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a
statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the City Council in
support of or in protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the
time of the hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the
date of receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after the hearing the
City Council shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings
a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the license. The City
Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy
of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice, except
that failure to comply with this provision shall not void any license issued by
the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of
publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for
costs;
      (8)   To review and authorize an application by a retail, bottle club,
craft brewery, farm winery or microdistillery licensee for a temporary
expansion of its licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the local
governing body to an immediately adjacent area owned or leased by the licensee
or to an immediately adjacent street, parking lot or alley, not to exceed 50
days for calendar year 2020 and, for each calendar year thereafter, not to
exceed 15 days per calendar year, as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 53-123.12
and 53-129; and
      (9)   To review and authorize an application by a craft brewery, farm
winery or microdistillery licensee that holds a promotional farmers market
special designated license for a permit to use such promotional farmers market
special designated license to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, which the
holder is licensed to produce, at a farmers market within the jurisdiction of
the local governing body as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-124.17. The local
governing body shall electronically notify the Commission within five days
after authorization of any permit pursuant to this division (C).
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134)
   (D)   (1)   When the State Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the City Clerk a retail, craft brewery or microdistillery license issued or
renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver the license to the licensee
upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:
         (a)   The license fee if by the terms of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-124 the
fee is payable to the City Treasurer;
         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the City
Council upon the application for the license;
         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-135.01; and
         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the city, except that Class
J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation taxes.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm or
corporation licensed under the State Liquor Control Act and doing business
within the corporate limits of the city in any sum which exceeds two times the
amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain that
license.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-132)
§ 111.18 LICENSE RENEWAL; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A retail or bottle club license issued by the State Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the City Council to require the licensee to
submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises located in an
area which is annexed to the city shall file a formal application for a
license, and while the application is pending, the licensee may continue all
license privileges until the original license expires or is canceled or
revoked. If that license expires within 60 days following the annexation date
of the area, the license may be renewed by order of the Commission for not more
than one year.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-135)
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the city, one time between January 10 and January 30
of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed by law of the right of
automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the city,
except that notice of the right of automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall
be published between the dates of July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written
protests to the issuance of automatic renewal of a license are filed in the
office of the City Clerk by three or more residents of the city on or before
February 10, or August 10 for Class C licenses, the City Council shall hold a
hearing to determine whether continuation of the license should be allowed.
Upon the conclusion of any hearing required by this section, the City Council
may request a licensee to submit an application as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§ 53-135.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-135.01)
§ 111.19 CATERING LICENSES.
   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail issued
under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-124, a craft brewery license, a microdistillery
license or a farm winery license may obtain an annual catering license by
filing an application and license fee with the State Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of the
application as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-124.12, the City Council shall
process the application in the same manner as provided in §
111.17.
   (C)   The City Council, with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of
the period for which that catering license is issued. Any person whose catering
license is canceled may appeal to the district court.
   (D)   The City Council may impose an occupation tax on the business of a
catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction of the
City Council. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a catering
license.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-124.12)
§ 111.20 LICENSED PREMISES; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall cause frequent inspection to be made on the
premises of all retail licensees and bottle club licensees. If it is found that
any such licensee is violating any provision of this chapter, the State Liquor
Control Act or the rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control
Commission, or is failing to observe in good faith the purposes of this chapter
or the Act, the license may be suspended, canceled or revoked after the
licensee is given an opportunity to be heard in his or her defense.
   (B)   The City Council may inspect a charter bus providing service under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the Public Service
Commission when the owner or operator of the charter allows the consumption of
alcoholic liquor in the charter bus by an individual who is 21 years of age or
older so long as the inspection is performed when the bus has stopped for the
purpose of allowing passengers to embark or disembark.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-116.01)
§ 111.21 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-148 shall cause his or her license
to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-148) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.
   Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a complaint with
the City Council stating that any retail licensee or bottle club licensee
subject to the jurisdiction of the City Council has been or is violating Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 53-134. The complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed
by the City Council and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties
complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
belief is based. If the City Council is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is
reasonable cause for that belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within
ten days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice
upon the licensee of the time and place of the hearing and of the particular
charge in the complaint. The complaint shall in all cases be disposed of by the
City Council within 30 days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution
thereof, which resolution shall be deemed the final order for purposes of
appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §
53-1,115.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134.04)
§ 111.23 FORM FOR CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.
   The following form is hereby prescribed for the use of residents of this
city desiring to complain to the Mayor and the City Council that any licensee
is violating any provision of the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 53-101 et seq., regulations prescribed by the State Liquor Control
Commission or any provision of this chapter.
 
To the Mayor and City Council of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
 
The undersigned respectfully state:
 
1.   That they are each residents of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
 
2.   That they believe that        , the holder of a Class       license in the aforesaid city, has violated Section        of (check one or more)
 
           the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
           the regulations prescribed by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission.
           the Municipal Code of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
 
3.   That the aforesaid belief is based on the following facts, to-wit:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
                                                        
(Name)            (Name)
                                                        
(Name)            (Name)
                            
(Name)
 
STATE OF NEBRASKA      )
) ss.
COUNTY OF DOUGLAS   )
 
Subscribed in my presence and sworn to before me by                            ,
                            ,                            ,                             and                            , this                             day of                            , 20                            .
 
                               
   Notary Public
My commission expires                            .
 
(Prior Code, § 4-208)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134.04
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.35 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment
that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be
adequate and convenient for customers and patrons. The licensed premises shall
be subject to any health inspections the City Council or the city police may
make or cause to be made. All applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed
in part from the standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning
the sanitary conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the
application for or renewal of a liquor license.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate licensed premises, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-134.03
   State sanitary rules and regulations authorized, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-
118
§ 111.36 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OFF-SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container
for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.
      ON-SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the
premises of the licensed establishment.
   (B)   It shall be lawful for any licensed person or his or her agents to
sell any alcoholic beverages within the city except during the hours provided
herein.
 
Hours of Sale
Alcoholic Liquors (including beer and wine)
Daily
On- and off-sale 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
 
   (C)   No person(s) shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed
herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on said premises.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-205) (Ord. 774, passed 4-12-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-179
§ 111.37 CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for any
goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered, and if
any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to
be created shall not be recoverable at law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:
      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of such club;
      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from permitting
checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such
hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the accounts of such guests;
or
      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or distilled
spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-183) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.38 SPIKING BEER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) who own, manage or lease any premises
in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed to serve or offer for sale
any beer to which any alcohol has been added or permit any person to add
alcohol to any beer on the licensed premises of such licensee.
(Prior Code, § 4-215) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.39 CHANGE OF PREMISES.
   Any retailer licensee desiring to transfer his or her license from one
premises to another shall file a written request for permission to do so with
the City Clerk and shall also file with said Clerk a sworn statement showing
that the premises to which removal is to be made complies in all respects with
the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-129. The City Clerk shall present said
application and statement to the next meeting of the Mayor and City Council,
who shall by resolution approve or disapprove the transfer. If they approve the
transfer, such approval shall be endorsed on the license by the Mayor and
attested by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 4-216)
§ 111.40 GAMBLING.
   Unless sanctioned by state law, no licensee in this city holding a license
covering any premises open to the public for the sale of intoxicating liquor or
beer shall directly or indirectly permit gambling on or in the licensed
premises; nor shall he or she permit the operation or possession of any payoff
gambling device, slot machine or punchboard, mechanical or otherwise, whether
payoff is in cash or merchandise, in, on or about the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-217) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.41 SALE FOR RESALE.
   No retail licensee in this city shall engage, directly or indirectly, in any
transaction including or conspiring as to the resale of any liquors owned by
him or her as a licensee, nor shall such licensee so permit the sale or
delivery of any such liquors in such quantities as would place a reasonable-
minded person on notice that such liquor might be intended for resale.
(Prior Code, § 4-218) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.42 TRANSPORTATION OF LIQUOR BY RETAIL LICENSEES.
   No retail licensee in this city shall permit the transportation of alcoholic
liquor from his or her licensed premises for storage purposes in any manner for
any purpose or to any location other than has been expressly authorized in
writing by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-219) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.43 NO DELIVERY AFTER CLOSING HOURS.
   No retail licensee in this city operating any premises open to the public
shall act as retainer or keeper of liquor for customers or other persons for
the purpose of delivering or disposing of such liquor after closing hours as
provided by state law, ordinance or resolution or on days when sales are
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 4-220) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.44 RESTRICTIONS ON CONDUCT OF OTHER BUSINESS.
   Retail licensees in this city shall not maintain in their licensed premises
any door opening into or access leading into any premises owned, used or
occupied by other persons; nor shall any retail licensee permit any other
person to use his or her licensed premises for the purpose of carrying on
within such licensed premises any business activity of such other persons in
any of its phases, such as solicitation, sale, service, delivery, storage or
otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 4-221)
§ 111.45 CONDUCT PROHIBITED ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No licensee shall engage in, allow or suffer, in or upon the licensed
premises, any disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities or displays, brawls or
unnecessary noise, or allow or permit the licensed premises to be used in such
a manner as to create public censure or become a nuisance, public or private.
(Prior Code, § 4-222)
§ 111.46 ADVERTISEMENTS AND SALES.
   Advertising by licensees in this city shall not contain misrepresentations
or misleading statements, and no sales shall be promoted or made by any
licensee by unlawful means. Alcoholic liquors shall not be offered, delivered
or disposed of by any licensee as a prize.
(Prior Code, § 4-223) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: SALVAGE YARDS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   License application; contract
   
112.04   Investigation
   
112.05   License fee
   
112.06   Period of license; renewal procedure
   
112.07   License not transferable
   
112.08   General operating requirements
   
112.09   Nuisance
   
112.10   Annual inspection
   
112.11   Revocation and suspension
   
112.12   Hearing on granting, denial, renewal or revocation of license
   
112.13   Exclusions and exemptions; fences
   
112.14   Zoning ordinances
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE AND USED PARTS BUSINESS. Any lot, portion of a lot or
tract of land, or any building or other premises where:
      (1)   Dismantling, demolition or salvage operations of automobiles,
trucks, semi-trailers or other vehicles or parts thereof are carried on;
      (2)   Parts and accessories are removed from used, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, semi-trailers or other vehicles or where parts or
accessories therefrom are stored; or
      (3)   Salvage operations of such wrecked, abandoned or used automobiles,
trucks, semi-trailers or other vehicles are carried on.
   BUSINESS PREMISES or PREMISES. The area used as a salvage yard, scrap
processing operation yard or auto salvage yard as described in the license or
application for license for such business.
   INSPECTOR. The City Building Inspector or his or her authorized
representative.
   NON-OPERATING. Any item of salvage as defined in this chapter which, without
alteration or repair, cannot be immediately moved as intended when designed and
constructed.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   SALVAGE. Scrap copper, wood, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper or rubber;
dismantled, non-operating or wrecked automobiles; trucks, trailers, equipment,
machinery, mobile homes, tractors and farm machinery, or other vehicles or
parts thereof; or iron, steel and any scrap ferrous or non-ferrous materials.
   SALVAGE YARD OR SCRAP PROCESSING OPERATION.
      (1)   An establishment or place of business maintained or operated wholly
or partially for storing, keeping, receiving, reusing, processing, wrecking,
dismantling, recycling, re-melting, collecting, dealing, buying or selling
salvage. A business having facilities for processing and re-melting iron, steel
or non-ferrous scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron and steel or
non-ferrous scrap for re-melting purposes shall be excluded from this
definition.
      (2)   An establishment or place of business may hold salvage for not more
than 90 days without being considered a SALVAGE YARD OR SCRAP PROCESSING
OPERATION when:
         (a)   The salvage is unaltered and is impounded by legal authority; or
         (b)   The salvage is repaired to a non-salvage state within a 90-day
period.
   SALVAGE YARD OR SCRAP PROCESSING OPERATOR. Any person engaged in the
business of owning or operating a salvage yard or scrap processing operation.
(Prior Code, § 4-501)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of
a salvage yard or scrap processing operation, or conduct, operate or maintain a
salvage yard or scrap processing operation within the city or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction without first having obtained a written license
for the operation of such business.
(Prior Code, § 4-502) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTRACT.
   (A)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be in writing upon
a form provided for that purpose by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall set
forth:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The exact location of the existing establishment or of the proposed
establishment, as the case may be;
      (3)   The exact nature of the business conducted or to be conducted, as
the case may be;
      (4)   Where the business is conducted;
      (5)   Evidence of compliance with the zoning laws; if not established,
shall be conducted inside of a building or outside a building, or partly within
or partly without a building; and
      (6)   The dimension and character of the building.
(Prior Code, § 4-503)
§ 112.04 INVESTIGATION.
   The Inspector may cause investigations to be made by the necessary city
departments to determine whether any salvage yard or scrap processing operation
will be in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and all other city
ordinances and regulations and shall have the authority to enter the
applicant’s premises at reasonable times to determine if he or she is in
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-504)
§ 112.05 LICENSE FEE.
   The Inspector shall collect $25 with each license application to help defray
the cost of investigation and enforcement of this chapter, which sum shall be
nonrefundable.
(Prior Code, § 4-505)
§ 112.06 PERIOD OF LICENSE; RENEWAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by the City Council, any license or renewal
license issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its issuance and
shall expire on August 31 each year.
   (B)   An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the City Clerk a
written application, together with two copies of the application and
information about applicant’s demeanor and about the conduct and operation of
his or her licensed business during the preceding license period, as is
reasonably necessary to enable the City Council to determine the applicant’s
eligibility for a renewal license.
(Prior Code, § 4-506)
§ 112.07 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or
used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, and no salvage
dealer’s license shall be used at any location other than the one described in
the application upon which it was issued.
(Prior Code, § 4-507) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general operating requirements shall apply to that portion of
every premises required to be licensed under this chapter which is not in an
enclosed building.
   (A)   The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be plainly displayed
on the business premises.
   (B)   The salvage yard or scrap processing operation, together with the
items kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition, including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shrubs and
vines, shall be kept at a height of not more than 12 inches.
      (2)   No refuse of any kind shall be kept on the premises, unless such
refuse is salvage, as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business.
      (3)   The enumeration of the above shall not be to the exclusion of all
other acts or things necessary to maintain the salvage yard or auto salvage
yard in a reasonable sanitary condition.
   (C)   No salvage shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public
street, walkway or other public property, and no salvage or refuse shall be
allowed to be scattered or blown off the business premises.
   (D)   Salvage, as defined herein, shall be arranged so as to permit easy
access to all such salvage for firefighting purposes.
   (E)   No salvage or other materials shall be burned on the premises in the
open, except in accordance with the applicable laws governing burning.
   (F)   Regulations in regard to fencing and screening are as follows.
      (1)   The area on the premises where salvage is kept or stored shall be
enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a vertical wall or fence of a
minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level. The wall or fence
shall not contain any posters or advertising except one sign of the licensee
not exceeding 100 square feet. The fences on the sides which do not face a
public street, roadway or adjacent residential property may be of chain link
fence.
      (2)   The fence of the licensed premises which faces a public street,
roadway or adjacent residential property shall be screened from public view
where possible.
      (3)   Materials for use in screening of the licensed premises may consist
of plant material, fence or a combination of plant material and fence. Plant
material for use in screening shall consist of trees and shrubs. All plant
material used for screening shall be of a size and quantity to obscure the
salvage contained on the licensed premises from the view of the public within
five years. Plant material shall be primarily of coniferous varieties to
provide year-round screening.
      (4)   Fencing material shall consist of wood, metal or other material
commonly used in the building trade and shall be of one natural color.
      (5)   All screening shall be placed and located on the licensed premises
in a manner that will provide adequate visibility of traffic from all
driveways, streets and roads.
   (G)   (1)   Any person who shall engage in the automobile salvage and used
parts business shall keep a book in which shall be legibly written in ink in
the English language at the time of purchase of any used, wrecked or abandoned
automobile or major parts or accessories readily identifiable by serial numbers
or other distinctive markings or characteristics:
         (a)   An accurate, detailed description of the same;
         (b)   The quantity purchased;
         (c)   The amount paid;
         (d)   The date and time purchased; and
         (e)   The name, address and identity of the person selling such
automobiles, parts and accessories.
      (2)   Such record need not be kept, however, if a certificate of title or
other legal instrument evidencing title in the seller is obtained at the time
such purchase is made. The record book required by this section, as well as any
used, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, parts or accessories, shall be open to
the inspection of the Inspector or his or her designated agent at all
reasonable times.
   (H)   The licensee shall, at reasonable times, remove from the premises all
salvage not usable or saleable and shall also store all flammable material so
as to reduce the fire hazard as much as possible and in conformity with the
lawful orders of the Fire Inspector made from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 4-508)
§ 112.09 NUISANCE.
   (A)   All salvage yards or scrap processing operations as defined herein
within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction who operate without the license required herein are declared to be
a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the
same to remain at any place within the corporate limits of the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   (B)   The city may apply to the county district court for an injunction to
abate such nuisance and for such other relief as may be necessary, if proper.
(Prior Code, § 4-509) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.10 ANNUAL INSPECTION.
   The Inspector or his or her authorized agent shall cause all businesses
licensed under this chapter to be inspected at least once a year to determine
whether such businesses are being operated in a lawful manner and in accordance
with this chapter and all other applicable provisions of law.
(Prior Code, § 4-511)
§ 112.11 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   The Inspector or his or her authorized agent may recommend to the City
Council that the license may be revoked, denied or suspended, as he or she
determines after due and diligent investigation that:
   (A)   The licensee has failed to comply with this chapter or any provision
of law applicable to the premises, equipment or operation of the licensed
business;
   (B)   The licensee has obtained his or her license through fraud or
misstatement;
   (C)   The licensed business is being conducted in a manner detrimental to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public, or is a nuisance, or is
being operated in any unlawful manner; or
   (D)   The licensed business is no longer being operated by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 4-512)
§ 112.12 HEARING ON GRANTING, DENIAL, RENEWAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order of the Inspector granting, denying,
renewing or revoking a license for a proposed or existing business subject to
the provisions of this chapter may file a written request for a hearing before
the City Council within ten days after issuance of such order. The City Clerk
shall give notice of public hearing upon this request to be held in not less
than 30 days after service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing.
   (B)   The City Clerk may also give notice of the hearing to other persons
directly interested in the order in question. At such hearing, the City Council
shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal or revocation of the
license was in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue
written findings of fact, conclusions of law and an order to carry out its
findings and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of law and order
shall be filed with the City Clerk and served by the City Council upon all
parties appearing or represented at said hearing.
(Prior Code, § 4-513)
§ 112.13 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS; FENCES.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to used cars, trucks
and machines in operating condition which may be displayed in a neat and
orderly manner on premises for which a permit has been granted on any lot,
portion of a lot or tract of land or any building or other premises used only
to temporarily store and protect automobiles, trucks, semi-trailers or other
vehicles towed from the scene of a traffic violation, accident or breakdown at
the direction of a law enforcement officer or other owner or operator of the
vehicle, until the vehicle is reclaimed or disposed of by the owner.
   (B)   (1)   In any event, lots, portions of lots, tracts of land or other
premises otherwise exempt from the provision of this chapter shall be fenced
with a fence not less than eight feet in height from ground level with a solid
fence or a chain link fence with inserted slats so as to screen the same from
public view.
      (2)   Such fencing materials may consist of wood, metal or other material
commonly used in the building trade and, if within the corporate limits of the
city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall comply with the municipal code
for fences.
(Prior Code, § 4-514)
§ 112.14 ZONING ORDINANCES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to repeal, abrogate or
modify any zoning law or any provision thereof in effect in the city or within
its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 4-515)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Whenever a nuisance exists, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to
enjoin and abate the same in the manner provided by law. Whenever, in any
action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the Court may, along with the
fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in
the case. Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each such offense. A
new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply. In addition to the penalty contained herein, the city may
seek relief through abatement proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 4-510)
CHAPTER 113: SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING STATIONS
Section
   
113.01   Definition
   
113.02   NFPA standards adopted
   
113.03   Approved self-service equipment
   
113.04   Attendant required
   
113.05   Emergency controls
   
113.06   Operation instructions; posting
   
113.07   Visible dispensing required
   
113.08   Warning sign
§ 113.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING STATIONS. The portion of property where
flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles by persons other than a service station attendant, and the term shall
include any facility available for the sale of other retail products.
(Prior Code, § 4-701)
§ 113.02 NFPA STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The operation of all self-service motor vehicle fuel dispensing
stations, including all use, sales, storage, transportation and installation of
flammable and combustible gases, shall be in conformity with:
      (1)   The provisions of standards of the National Fire Protection
Association for the storage and handling of flammable gases, known as Pamphlet
No. 30, dated 1981, which are hereby included and made part of this section by
this reference, having the same force and effect as if physically set out
herein; and
      (2)   The statutes of the state.
   (B)   Self-service motor fuel dispensing stations shall be permitted;
provided, that they comply with all provisions hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, § 4-702)
§ 113.03 APPROVED SELF-SERVICE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Approved self-service dispensers. Only those special dispensing
devices and remote controlled types, or equivalent, approved by Underwriters
Laboratories shall be permitted at self-service stations.
(Prior Code, § 4-703)
   (B)   Approved self-service nozzles. Hose nozzle valves used at self-service
stations shall be automatic-closing type with a latch-open device, or
equivalent, approved by Underwriters Laboratories.
(Prior Code, § 4-704)
§ 113.04 ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Responsibilities. All self-service stations shall have at least one
qualified attendant on duty while the station is open to the public. During all
times when gasoline, gasohol or diesel fuel is being dispensed, the attendant’s
primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of
said fuels. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the
dispensing of gasoline, gasohol or diesel fuel into portable containers unless
the container is constructed of metal or is approved by the office of the State
Fire Marshal, has a tight closure with screwed or spring cover and is fitted
with a spout or so designed that the contents can be poured without spilling.
It shall also be the responsibility of the attendant to control sources of
ignition such as, but not limited to, requiring that the motors of all
equipment being fueled be shut off during the fueling operation and to
immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers if needed.
(Prior Code, § 4-705)
   (B)   Supervision and control. At self-service stations where a remote
controlled dispensing device is being used, the attendant shall be required to
remain within arm’s length distance of the remote control console and shall
have visual contact with fuel dispensers at all times while gasoline, gasohol
or diesel fuels are being dispensed.
(Prior Code, § 4-706)
§ 113.05 EMERGENCY CONTROLS.
   (A)   A main power shut-off or switches shall be installed at a location not
more than 15 feet from the attendant’s principal control location and not more
than 100 feet from the dispensers and shall be accessible at all times.
   (B)   A fixed fire extinguisher system which complies with the provisions of
the NFPA. Pamphlet No. 17 and is suitable for the extinguishment of flammable
liquid fire shall be installed at each self-service station. Said system shall
utilize any dry chemical or its equivalent approved by the State Fire Marshal,
be capable of covering the entire area where gasoline, gasohol or diesel fuels
are being dispensed and be capable of being activated by the attendant.
   (C)   Each service station shall be provided with at least one portable fire
extinguisher having a minimum classification of five to eight B:C, located so
that an extinguisher will be within 75 feet of each dispenser.
   (D)   A functional method of communicating with the Fire Department shall be
located not more than 15 feet from the attendant’s principal control station.
(Prior Code, § 4-707)
§ 113.06 OPERATION INSTRUCTIONS; POSTING.
   The instructions for the operation of each dispenser shall be conspicuously
posted on either the dispenser or the dispenser island. Conspicuous and legible
weather-resistant signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted on either the
dispenser or the dispenser island and shall be visible from both sides of the
dispenser island.
(Prior Code, § 4-708)
§ 113.07 VISIBLE DISPENSING REQUIRED.
   The dispensing operation shall at all times be in clear view of the
attendant, and the placing or allowing of any foreign obstacle to come between
the dispensing operation and the attendant so as to obstruct the attendant’s
view is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 4-709) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.08 WARNING SIGN.
   On each and every dispenser island shall be conspicuously posted the
following words of warning:
 
WARNING - IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DISPENSE GASOLINE
INTO ANY PORTABLE CONTAINER UNLESS THE CONTAINER
IS APPROVED BY THE NEBRASKA STATE FIRE MARSHAL
 
(Prior Code, § 4-710)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
Section
Games of Chance and/or Lotteries
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Occupation tax
   
114.03   Prohibited; license required
   
114.04   License application
   
114.05   License fee
   
114.06   Display of license
   
114.07   Exemption
   
114.08   Lottery sales outlet locations
GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who engages in the business of selling, leasing or
delivering possession or custody of gambling devices for consideration to a
person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or
lotteries.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any and all machines or devices used by a person engaged in
the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.
   GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES. Forms of gambling authorized by the state
pursuant to Article III, § 24 of the State Constitution.
   PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE OCCUPATION OF CONDUCTING GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR
LOTTERIES. Any person who operates, owns or is the lessee of a place of
business where any games of chance and/or lottery activities are conducted,
whether or not any other type of business is conducted on the premises; or any
person who either directly controls or manages the games of chance and/or
lotteries or owns any machine or device used to engage in the occupation of
games of chance and/or lotteries but does not sell, lease or deliver possession
or custody of such a device to other persons.
(Prior Code, § 4-901)
§ 114.02 OCCUPATION TAX.
   An occupation tax is hereby imposed on each person engaged in the occupation
of conducting games of chance and/or lottery activities within the city, and
every such person shall pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in §
110.01.
(Prior Code, § 4-902)
§ 114.03 PROHIBITED; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of
conducting games of chance or lottery activities without first obtaining a
license to do so.
(Prior Code, § 4-903) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring a license required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application to the City Clerk.
   (B)   Accompanying each application shall be:
      (1)   A sworn statement by each designated supervising member that such
member will be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations for each
occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he or she supervises; and
      (2)   A sworn statement by the member designated as responsible for the
proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission, fee, rent, seller
profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or
organization not sanctioned by the laws of the state and the city; and that all
profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.
(Prior Code, § 4-904)
§ 114.05 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance
and/or lotteries within the city shall be $10 for each location wherein such
activities are conducted.
(Prior Code, § 4-905)
§ 114.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance and/or lottery
activity is conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-906)
§ 114.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nonprofit organizations that desire to participate in games of chance and/or
lotteries that are in compliance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 9-510 and 90511 are
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-907)
§ 114.08 LOTTERY SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS.
   (A)   The lottery operator whom the City Council contracts to conduct its
lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than the
location of the lottery operator without prior Council approval of such sales
outlet location. The Council shall approve or disapprove each sales outlet
location and any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation
which desires to conduct the lottery at its sales outlet location solely on the
basis of the qualification standards prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation which
seeks to have its location approved as an authorized sales outlet location
shall:
      (1)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful
failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any
level; filing false reports with any such agency; or any similar offense or
offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving gambling
activity or moral turpitude;
      (2)   Not have had a gaming license revoked or cancelled under the State
Bingo Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 9-201 et seq., the State Pickle Card
Lottery Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 9-301 et seq., the State Lottery and
Raffle Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 9-401 et seq. or the State County and City
Lottery Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 93-601 et seq.; and
      (3)   Be fit, willing and able to properly provide the service proposed
in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the State County and
City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the Act.
   (C)   If the entity seeking to have its location approved as an authorized
sales outlet location is a partnership or corporation, the qualification
standards shall apply to every partner of such partnership, every officer of
such corporation and every stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of
such corporation.
   (D)   The City Council shall notify the Department of Revenue of all
approved lottery locations within 30 days of approval.
(Prior Code, § 4-908)
CHAPTER 115: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Lawful operation
   
115.03   Application for license
   
115.04   Regulations
   
115.05   License renewal
   
115.06   License revocation or suspension
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage, ingredient,
ice or water used or intended for use or for sale, in whole or in part, for
human consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person who, by traveling from place to place upon the
public ways, sells or offer for sale food from public or private property to
consumers for immediate delivery and consumption upon purchase. The following
activities are excluded from such definition, and alone, do not subject a
vendor to being covered by such definition: the sale or offer for sale of farm
products produced or raised by such a vendor from land occupied and cultivated
by him or her; or the sale or offer for sale of food by a caterer.
   PERMANENT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A fixed building which a person occupies on a
continual basis and from which such person sells or offers to sell food for
immediate delivery and consumption upon purchase. Such term shall not include a
location where a mobile food vendor sells or offers to sell food.
(Prior Code, § 4-1001) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 115.02 LAWFUL OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a mobile food vendor
within the city unless such person complies with the requirements and
regulations of this chapter, including holding a valid and active mobile food
vendor license issued by the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter; except that a
mobile food vendor may operate at Valley Days or other similar events sponsored
by or approved by the city without obtaining a mobile food vendor license if
such vendor has obtained written consent from the city to operate at such
event. Any such mobile food vendor shall be subject to all regulations
contained in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1002) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An applicant for a license shall file with the City Clerk a signed
application on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s business name, address, telephone number and email
address, if any;
      (2)   If the applicant is a business entity of any kind, the names of all
officers and managers of such entity;
      (3)   If food is to be sold from any motor vehicle, the vehicle license
numbers and descriptions of such vehicle, the names of all persons authorized
and expected to drive such vehicle and a copy of a valid and currently existing
policy of liability insurance for such motor vehicle;
      (4)   Documentation from the County Health Department showing its
approval of the applicant’s sale of food;
      (5)   A copy of the state sales tax permit or proof of an applicable
sales tax exemption;
      (6)   A copy of the applicant’s policy or policies of commercial general
liability insurance; and
      (7)   Such other documentation as the City Clerk may require and as
requested in the application.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall make or
cause to be made any inquiry or investigation that may be necessary in order to
determine whether the applicant is in compliance with all applicable laws. The
City Clerk may request and take into consideration the recommendations of other
affected departments of the city.
   (C)   After receipt of the completed application and a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $50, the City Clerk shall either approve or
deny the application.
(Prior Code, § 4-1003) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 115.04 REGULATIONS.
   Mobile food vendors shall comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   A mobile food vendor shall not operate from a location within 50 feet
of the main entrance of a permanent food establishment during the hours that
food is sold within such establishment unless such permanent food establishment
has provided written consent.
   (B)   A mobile food vendor may operate from a motor vehicle at a location in
a city right-of-way open to traffic or parking but only from a motor vehicle
parked in a location where a motor vehicle is authorized to park by law,
signage or city permit.
   (C)   A mobile food vendor shall not operate from a location which would
involve customers to be waited on or served while standing in a portion of a
street being traversed by motor vehicle traffic.
   (D)   A mobile food vendor who operates from a location on property other
than a city right-of-way shall first obtain and possess and be able to exhibit
upon request each of the following:
      (1)   Written consent of the owner of the property; and
      (2)   Any required temporary use permit to be issued by the city.
   (E)   A mobile food vendor shall not operate from city park property unless
it possesses written consent of the city.
   (F)   A mobile food vendor shall not operate from a school property unless
it possesses written consent of the school district.
   (G)   A mobile food vendor shall not operate from a location authorized for
a street show, festival, parade, block party or similar event, or within 200
feet of any boundary of such authorized area, unless the vendor possesses the
written consent of the event permittee to operate from that location.
   (H)   A mobile food vendor shall possess and be able to exhibit its license,
all required County Health Department permits, a state sales tax permit or
proof of sales tax exemption and any other written consents or documentation
required under this chapter, at all times during which the mobile food vendor
is operating.
   (I)   Any city official may order a mobile food vendor to move from or leave
a specific location if the operation of the vendor at that location causes an
obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endangers the
health, safety or welfare of the public. If such order is refused, a city
official of the Public Works Department or the Police Department may authorize
that the vehicle be towed.
   (J)   An individual representative of the mobile food vendor must remain
with the motor vehicle, trailer or auxiliary equipment at all times.
   (K)   A mobile food vendor may operate seven days a week but only from 7:00
a.m. to 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to operate at
any other times.
   (L)   A mobile food vendor shall maintain in operable condition all fire
suppression equipment or devices as required by local, state or federal law.
   (M)   It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to sell or offer to sell
alcohol in any form.
   (N)   A mobile food vendor shall provide trash receptacles and shall
properly dispose of all trash and litter within 20 feet of its location, but
such trash shall not be disposed of in public trash containers on city right-
of-way or city property.
   (O)   A mobile food vendor shall comply with all city ordinances regarding
noise.
(Prior Code, § 4-1004) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.05 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   A license issued shall expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed for
the following year. An applicant shall renew a license for the following year
by filing with the City Clerk a statement updating or confirming the
information provided in the immediately preceding application. The statement
shall be on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk. At the time of filing of
such statement, a renewal fee of $50 shall be due to the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-1005) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 115.06 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   A license issued may be revoked or suspended by the City Clerk for any
of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in connection
with the sale of food;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or any applicable laws; and
      (4)   Conduct of business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
   (B)   To revoke or suspend a license issued, the City Clerk shall provide
written notice to the license holder stating the revocation or suspension
action taken, the grounds for such action and the availability of an appeal.
Such notice shall be served personally upon the license holder or sent by
regular U.S. mail to the license holder’s address as stated in its application.
   (C)   A license holder aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk under
this section may file an appeal with the City Council.
   (D)   A license holder whose license has been revoked under this section may
not reapply for a new license for a period of six months after the effective
date of the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 4-1006) (Ord. 717, passed 11-13-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116: RAILROAD COMPANIES
Section
   
116.01   Obstruction view at crossing prohibited
§ 116.01 OBSTRUCTION VIEW AT CROSSING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct or obscure
the traveling public’s view by storing or parking any railroad car on a
railroad track within 500 feet of the crossing of any such railroad track and a
public road within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that in
no instance shall any person who is authorized to control the movement of such
railroad car or cars within such distance be prevented from reasonably
conducting his or her business.
   (B)   Any company, its officers, agents, or employees, or any other person
subject to division (A) of this section who fails, neglects, or refuses to
promptly comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, but shall
be fined not more than $200 for each offense. Each day of such neglect,
refusal, or failure shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-602) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 74-1323
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   CONTROL OF MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Property Offenses
   
130.001   Malicious destruction of property
   
130.002   Trespassing
   
130.003   Injury to trees
   
130.004   Posting
   
130.005   Lawn debris, snow, garbage and the like
Offenses Against Public Order
   
130.020   Disorderly conduct
   
130.021   Street games
   
130.022   Obstruction of public ways
   
130.023   Obstructing water flow
   
130.024   Disturbing the peace
   
130.025   Disturbing an assembly
   
130.026   Control of excessive noise
Offenses Against Public Justice and Administration
   
130.040   Impersonating a peace officer
   
130.041   Refusing to aid a peace officer
   
130.042   Obstructing a peace officer
Offenses Against Public Health and Safety
   
130.055   Appliances in yard
   
130.056   Prohibited fences
   
130.057   Littering
   
130.058   Fireworks generally
   
130.059   Drinking on public property; open beverage container
   
130.060   Discharge of firearms, bow and arrows
   
130.061   Discharge of slingshots, BB guns, blow guns, air rifles, paintball
guns or similar instruments
Offenses Against Public Morals
   
130.075   Public indecency
   
130.076   Window peeping
   
130.077   Stalking
 
   
130.999   Penalty
PROPERTY OFFENSES
§ 130.001 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person wantonly or maliciously in any manner to
molest, injure or destroy any property of another in this city. Any such
offender shall be liable for all damages which arise from the commission of
such unlawful act, in addition to a fine as permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-106) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.002 TRESPASSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any private grounds
within the city or to break, cut or injure any tree, shrub, plant, flower or
grass growing thereon, or without the consent of the owner or occupant to enter
upon an improved lot or grounds occupied for residence purposes and to loiter
about the same.
(Prior Code, § 2-107) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-520 and 28-521
§ 130.003 INJURY TO TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or carelessly and without
lawful authority to cut down, carry away, injure, break down or destroy any
fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any land
belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the corporate
limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any tree,
except on property owned and controlled by it, shall make an application to the
City Council to do so, and the written permit of the City Council in accordance
with their decision to allow such an action shall constitute the only lawful
authority on the part of the company to do so.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.004 POSTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks or public
grounds of the city for signs, signposts or the posting of handbills or
advertisements without written permission of the City Council.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.005 LAWN DEBRIS, SNOW, GARBAGE AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful to throw, blow, place, discard or sweep any weeds,
grass, leaves, snow, dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, garbage,
waste, rubbish or refuse matter of any kind onto any street, alley, park or
other public grounds or, without permission, upon the property of another
person in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-128) (Ord. 271, passed 8-13-1991; Ord. 356, passed 12-10-1996;
Ord. 486, passed 2-10-2004) Penalty, see §
130.999
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
§ 130.020 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which
disturbs the peace and good order of the city by clamor or noise, intoxication,
drunkenness, fighting or using obscene or profane language in the streets or
other public places or otherwise violating the public peace by indecent or
disorderly conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prevent disorderly conduct, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-129
   Authority to regulate noise, riots and routs, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-556
§ 130.021 STREET GAMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play catch, bat a ball or kick or
throw a football, or to engage in any exercise or sport, upon the city streets
and sidewalks. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the
City Council from ordering from time to time certain streets and public places
blocked off for the purpose of providing a safe area to engage in such exercise
and sport.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-555 and 17-557
   Authority to regulate excavation and obstruction of streets, see Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 17-142
§ 130.022 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or suffer to remain
on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display or other obstruction
inconvenient to or inconsistent with the public use of the same.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-555 and 17-557
   Authority to regulate excavation and obstruction of streets, see Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 17-142
   Penalties for injuring or obstructing roads, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 39-301
and 39-302
§ 130.023 OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water
in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe or hydrant.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-555
   Authority to prevent water obstruction, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-920
§ 130.024 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to disturb the peace and
quiet of any person, family or neighborhood.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1322) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.025 DISTURBING AN ASSEMBLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, interrupt or interfere with
any lawful assembly of people, whether religious or otherwise, by loud and
unnecessary noise, threatening behavior or indecent and shocking behavior. Any
person or persons so disturbing an assembly shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined in accord with state statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-103) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.026 CONTROL OF EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to be made or to cause
to be made any excessive, loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others, including, but not limited to, noise associated with
the operation of industrial equipment, heavy machinery, jackhammers or other
construction equipment, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that the following activities shall be exempt from this section:
   (A)   Noise of safety signals, warning devices or emergency relief valves;
   (B)   Transient noises from moving sources, including automobiles, trucks,
airplanes and railroads operating in the ordinary and legal course;
   (C)   Occasional outdoor events, provided such events are conducted pursuant
to written permission received by the appropriate department or agency; such
events may not occur on a recurring schedule;
   (D)   Dewatering pumps;
   (E)   Any activities conducted in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety; provided, however, that in the event such
activities are not conducted by the city or an agent thereof, such activities
will require the written consent from the city, which consent may be granted
for a period not to exceed three days while the emergency continues and said
written consent may be renewed for period of three days or less while the
emergency continues.
(Prior Code, § 2-104) (Ord. 737, passed 4-14-2020) Penalty, see §
130.999
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 130.040 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer
and perform any act in that pretended capacity.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-610) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.041 REFUSING TO AID A PEACE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a request by a person known to him
or her to be a peace officer, unreasonably to refuse or fail to aid the peace
officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense
against any of the laws of this state or city;
   (B)   Securing the offender when apprehended; or
   (C)   Conveying the offender to the jail of the county or this city.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-903) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.042 OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of obstructing a peace officer when, by
using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference or obstacle,
he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders:
      (1)   The enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace
by a peace officer or judge acting under color of his or her official
authority; or
      (2)   A police animal assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to the
peace officer’s official authority.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, POLICE ANIMAL means a horse or dog owned
or controlled by the state or any county, city or village for the purpose of
assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to his or her official authority.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-906) Penalty, see §
130.999
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 130.055 APPLIANCES IN YARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property unless the person first removes
all doors and makes the same reasonably safe.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit nuisances within zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 18-1720
§ 130.056 PROHIBITED FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where
the fence abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley.
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Restrictions on barbed wire fences, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-307
§ 130.057 LITTERING.
   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense
of littering unless:
      (1)   The property is an area designated by law for the disposal of that
type of material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to
so use the property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on the
property for that purpose.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Includes all waste material susceptible of being dropped,
deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property
in the state, but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or
manufacturing.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of the motor
vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-523) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.058 FIREWORKS GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to possess, sell,
offer for sale, hold for sale, bring into the city, use or discharge any
fireworks, except for the following:
      (1)   Consumer fireworks, as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1241;
      (2)   Any display fireworks purchased by a person licensed to purchase
such fireworks and purchased from a licensed distributor;
      (3)   Any display fireworks purchased by the holder of a display permit
issued pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1239.01;
      (4)   Any fireworks brought into this state for storage by a licensed
distributor and held for sale outside of this state;
      (5)   Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to
written authorization from the State Fire Marshal to any holder of a
distributor’s license; or
      (6)   Toy cap pistols or toy caps, each of which does not contain more
than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive material.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, FIREWORKS shall mean any composition
or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration or detonation and which meets the definition of
consumer or special fireworks set forth by the United States Department of
Transportation in 49 C.F.R.
   (C)   The use or discharge of consumer fireworks under division (A)(1) above
shall be subject to the following rules.
      (1)   The possession, use or discharge of consumer fireworks shall comply
with the laws of the state.
      (2)   Notwithstanding other rules, consumer fireworks may be used or
discharged only on June 25 through July 4 and December 28 through December 30,
inclusive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on those days and from
8:00 a.m. on December 31 through 12:30 a.m. on January 1.
      (3)   Consumer fireworks may only be possessed, used or discharged by a
person 16 years of age or older; provided, that a person 12 years of age or
older and less than 16 years of age may possess, use or discharge consumer
fireworks but only when in the immediate presence of and under the direct
supervision of an adult 19 years of age or older.
   (D)   The sale of fireworks shall be regulated by Ch. 93.
(Prior Code, § 2-127) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.059 DRINKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; OPEN BEVERAGE CONTAINER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
         (a)   Beer, ale, porter, stout and other similar fermented beverages,
including sake or similar products, of any name or description, containing 0.5%
or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part,
or from any substitute therefor;
         (b)   Wine of not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume;
         (c)   Distilled spirits, which is that substance known as ethyl
alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced; and
         (d)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE does not include trace amounts not readily
consumable as a beverage.
      HIGHWAY. A road or street including the entire area within the right-of-
way.
      LIMOUSINE. A luxury vehicle used to provide prearranged passenger
transportation on a dedicated basis at a premium fare that has a seating
capacity of at least five and no more than 14 persons behind the driver with a
physical partition separating the driver seat from the passenger compartment.
LIMOUSINE does not include taxicabs, hotel or airport buses or shuttles or
buses.
      OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§ 53-123.04(3) and 53-123.11(1)(c), any bottle, can or other receptacle:
         (a)   That contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and
         (b)   1.   That is open or has a broken seal; or
            2.   The contents of which are partially removed.
      PASSENGER AREA. The area designed to seat the driver and passengers while
the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to
the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including any
compartments in the area. PASSENGER AREA does not include the area behind the
last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the area is not normally occupied by
the driver or a passenger and the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess an open alcoholic
beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a public parking area
or on any highway in this city.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
111.03 or division (D) below, it is unlawful for any person to consume an
alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   In a public parking area or on any highway in this city; or
      (2)   Inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking area or on any
highway in this city.
   (D)   This section does not apply to persons who are passengers of, but not
drivers of, a limousine or bus being used in a charter or special party service
as defined by rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the State Public
Service Commission and subject to NAC, Ch. 75, art. 3. Such passengers may
possess open alcoholic beverage containers and may consume alcoholic beverages
while such limousine or bus is in a public parking area or on any highway in
this city if:
      (1)   The driver of the limousine or bus is prohibited from consuming
alcoholic liquor; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor is not present in any area that is readily
accessible to the driver while in the driver’s seat, including any compartments
in such area.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,211.08) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.060 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, BOWS AND ARROWS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, an arrow from
a bow, or any other firearm or weapon using any form of compressed gas as a
propellant; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to apply
to:
   (A)   Discharge of a firearm by an officer of the law in performance of his
or her official duties;
   (B)   Shooting galleries or other private shooting ranges within buildings
or other structures approved by the Mayor and City Council;
   (C)   Officially sanctioned public celebrations if the person so discharging
firearms, paintball guns or arrows from a bow have written permission from the
City Council;
   (D)   Discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances or sporting
events;
   (E)   Firing of salutes by honor guard and military funerals or memorials;
   (F)   The discharge of an arrow from a bow or a firearm in connection with
trap or target shooting on private property under the following conditions:
      (1)   No trap or target shooting shall occur within 500 feet of the
property lines unless projectiles are directed in such direction so as to not
cross the property lines; and
      (2)   All projectiles must remain within the boundaries of the parcel
upon which it was discharged.
   (G)   The discharge of a bow and arrow in connection with seasonal hunting
on private property under the following conditions:
      (1)   No hunting shall occur within 500 feet of the property lines unless
projectiles are directed in such direction so as to not cross the property
lines;
      (2)   Each individual participating must abide by all laws of the state;
and
      (3)   All projectiles must remain within the boundaries of the parcel
upon which it was discharged.
(Ord. 825, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.061 DISCHARGE OF SLINGSHOTS, BB GUNS, BLOW GUNS, AIR RIFLES, PAINTBALL
GUNS OR SIMILAR INSTRUMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, BB gun, blow
gun, air rifle, paintball gun or other like instruments loaded with rock or
capable of launching a dangerous projectile therefrom at any time or under any
circumstances within the city or within a half mile of the city limits where
the projectile from the piece could reach property within the city; provided,
nothing herein shall be construed to apply to officially sanctioned public
celebrations if the person so discharging the firearm has written permission
from the City Council.
(Ord. 825, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
130.999
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
§ 130.075 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   A person, 18 years of age or over, commits the offense of public
indecency if such person performs or procures, or assists any other person to
perform, in a public place and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed by members of the public:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-
318;
      (2)   An exposure of the genitals of the body done with intent to affront
or alarm any person; or
      (3)   A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of the
same or opposite sex.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for an individual to
breast-feed a child in a public place.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-806) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.076 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or stealthily go upon the
premises of another in said city and look or peep into any window, door or
other opening in any building located thereon which is occupied as a place of
abode, or to go upon the premises of another for the purpose of looking or
peeping into any window, door or other opening in any building thereon which is
occupied as a place of abode.
(Prior Code, § 2-108) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.077 STALKING.
   (A)   Any person who willfully and maliciously harasses another person with
the intent to terrify, threaten or intimidate commits the offense of stalking.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COURSE OF CONDUCT. A pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts of
following, detaining, restraining the personal liberty of or stalking the
person or repetitiously telephoning him or her.
      HARASS. To engage in a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at
a specific person which seriously terrifies, threatens or intimidates the
person and which serves no legitimate purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2-109) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a sum not more than $500
for each offense. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 2-801)
CHAPTER 131: CONTROL OF MINORS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Purpose
   
131.02   Parental responsibility
   
131.03   Remedy cumulative
   
131.04   Appeal
   
131.05   Annual reports by Mayor
Substance Offenses
   
131.20   Possession of tobacco by minors
   
131.21   Sale of tobacco to minors
Curfew
   
131.35   Curfew hours
   
131.36   Curfew hours extended
   
131.37   Violation; parental liability
   
131.38   Enforcement; police authorization
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Gang activity, criminal mischief and juvenile delinquency have become
an increasing reality of life within the city. Such activity exposes the
community to criminal conduct, lessens the citizens’ sense of safety and well-
being and generally erodes the quality of life our citizens have the right to
expect and enjoy. The activities of youths aged 18 and under can and should be
controlled by their parents and/or legal guardians. Unless such parental
responsibility is encouraged and ultimately exercised, criminal activity and
incidents of juvenile mischief will continue unabated.
   (B)   By reason of the foregoing facts, it is the recommendation of the
Mayor that the powers delegated by this section are urgently required for the
general welfare, health, safety and security of the city and the citizens
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-701)
§ 131.02 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Every parent or legal guardian who, by any act, omission or threats
contributes to or induces or endeavors to induce his or her dependent child or
ward to violate any requirements of this code or a state statute concerning
illegal acts shall be subject to a civil penalty. For the purposes of this
section, a parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of 18 years
shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care, supervision, protection and
control over his or her minor child or ward.
(Prior Code, § 2-702) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 REMEDY CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies provided in this section are in addition to the remedies and
penalties under this code and all other laws of this state.
(Prior Code, § 2-704)
§ 131.04 APPEAL.
   A parent or guardian may appeal the civil penalty provided for herein by
filing a written notice with the City Council within 20 calendar days of the
date upon which the parent or guardian receives notice of such civil penalty. A
hearing shall be held, for which the City Council shall establish the
procedures. Said procedures shall contain requirements for providing the parent
or guardian with notice of the hearing and an appropriate time for preparation
for the same and shall not be inconsistent with any of the terms set forth in
this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-705)
§ 131.05 ANNUAL REPORTS BY MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be responsible for providing a written report to the City
Council on or about one year from the date this section is approved and adopted
by the City Council. The report prepared pursuant to this section shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to: the number of individuals the Mayor
has determined to be in violation of this section; the nature of penalties
invoked for each such violation; the opinion of the Mayor regarding the
effectiveness of the various forms of civil penalties and alternate penalties
in encouraging parental responsibility; and any observation or improvements in
this section which, in the opinion of the Mayor, would improve the link between
parental responsibility and proper conduct by a child or ward.
(Prior Code, § 2-706)
SUBSTANCE OFFENSES
§ 131.20 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS.
   (A)   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of 21 years to possess any tobacco products.
   (B)   Exceptions: It shall not be unlawful for any person under the age of
21 years to:
      (1)   Sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products in the
course of his or her employment by a tobacco licensee; or
      (2)   Possess or purchase tobacco products while under the direct
supervision of an adult to enforce or test compliance statutes, laws or
ordinances governing the sale of tobacco products, having provided written
parental consent to participate in such enforcement or compliance testing.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall be defined as
any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
(Prior Code, § 2-125) (Ord. 753, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.21 SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other
business entity, including retail establishments where goods or services are
sold.
      MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or other
legal entity.
      SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Any open display of tobacco or tobacco
products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products to which
customers have access without the assistance or intervention of an employee.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco cigarette or cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized by
smoking, chewing, inhaling or other means of ingestion.
      TOBACCO RETAILER. Any person or entity operating a store, stand, booth,
concession or other place which sells tobacco or tobacco products to customers
for consumption or use, whether utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco or
tobacco products or in which the sale of tobacco or tobacco products is
incidental.
      TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE. Any electronic or mechanical device utilizing
the insertion of money, whether coin or paper currency or other things of
value, which dispenses or releases tobacco or tobacco products.
      VENDOR-ASSISTED ACCESS. Access to tobacco or tobacco products wherein
customers do not have direct access to take possession of such without
assistance from a store employee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or organization within the city:
      (1)   To sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale tobacco or tobacco
products to any person by means other than vendor-assisted access;
      (2)   To display tobacco or tobacco products in a manner allowing
customers access to tobacco or tobacco products without vendor assistance;
      (3)   To give away, hand out or otherwise distribute free samples of
cigarettes of other tobacco products, or coupons that can be redeemed for free
samples of cigarettes or other tobacco products; or
      (4)   To sell tobacco products in any form except in original factory-
wrapped packages.
   (C)   (1)   This section shall not apply to tobacco vending machines
regulated by state law, tobacco retail stores or to any business, retailer or
establishment which is licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission for a
dispensing license and required to be posted preventing any minors from access
to the premises, nor shall this subchapter apply to other forms of sale or
distribution which are specifically allowed by federal or state law.
      (2)   This exception shall not apply to the sale of tobacco or tobacco
products by vending machine or other similar distribution method which is not
regulated by the Liquor Control Commission or by other state or federal laws.
(Prior Code, § 2-126) (Ord. 753, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
131.99
CURFEW
§ 131.35 CURFEW HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, play or be in or upon the public streets, public places
and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant buildings
or lots or otherwise operate any bicycle or other vehicle in, upon, over or
through the streets or other public places of the city between the hours of 10:
30 p.m. of any day, Sunday through Thursday until the hour of 5:00 a.m. of the
next day and between the hours of 12:30 a.m. on Friday or Saturday until the
hour of 5:00 a.m. unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or
other adult person having the legal care and custody of said minor person or
unless the minor person is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business,
directed by his or her parents, guardian or legal custodian, except as
hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 2-201) (Ord. 571, passed 11-11-2008) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.36 CURFEW HOURS EXTENDED.
   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit said minor persons from attending
special school functions or adult-supervised entertainment conducted by any
school, church or fraternal organization continuing beyond the curfew hours as
set out in §
131.35. In all such cases, the hours herein prohibited shall be extended for
those minors attending said special social function or entertainment one hour
after the closing of said special function.
(Prior Code, § 2-202) (Ord. 571, passed 11-11-2008) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.37 VIOLATION; PARENTAL LIABILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of minors under the age of 18 years to allow or permit
said minor persons to do any of the acts or things prohibited by §§
131.35 or
131.36.
(Prior Code, § 2-203) (Ord. 571, passed 11-11-2008) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.38 ENFORCEMENT; POLICE AUTHORIZATION.
   Every member of the police force while on duty shall be authorized to detain
any minor willfully violating the provisions of this subchapter and, upon
apprehension of said minor, shall forthwith notify the parents or legal
guardians or person in custody of said minor child by telephone or other
appropriate means.
(Prior Code, § 2-204) (Ord. 571, passed 11-11-2008) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any parent or guardian, except where the state or local unit of
government is a guardian, who violates the provisions of §
131.01 through
131.05 shall be liable for a civil penalty. For violations of §
131.01 through 131.05, the Mayor or his or her designee, who shall be an
employee of the city, shall levy a civil penalty according to the following
schedule. The Chief of Police shall forthwith notify the Mayor or his or her
designee of the name of the minor child or ward, the fact that the minor child
or ward has been charged with and convicted and/or adjudicated of violating any
state statute or city ordinance within the corporate limits of the city, and
any other information of a non-confidential nature which is requested pursuant
to policies and procedures approved by the City Council. The sequential
violations provided herein shall be applicable to any and all violations
occurring within any consecutive 48-month period of time:
         (a)   First violation: civil penalty not to exceed $200;
         (b)   Second violation: civil penalty not to exceed $250;
         (c)   Third violation: civil penalty not to exceed $500; and
         (d)   Fourth and subsequent violations: civil penalty not to exceed
$1,000.
      (2)   The Mayor or his or her designee may, upon the request of the
responsible parent or guardian, provide alternate methods for satisfying the
civil penalty described above. Those alternates are as follows:
         (a)   The Mayor or his or her designee may provide that the
responsible parent or guardian and the child or ward may satisfy the civil
penalty provided for herein by performing community service. Projects
constituting acceptable community service shall be identified in the sole
discretion of the Mayor. Satisfaction of the civil penalty shall be at the rate
of the current federal minimum wage rounded to the next highest dollar. More
than one parent, guardian and child or ward may participate in the community
service provided for herein, and in such event, each person’s participation
shall be determined on a cumulative basis for the purpose of satisfying the
civil penalty.
         (b)   As an alternative to division (B)(2)(a) above, the responsible
parent or guardian may be allowed to attend and complete an approved parenting
class. Any such class shall be designated in the sole discretion of the Mayor.
Utilizing the parenting class alternative shall be allowed only in those
instances involving either a first or second violation of this section.
However, in the event of a third offense, mandatory attendance at a parenting
class shall be required in addition to the monetary penalty set forth above.
The Mayor shall require that proof be submitted which, in the Mayor’s
determination, demonstrates an acceptable record of attendance and completion
of said parenting class.
      (3)   The Mayor shall be authorized to implement procedures and policies
not inconsistent with this section upon the City Council’s approval of such
policies and procedures by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2-703)
   (C)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of §
131.20 shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35 and not more
than $100.
(Prior Code, § 2-125)
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
131.35 through
131.38 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a warning for
the first offense and a fine of $50 for the second offense. A third and any
subsequent violation shall constitute a violation of §§
131.35 through
131.38, and a complaint shall be filed against the parent(s) of said child for
violation of such sections.
(Prior Code, § 2-205)
(Ord. 753, passed 6-8-2021)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING
      
152.   TRAILER COURTS
      
153.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
      
154.   TREES
      
155.   MUNICIPAL PLANNING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Permits and Regulations
   
150.001   Requirement
   
150.002   Limitation
   
150.003   Duplicate to County Assessor
   
150.004   Excavations and exposures; barricades and lights
   
150.005   Fences
   
150.006   Satellite dish antennas
Moving of Buildings
   
150.020   Regulations
   
150.021   Deposit
   
150.022   Fee, liability insurance
   
150.023   Duties of permittee
   
150.024   No general license
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.035   Definition
   
150.036   Prohibitions
   
150.037   Determination; notice
   
150.038   Hearing and appeal
   
150.039   Costs; assessed to property or collected in civil action
   
150.040   Standards for repair, vacation or demolition
   
150.041   Immediate hazard
Building Inspector
   
150.055   Power and authority
   
150.056   Right of entry
   
150.057   Time of inspection
   
150.058   Appeal from decision
Building Codes and Standards
   
150.070   Building code
   
150.071   Electrical code and electrician licenses
   
150.072   Plumbing code and plumber licenses
   
150.073   Mechanical code and contractor licenses
   
150.074   Existing building code
   
150.075   Residential code and additional standards
   
150.076   Property maintenance code
   
150.077   Energy conservation code
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
§ 150.001 REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct,
repair, enlarge, demolish or relocate any building or dwelling, or cause the
same to be done, shall file with the City Clerk an application for a building
permit. The application shall be in writing on a form furnished by the City
Clerk. Every such application shall set forth the legal description of the land
upon which the construction or relocation is to take place, the nature of the
use or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of
the owner, architect and contractor and such other information as may be
requested thereon.
   (B)   The application, plans and specifications so filed with the City Clerk
shall be checked and examined by the Building Inspector, and if they are found
to be in conformity with the requirements of this subchapter and all other
ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Inspector shall authorize the City
Clerk to issue the applicant a permit upon the payment of the permit fee set by
resolution of the City Council; provided, that no permit shall be needed for
roof repair or driveway construction. Whenever there is a discrepancy between
permit application procedures contained herein and those contained in any
building code adopted by reference, the provisions contained herein shall
govern.
   (C)   (1)   At the time of application for a building permit, a deposit
shall be made to the city according to the following building permit deposit
fee schedule.
 
Commercial addition, remodel or accessory building valued at $25,000 or  $1,000
greater
New commercial building or new residential building                      $1,000
Residential remodel, addition or accessory building valued at $25,000 or $500
greater
 
      (2)   Such deposit shall be refunded to the remitter upon completion and
approval of a final inspection and adherence to the conditions of the building
permit deposit agreement.
(Prior Code, § 8-105) (Ord. 703, passed 10-10-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-130 through 17-132, 17-550 and
17-1001
§ 150.002 LIMITATION.
   If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not have begun within
six months of the date thereof, or if the construction is discontinued for a
period of six months, the permit shall be void. Before work can be resumed, a
new permit shall be obtained in the same manner and form as an original permit.
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.003 DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or repair
of any building within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction, if the improvement is $2,500 or more, a duplicate of the permit
shall be issued to the County Assessor.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1743)
§ 150.004 EXCAVATIONS AND EXPOSURES; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   Any owner, tenant or lessee causing the construction, demolition or moving
of any building or improvement within the city shall protect all excavations,
exposures, open basements, building materials and debris by suitable barricades
or guards by day and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect or
refusal of the owner, tenant or lessee to erect and maintain such protections
shall constitute a violation of this section, and the Building Inspector or
other city law enforcement authority may stop all work upon the buildings and
improvements until suitable protections are erected and maintained in the
required manner.
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.005 FENCES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FENCE. A structure without a roof, erected for a means of protection,
confinement or aesthetic value of materials such as wood, wire and metal,
masonry or other materials approved by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 8-301)
   (B)   Permit required. Before the installation of any fence within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city when the property is used for residential
purposes, the installer and/or owner of the property lawfully in possession of
the land to be fenced shall first obtain a permit from the City Clerk. Fences
shall be governed by § 7-11 of the zoning ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-302)
(Ord. 646, passed 5-14-2013)
§ 150.006 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISH. The part of a satellite signal-receiving antenna,
characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish.
      DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNAS or EARTH STATIONS or GROUND
STATIONS. One or a combination of two or more of the following:
         (a)   A signal-receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish-type
antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals
from satellites in earth orbit and other extraterrestrial sources;
         (b)   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point
of the receiving component, the purpose of which is to magnify, store, transfer
and/or transmit electronic or light signals; and
         (c)   A coaxial cable, the purpose of which is to carry or transmit
said signals to a receiver.
      GROUNDING ROD. A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve
as an electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely pass and
dissipate.
      RECEIVER. A television set or radio receiver.
(Prior Code, § 8-401)
   (B)   Permit required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or
other legal entity shall construct an earth station without a permit nor shall
construction commence before a permit is issued in accordance with division (C)
below.
(Prior Code, § 8-402)
   (C)   Application for permit.
      (1)   The owner, or occupant with written permission from the owner, of
any lot, premises or parcel of land within the city who desires to construct an
earth station on said lot, premises or land parcel must first submit a written
application upon a form provided and approved by the Building Inspector,
stating the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the real estate;
         (c)   The name and address of the person to be permitted to construct
the proposed earth station;
         (d)   The exact location and dimensions of all buildings and
structures; and
         (e)   The legal description of the lot, premises or land parcel.
      (2)   The applicant must also provide:
         (a)   A plot plan showing the exact location and dimensions of the
proposed earth station;
         (b)   Construction plans and specifications; and
         (c)   Documentation of the possession of any license or permit
required by any federal, state or local agency pertaining to the ownership,
construction or operations of an earth station.
      (3)   The applicant shall submit with each application a permit fee in
the sum of $5. Such fee shall cover the costs of reviewing the construction
plans and specifications, inspecting the final construction and processing the
application.
      (4)   After submission of all of the aforementioned information and
documentation to the Building Inspector, and upon his or her approval of the
same, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit for construction of an earth
station.
(Prior Code, § 8-403)
   (D)   Location of ground-mounted earth station.
      (1)   No earth station shall be erected in any front or side yard but
shall be permitted only in the rear of the residence or main structure.
      (2)   No earth station, including its concrete base slab or other
substructure, shall be constructed less than five feet from any property line
or easement, except when the earth station is installed in an area zoned other
than first or second residential, and in that event, the dish may orbit within
zero feet of the lot line.
      (3)   No earth station shall be linked, physically or electronically, to
a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land as
the earth station.
      (4)   An earth station shall not exceed a grade height of 15 feet, unless
constructed on or attached to a building.
      (5)   Wiring between an earth station and a receiver shall be placed at
least four inches beneath the surface of the ground in rigid conduit; provided,
however, that direct burial cable may be used if the maximum voltage never
exceeds 90 volts. All electrical installations are subject to inspection and
must meet existing electrical codes.
      (6)   Such earth station shall be designed to withstand a wind force of
75 mph.
      (7)   Any driving motor shall be limited to 110V maximum power design and
be encased in protective guards.
      (8)   An earth station must be bonded to a grounding rod.
      (9)   Not more than one earth station shall be installed per lot,
premises or parcel of land in residential districts.
(Prior Code, § 8-404)
   (E)   Electro-magnetic interference. Earth stations shall be filtered and/or
shielded so as to prevent emission of radio frequency energy that would cause
any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or
reception. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the
granting or a conditional use permit, the operator of the earth station shall
promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference, including moving the
earth station, shielding the same and, if necessary, removing it.
(Prior Code, § 8-405)
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.020 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any
building or structure within the city without a written permit to do so.
Application may be made to the City Clerk and shall include the present and
future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the equipment
to be used and such other information as the City Council may require. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the County
Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the moving of
buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the building is presently located.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall refer the application to the City Council or its
designee for approval of the proposed route over which the building is to be
moved. Upon approval, the City Clerk shall issue the permit; provided, that a
good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check or cash in an amount set by
motion of the City Council and conditioned upon moving the building without
doing damage to any private or city property is filed with the City Clerk prior
to the granting of any permit.
   (C)   No moving permit shall be required to move a building that is ten feet
wide or less, and 20 feet long or less, and when in a position to move, 15 feet
high or less.
   (D)   In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover to
interfere with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires or a gas line, the
company or companies owning, using or operating the poles, wires or line shall,
upon proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by disconnecting
the poles, wires or line relative to the building moving operation. All expense
of the disconnection, removal or related work shall be paid in advance by the
licensee unless the disconnection or work is furnished on different terms as
provided in the company’s franchise.
   (E)   Whenever the moving of any building necessitates interference with a
water main, sewer main, pipes or wire belonging to the city, notice in writing
of the time and route of the building moving operation shall be given to the
various officials in charge of the city utility departments, who shall proceed
on behalf of the city and at the expense of the mover to make such
disconnections and do such work as is necessary.
Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate moving of buildings, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-142
§ 150.021 DEPOSIT.
   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the Building
Inspector or other designated official shall inspect the premises and report to
the City Clerk as to the extent of damages, if any, resulting from the
relocation and whether any city laws have been violated during the operation.
Upon a satisfactory report from the Building Inspector or other designated
official, the City Clerk shall return the corporate surety bond, cash or check
deposited by the applicant. In the event the basement, foundation or portion
thereof is not properly filled, covered or in a clean and sanitary condition,
the City Council may apply the money deposited for the purpose of defraying the
expense of correcting the conditions. If the expense of correcting the
hazardous condition is greater than the amount of the deposit set by the City
Council, the City Council may recover the excess expense by civil suit or
otherwise as prescribed by law.
§ 150.022 FEE, LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Any person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application for such permit with the City Clerk. Upon approval of the City
Council, the City Clerk shall then issue the permit.
   (B)   The application shall be made in writing upon a form provided by the
City Clerk and shall set forth:
      (1)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of
exterior and interior;
      (2)   A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be
moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city;
      (3)   A legal description of the lot to which the proposed such building
is to be removed, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the city;
      (4)   The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved;
      (5)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved;
      (6)   Proposed moving date and hours; and
      (7)   Any additional information which the City Council shall find
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by the following papers.
      (1)   Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file
with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which
it is to be removed are free of any entanglements and that all taxes and any
city charges against the same are paid in full.
      (2)   Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other
than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement of bill of
sale signed by the owner or other sufficient evidence that he or she is
entitled to move the building.
      (3)   Liability policy. The applicant shall file with the application a
certificate of insurance providing coverage for both personal injury and
property damage which might occur during the moving of said building. The
minimum amount of coverage shall be $10,000 for property damage and $10,000 for
personal injury. The City Council may require coverage in greater amounts if
deemed necessary.
      (4)   Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount of $25, which shall be paid over by the City Clerk to the City
Treasurer, who shall credit it to the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 8-203)
§ 150.023 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   Every permittee under this subchapter shall:
   (A)   Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the
written permit;
   (B)   Notify the City Clerk in writing of a desired change in moving date
and hours as proposed in the application;
   (C)   Notify the City Clerk in writing of any and all damage done to
property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has
occurred;
   (D)   Cause red lights to be displayed during night hours on every side of
the building while standing on the street, in such a manner as to warn the
public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades
across the streets in such a manner as to protect the public from damage or
injury by reason of the removal of the building;
   (E)   Remove the building from the city streets after four days of such
occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the Mayor and the City Council;
   (F)   Comply with the building code, the fire zone, any zoning ordinances
now existing or hereinafter adopted and all other applicable ordinances and
laws, if any, upon relocating the building in the city;
   (G)   Within ten days from the removal of the building, the permittee shall
remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at
the original site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary
condition; and
   (H)   See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, the water
shut off and the meter returned to the city water office. Permittee shall
notify the gas and electric service companies to remove their services.
(Prior Code, § 8-205)
§ 150.024 NO GENERAL LICENSE.
   There shall be no general license or permit issued to anyone to move
buildings at will or generally within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-206)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.035 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS STRUCTURE or UNSAFE STRUCTURE. Includes:
      (1)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of its occupants or those
of neighboring structures;
      (2)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause,
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
      (3)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause,
is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse of any part
of such structure; and
      (4)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows readily admits
birds and animals or is an attraction for children or other persons to enter.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1720, 18-1722 and 18-1722.01
§ 150.036 PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
structure in the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous structure to permit the same to remain in an
unsafe condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied while
it is in an unsafe condition. Any such unsafe structure in the city is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1720, 18-1722 and 18-1722.01
§ 150.037 DETERMINATION; NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector or Fire Chief shall be of the opinion
that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous structure, he or she
shall file a written statement to this effect with the City Council. The City
Council shall thereupon pass a resolution outlining the violations, authorizing
and directing the Building Inspector to place a sign on the dangerous structure
City Clerk to:
      (1)   File a copy of such resolution in the office of the County Register
of Deeds;
      (2)   Serve written notice upon the owner and upon the occupant thereof,
if any, by certified mail or by personal service; and
      (3)   Post written notice at the premises.
   (B)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall include the following:
      (1)   The legal description/address of property;
      (2)   A statement of violation/violations;
      (3)   An order that such structure is to be repaired/demolished/removed
within reasonable time or the city will proceed to do so;
      (4)   Description of owner’s right to appeal; and
      (5)   A statement of the city’s right to levy the costs as a special
assessment on the real estate upon which the dangerous structure exists, which
special assessment shall be a lien on the real estate, and the city’s right to
recover the costs in a civil action.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 150.038 HEARING AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building, its
owner may, in writing to the City Clerk and within 20 days from the date the
notice was served, appeal the decision and request a hearing before the Board
of Appeals to present reasons why the building should not be repaired or
demolished. The Board of Appeals shall grant such hearing within 20 days from
the date of receiving the request.
   (B)   A written notice of the Board’s decision following the hearing shall
be sent to the property owner by certified mail. If the Board rejects the
appeal, the owner shall have five days from the sending of the decision to
begin repair or demolition and removal. If the owner has not begun work after
the five-day period, the city shall proceed to cause such work to be done;
provided, that the property owner may appeal such decision to the appropriate
court for adjudication, during which proceedings the decision of the Council
shall be stayed.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1720, 18-1722 and 18-1722.01
§ 150.039 COSTS; ASSESSED TO PROPERTY OR COLLECTED IN CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   If any owner of any building or structure fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with notice by or on behalf of the city to repair, rehabilitate or
demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe and a public
nuisance, the city may proceed with the work specified in the notice to the
property owner.
   (B)   A statement of the cost of such work shall be forwarded to the City
Council, which may:
      (1)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or real
estate upon which the building or structure is located, such special assessment
being a lien on the real estate and collected in the manner provided for
special assessments; or
      (2)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or structure and
enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 and
77-1725.01
§ 150.040 STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.
   The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector on ordering repair, vacation or demolition.
   (A)   Conditions for repair. If the dangerous or unsafe building or
structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this subchapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
   (B)   Conditions for vacation. If the dangerous or unsafe building or
structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous or unsafe to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be
vacated.
   (C)   Conditions for demolition.
      (1)   In any case where a dangerous or unsafe building or structure is
50% damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its replacement value or structure
and cannot reasonably be repaired, it shall be demolished.
      (2)   In all cases where a building or structure cannot be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subchapter, it
shall be demolished.
      (3)   In all cases where a dangerous or unsafe building or structure is a
fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this subchapter or
of any other provisions of this code or of state statutes, it shall be
demolished.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 150.041 IMMEDIATE HAZARD.
   (A)   (1)   In the even the unsafe structure constitutes an immediate hazard
to the life or safety of any persons and must be demolished to protect their
health or safety, the Building Inspector shall report such facts to the City
Council, who shall follow the procedures set forth in state statutes.
      (2)   The city, by and through the City Council, may immediately contract
for the immediate demolition of the unsafe or dangerous structure without
requiring bids.
   (B)   A statement of the cost of such emergency vacation and demolition of
an unsafe or dangerous building shall be forwarded to the City Council, which
may:
      (1)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or real
estate upon which the building or structure is located, such special assessment
being a lien on the real estate and collected in the manner provided for
special assessments; or
      (2)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or structure and
enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 794, passed 8-8-2023)
BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.055 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all city building and housing regulations, if any. He or she
shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the city as
often as necessary to ensure compliance with all city ordinances. He or she
shall have the power and authority to order, at the direction of the City
Council, all work stopped on any construction, alteration or relocation which
violates any provisions prescribed in any city building and housing
regulations. He or she shall, at the direction of the City Council, issue
permission to continue any construction, alteration or relocation when the City
Council is satisfied that no provision will be violated.
   (B)   If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within one hour. This written order may be served by any city police
officer. In the event that the city has building and housing regulations, and
the Mayor fails to appoint a Building Inspector, the chief city law enforcement
officer shall be the Building Inspector ex officio.
§ 150.056 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair or relocation is taking place, for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.057 TIME OF INSPECTION.
   The Building Inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his or
her agent, shall make the following inspections of the building or structure
and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall
notify the permit holder or his or her agent that the work fails to comply with
the requirements of the city code: Foundation inspection shall be made after
trenches are excavated and the necessary forms erected; frame inspection shall
be made after the roof, framing, fire-blocking and backing is in place and all
pipes, chimneys and vents are complete; and final inspection shall be made
after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. It shall be unlawful
for any person to do work or cause work to be done beyond the point indicated
in each successive inspection without the written approval of the Building
Inspector.
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.058 APPEAL FROM DECISION.
   In the event it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of any city
building or housing regulation has been wrongly interpreted by the Building
Inspector, that the time allowed for compliance with any order of the Building
Inspector is too short, or that conditions peculiar to a particular building
make it unreasonably difficult to meet the literal requirements prescribed by
the regulation and by the Building Inspector, the owner, his or her agent or
the occupant may file a notice of appeal within ten days after the decision or
order of the Building Inspector has been made. The City Council shall hear all
appeals and shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the
decision or order of the Building Inspector. Such a decision shall be final,
subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or
equity. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons
why the variance should be made. A variance shall be granted only where it is
evident that reasonable safety and sanitation is assured and may include
conditions not generally specified by the building or housing regulation to
achieve that end. A copy of any variance so granted shall be sent to both the
Building Inspector and the applicant.
BUILDING CODES AND STANDARDS
§ 150.070 BUILDING CODE.
   To provide certain standards, provisions and requirements for establishing
the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, to
provide for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures and to provide for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Building
Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. are
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though printed in full herein.
Three copies of said Code shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk,
available for public inspection during office hours. The provisions of the
International Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-601) (Ord. 684, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.071 ELECTRICAL CODE AND ELECTRICIAN LICENSES.
   (A)   National Electrical Code adopted by reference. To provide certain
standards, provisions and requirements for safe and fireproof installation,
methods of connection and uses of materials in the installation of electrical
wiring and appliances, the National Electrical Code, 2023 edition, as
recommended and published by the National Fire Protection Association and
printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference as though
printed in full herein, insofar as said Code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. Three copies of the Code shall be on file at the office
of the City Clerk, available for public inspection during office hours. The
provisions of the National Electrical Code shall be controlling throughout the
city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-602)
   (B)   Electricians, fire alarm installers; license.
      (1)   No person shall perform electrical work or install fire alarm
systems under the State Electrical Act, being Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-2101 et
seq. within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction
without first having registered with the City Building Inspector.
      (2)   Registration with the City Building Inspector shall require:
         (a)   Completion of an electrician’s registration application form as
provided by the city;
         (b)   Submission of a copy of the person’s current electrician’s or
fire alarm installer’s license from the State Electrical Board;
         (c)   For master electricians, submission of a current certificate of
insurance which provides coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a
minimum amount of $300,000; and
         (d)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
      (3)   Each license shall be valid from the date of issuance up to and
including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed
before the expiration date thereof by submitting the required application form,
state license, certificate of insurance and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-615)
(Ord. 576, passed 2-10-2009; Ord. 634, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 663, passed 9-9-
2014; Ord. 673, passed 3-10-2015; Ord. 820, passed 9-10-2024)
§ 150.072 PLUMBING CODE AND PLUMBER LICENSES.
   (A)   International Plumbing Code adopted by reference. To provide certain
standards, provisions and requirements for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though printed in
full herein. Three copies of said Code shall be on file at the office of the
City Clerk, available for public inspection during office hours. The provisions
of the International Plumbing Code shall be controlling throughout the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-603)
   (B)   Master plumbers; license.
      (1)   No person shall engage in the business of plumbing as a master
plumber within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction
unless he or she is the holder of a current and valid master plumber’s license
and has registered with the City Building Inspector. In the case of any firm
having more than one person engaging in plumbing, only one of such persons
shall be required to qualify as a master plumber; and in the case of a legally
constituted corporation, only one executive officer, who is liable to service
of regular processes, shall be required to qualify as a master plumber.
      (2)   Registration with the City Building Inspector shall require:
         (a)   Completion of a master plumber’s registration application form
as provided by the city;
         (b)   Submission of documentation that the applicant has four years’
experience as a journeyman plumber and that the applicant has passed a master
plumber examination given by a recognized national testing agency with a score
of 75% or higher, or submission of a copy of the applicant’s current and valid
City of Omaha, City of Bellevue, City of Fremont or City of Council Bluffs
master plumber’s license;
         (c)   Submission of a current certificate of insurance which provides
coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000;
and
         (d)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
      (3)   Each license shall be valid from the date of issuance up to and
including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed
before the expiration date thereof by submitting the required application form,
master plumber’s license, certificate of insurance and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-612)
   (C)   Journeyman plumbers; license.
      (1)   No person shall perform any plumbing work as a journeyman plumber
within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction unless he
or she is the holder of a current and valid journeyman plumber’s license and
has registered with the City Building Inspector.
      (2)   Registration with the City Building Inspector shall require:
         (a)   Completion of a journeyman plumber’s registration application
form as provided by the city;
         (b)   Submission of documentation that the applicant has four years’
experience as an apprentice plumber and that the applicant has passed a
journeyman plumber’s examination given by a recognized national testing agency
with a score of 75% or higher, or submission of a copy of the applicant’s
current and valid City of Omaha, City of Bellevue, City of Fremont or City of
Council Bluffs journeyman plumber’s license; and
         (c)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
      (3)   Each license shall be valid from the date of issuance up to and
including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed
before the expiration date thereof by submitting the required application form,
journeyman plumber’s license, certificate of insurance and fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-613)
   (D)   Apprentice plumbers; license.
      (1)   No person shall perform any plumbing work as an apprentice plumber
within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction without
first having obtained from the City Building Inspector an apprentice plumber’s
license.
      (2)   An apprentice plumber’s license shall be issued to an applicant by
the City Building Inspector upon fulfillment of the following:
         (a)   Completion of an apprentice plumber’s license application form
provided by the city;
         (b)   Submission of a copy of the applicant’s written indentured
apprenticeship agreement through a certified apprenticeship program which
provides for training through employment and classroom-related instruction; and
         (c)   Payment of the fee as provided in §
110.05.
      (3)   An apprentice plumber’s license shall authorize the licensee to
perform plumbing work while on the job with and under the direct supervision of
a licensed journeyman or master plumber, except that a fourth year apprentice
may work by himself or herself on service and repair work. For the purpose of
this section, SERVICE AND REPAIR WORK shall include only the following:
         (a)   The cleaning of stoppages in drains, soil, waste or vent pipes;
         (b)   The repair of leaks in pipes and valves when such repairs do not
involve or require the rearrangement of valves or pipes and the total distance
of the pipe to be replaced is less than 15 feet;
         (c)   The replacement of such fixtures as water closets, lavatories,
water heaters, garbage disposers, dishwashers and kitchen sinks, when such
replacement does not require the rearrangement of water, waste and venting
piping; provided, that an apprentice may set fixtures in a new house or
building or on a remodel job;
         (d)   The replacement or repair of faucets, traps and supplies on
existing fixtures; and
         (e)   The replacement of sill cocks, pressure reducing valves,
backflow preventers and similar devices.
      (4)   An apprentice plumber’s license shall be valid from the date of
issuance up to and including the next December 31, unless sooner revoked, and
shall be renewed before the expiration date thereof by submitting the required
application form, documentation and fee.
      (5)   No master plumber shall employ any apprentice plumber who is not
licensed by the City Building Inspector. No more than three licensed apprentice
plumbers may be supervised by a master or journeyman plumber.
(Prior Code, § 8-614)
(Ord. 685, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.073 MECHANICAL CODE AND CONTRACTOR LICENSES.
   (A)   International Mechanical Code adopted by reference. To provide certain
standards, provisions and requirements for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, published by the International
Code Council, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though
printed in full herein. Three copies of the Code, shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk, available for public inspection during office hours.
The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-604)
   (B)   Mechanical contractors and journeymen; license. No person shall
install, repair, manufacture, replace, fit or change any air conditioning/air
distribution system, any furnace, restaurant appliance hood and its duct system
or any other exhaust or intake ventilating system within the city’s corporate
limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction without first having obtained a
mechanical contractor’s license or a mechanical journeyman’s license from the
City Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 8-616)
(Ord. 686, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.074 EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   To provide certain standards, provisions and requirements for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Existing
Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. Three
copies of said Code shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk, available
for public inspection during office hours. The provisions of the International
Existing Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout
its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-605) (Ord. 687, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.075 RESIDENTIAL CODE AND ADDITIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   International Residential Code adopted by reference. To provide
certain standards, provisions and requirements for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and
two-family dwellings and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor, each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the International Residential Code, 2012 edition, published by the
International Code Council, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though printed in full herein. Three copies of the Code shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk, available for public inspection during office hours.
The provisions of the International Residential Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-606)
   (B)   Additional standards; footings. The purpose of this section is to
provide an additional minimum standard for the structural design and materials
used to construct footings as provided for in the 2003 edition of the
International Residential Code, and amendments thereto, as recommended and
published by the International Code Council. Wood foundations and pole design
buildings are allowed, but not within the residential zoning areas of the city
nor within the platted residential areas within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction. In the areas where wood foundations and pole design buildings are
prohibited, footings shall be concrete, solid masonry, reinforced concrete or
steel grillages. For the purpose of this section, the term POLE DESIGN BUILDING
is defined as it appears in AWPI, Pole Building Design 2005.
(Prior Code, § 8-608)
   (C)   Footing requirements for accessory buildings. Any one-story wood or
metal frame building not used for human occupancy with a floor area up to 240
square feet may have a floating slab foundation or walls supported on a wood
foundation plate. Any building from 240 square feet to 720 square feet: a
footing one foot wide, one foot deep from grade with two #4 rebar running full
length of footing and #4 rebar placed approximately every four feet into floor
slab.
(Prior Code, § 8-609)
(Ord. 688, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.076 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   To provide certain standards, provisions and requirements for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out herein. Three copies of the Code shall be on file at the office of the City
Clerk, available for public inspection during office hours. The provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code shall be controlling throughout the
city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8-607) (Ord. 689, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 150.077 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   To regulate and govern energy efficient building envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems and to
provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation
Code of the city; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code, three copies of which
are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein, with the following
revisions.
      (1)   In Section 101.1, insert “City of Valley.”
      (2)   In Section 108.4, insert “less than $100.00 or more than $500.00.”
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the International
Energy Conservation Code and any existing city municipal ordinance that has not
been specifically repealed, then the provisions of the municipal code shall
survive.
(Prior Code, § 8-617) (Ord. 635, passed 4-10-2012)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter, whether set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in
a sum of not more than $500. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-901)
CHAPTER 151: FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Scope
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Materials and methods of construction
   
151.05   Tests of assemblies
   
151.06   Connections
   
151.07   Allowances for non-incorporated pipes, conduits and electrical wiring
   
151.08   Permits, fees and approval of plans
   
151.09   Certificate of inspection
   
151.10   Field erection
   
151.11   Appeal procedure
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control the quality of factory-built
housing installed within the corporate limits and within the jurisdictional
area outside the corporate limits of the city by adopting minimum standards for
quality and use of construction materials, quality and methods of fabrication
and by establishing standards for inspection.
(Prior Code, § 4-801)
§ 151.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to any factory-built housing, as defined herein,
installed within the corporate limits and within the jurisdictional area of the
city. Except as specifically provided herein, quality and use of construction
materials and quality and methods of fabrication shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this code as if the house were being conventionally built on
site.
(Prior Code, § 4-802)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
   FABRICATION. To construct, build or assemble standardized parts by putting
together floors, side walls, interior partitions, ceilings, roofs or any parts
or portions thereof as assembled units (including all parts and portions of
electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning systems and mechanical
equipment included therein), before incorporating them into one completed
structure as a factory-built house.
   FABRICATOR. An individual, firm or corporation fabricating factory-built
houses.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING. One family dwelling unit not to exceed one story in
height, which is either wholly or partially fabricated at an off-site location
to be wholly or partially assembled on site, but not to include mobile homes.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
law; or a group of persons who need not be related, living together in a
dwelling unit.
   INSTALLATION. The assembly of a factory-built house on site and the process
of affixing the structure to land, a foundation or footings.
   SITE. The entire tract, subdivision or parcel of land on which a factory-
built house is installed.
(Prior Code, § 4-803)
§ 151.04 MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The City Building Inspector shall have the authority to approve materials,
methods of construction and arrangement of materials for use under this
chapter. Before any such material, or any such method of construction, or any
such arrangement of materials, shall be approved, reasonable tests as required
by the Building Inspector shall have been made and found by him or her to be
safe and in conformity with the provisions of this code. Such tests shall be
made in accordance with current standards of the American Society for Testing
and Materials. All expenses for such tests shall be made by the applicant, and
security for payment of the cost thereof may be required.
(Prior Code, § 4-804)
§ 151.05 TESTS OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Durability tests. The Building Inspector may require reasonable
special tests to be made on assemblies to determine their durability and
weather resistance.
   (B)   Insulation. Factory-built houses shall be so insulated that the
coefficient of heat transmission (U) shall not exceed 0.25 BTU per hour per
square foot of surface area per degree of Fahrenheit difference in temperature
between the air on the two sides for ceilings, sidewalks and floors, except
that where there is a heated basement, no special provision for insulation of
floor between this space and the first or ground story shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 4-805)
§ 151.06 CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Design. Bolts or other devices designed to connect fabricated
assemblies to be used in factory-built houses shall be capable of developing
the strength of members connected and to resist wind loads as specified in the
National Building Code, as amended, recommended by the American Insurance
Association.
   (B)   Roof connections. Connections consisting of bolts or other devices
between roofs and the supporting walls shall be capable of withstanding an
uplift equal to not less than ten pounds per square foot of horizontally
projected roof area, in addition to withstanding the other stresses specified
in the National Building Code, as amended, recommended by the American
Insurance Association.
   (C)   Weatherproofing. Individual units or sections of fabricated
assemblies, either floor, wall, ceiling or roof, shall be so connected that
joints shall be weatherproof and windproof. Said joints shall be properly
caulked in an approved manner and covered on the weather side with approved
battens or other approved weather covering.
(Prior Code, § 4-806)
§ 151.07 ALLOWANCES FOR NON-INCORPORATED PIPES, CONDUITS AND ELECTRICAL WIRING.
   (A)   Structural design. In the structural design of an assembly, due
allowance shall be made for any material to be removed for the installation of
pipes, conduits, electrical wiring or other equipment at a place other than the
factory or which has been installed but not inspected at the factory.
   (B)   Tests. Panels which are required to be tested shall be tested after
all chases and cavities for such equipment have been cut.
   (C)   Additional cutting. No additional material shall be removed from any
fabricated assembly during construction, other than as provided in this
section, unless specifically approved by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-807)
§ 151.08 PERMITS, FEES AND APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any fabricator to begin fabricating a factory-built
house for use within the corporate limits or jurisdictional area of the city
until such fabricator, person, firm or corporation shall have filed plans and
specifications, including details for electrical, plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and distributions systems, together with an application and fees
for a permit thereunder in the same manner and amount as any owner, his or her
agent or a contractor building the same house on site and the permit and copy
of said plans and specifications bearing said permit number and stamped
approved by the Building Inspector shall have been received by the fabricator.
(Prior Code, § 4-808) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   Materials. Materials and the assembly thereof as a factory-built house
shall be inspected to determine compliance with this chapter. Every material or
fabricated assembly shall be labeled with stickers, affixed by the Building
Inspector or an approved certifying agency, bearing the permit number under
which it was fabricated, certifying compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Shop inspections. During the process of fabrication, all assembling of
materials which are inaccessible for inspection in each fabricated panel or
unit after completion shall be inspected for compliance with this chapter
before being covered, by checking to make sure it complies with the approved
copy of the plans and specifications.
   (C)   Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall be furnished with every
factory-built house. Such certificate shall certify that it has been inspected
and approved and complies with the copy of the plans, specifications or
description of work and the provisions of this code.
   (D)   Certifying agency. To be acceptable, every certificate of compliance
shall be made by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this code when
the place of fabrication is within the corporate limits or jurisdictional area
of the city. In the event the place of fabrication is outside the corporate
limits or jurisdictional area of the city, the certificate of compliance may be
made by the above authority or by an agency approved by the City Council. All
compensation of such inspection and certifying services conducted outside the
corporate limits or jurisdictional limits shall be paid by the person, firm or
corporation manufacturing said factory-built house. Failure on the part of any
approved certifying agency to make the required inspections, or the making by
any approved certifying agency of false or improper certificates, or false or
improper labeling of fabricated assemblies, shall be cause for cancellation of
approval of such agency by the City Council and shall, in addition, render such
agency subject to forfeiture of its penalty bond or liable to prosecution for
failure of compliance with this chapter. All approved certifying agencies shall
maintain a penalty bond in the sum of $10,000, payable to the city.
   (E)   Continuous inspection. If continuous inspection is required for
certain materials where construction takes place on the site, it shall also be
required where the same materials are used in factory-built housing. In such
event, the fabricator of such factory-built house shall pay to the City Clerk
the cost of such inspections made by the Building Inspector. Such continuous
inspections will not be required during fabrication if the approved certifying
agency provides such continuous inspection and certifies compliance with the
approved plans and specifications.
   (F)   Intermittent inspection. The fabricator shall permit the right of
entry and be required to pay for seven trips per year by the City Building
Inspector to allow him or her to make unscheduled plant inspections of the work
in progress relating to any factory-built house to be installed within the
corporate limits or jurisdictional area of the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-809)
§ 151.10 FIELD ERECTION.
   Placement of a factory-built house on the building site shall be inspected
by the City Building Inspector to determine compliance with this chapter, and
said Inspector shall require that anything not in compliance with the
requirements of this code be immediately removed from the premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-810)
§ 151.11 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person, firm or corporation feeling aggrieved by any order or decision
of the Building Inspector concerning the construction of a building under the
provisions of this code and controlled by this chapter may appeal to the Board
of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 4-811)
CHAPTER 152: TRAILER COURTS
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Permit required
   
152.03   Maintenance
   
152.04   Inspections
   
152.05   Liability of owner
   
152.06   Management
   
152.07   Revocation of permit
   
152.08   Prohibited location
   
152.09   Prohibited parking
   
152.10   Regulations
   
152.11   Alterations and additions
   
152.12   Water supply
   
152.13   Plumbing, electrical and building codes
   
152.14   Temporary storage
   
152.15   Certificate of occupancy
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE PREVENTION AUTHORITY. The Volunteer Fire Department.
   PERMIT. A written permit issued by the City Clerk, permitting the trailer
court to operate under this code and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
   STREET. Any public street, avenue, road, alley or highway located in the
city and established for the use of vehicles, the boundaries of which are
hereby determined to be the outer boundaries of said street, avenue, road or
alley, platted and dedicated as shown by the official records of the city and
the county and as shown on the official records in the office of the County
Clerk as official streets, avenues, roads or alleys within the corporate
limits.
   TRAILER COACH or TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure so designed and
constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping
quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession,
occupation or trade or use as a selling or advertising device; and so designed
that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or
city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a
device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   TRAILER COURT. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site,
lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose
of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach and upon which
any trailer coach is parked, and shall include all buildings used or intended
for use as part of the equipment thereof whether or not a charge is made for
the use of the trailer camp and its facilities. TRAILER CAMP shall not include
automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for
purposes of inspection and sale.
   TRAILER SPACE. A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for the
accommodation of one trailer coach.
   TRAVEL TRAILER, CAMPER and CONVERTED BUS. Any portable structure or vehicle
supported upon its own axle(s), used or so constructed as to permit its being
used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as
such and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons for a limited or temporary
time or basically designed for travel or camping purposes, propelled or drawn
by its own or other motive power.
(Prior Code, § 4-401)
§ 152.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or
alter any trailer court within the corporate limits unless he or she holds a
valid permit for the specific trailer court. All applications for permits shall
be made to the County Clerk, who shall issue a permit upon compliance by the
applicant with provisions of this code relative to trailer courts. No permit
shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall give notice in
writing to the City Clerk within 72 hours after having sold, transferred, given
away or otherwise disposed of any interest in or control of any trailer court.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such trailer court.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be in writing, signed by the applicant,
accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application
and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the trailer court;
      (3)   A complete plan of the trailer court, showing compliance with all
applicable provisions of this code and regulations promulgated thereunder; and
      (4)   Such further information as may be requested by the Board of Health
to enable it to determine that the proposed trailer court will comply with
legal requirements.
(Prior Code, § 4-402) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.03 MAINTENANCE.
   All trailer courts shall be maintained under the management and supervision
of the owner or person in control of the premises on which the same is located,
or of a duly authorized representative of such owner, who shall be personally
responsible for the maintenance of such trailer court in accordance with all
sanitary and fire protection rules and regulations of the city and the state.
(Prior Code, § 4-403)
§ 152.04 INSPECTIONS.
   All trailer courts shall be under the supervision of the Board of Health,
which shall make and provide for inspections at reasonable times and shall
recommend to the City Council such additional rules and regulations as may be
deemed advisable or necessary for the sanitation, safety and proper maintenance
of said trailer courts.
(Prior Code, § 4-404)
§ 152.05 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   The operator of a trailer court shall be primarily liable for all utility
service bills charged against each trailer house and shall make monthly
remittances to the city for such bills.
(Prior Code, § 4-405)
§ 152.06 MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Every trailer court shall have an office building in which shall be
located the office of the person in charge of said court. A copy of the license
shall be posted therein, and the court register shall at all times be kept in
said office.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to:
      (1)   Keep at all times a register of all occupants of each trailer
space, which shall be open at all times to inspection by officers of the city,
showing for all such occupants: names and addresses; dates of entrance and
departure; license numbers of all trailers and other towed automobiles; states
issuing such licenses; and evidence of payment of all required license fees and
property and/or personal taxes;
      (2)   Maintain the court in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at
all times;
      (3)   Report to the Director of Health all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease; and
      (4)   Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of occupants
than that which it is designated to accommodate.
(Prior Code, § 4-406)
§ 152.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to establish and maintain a trailer court may be revoked by
the City Council for cause at any time for a violation of the provisions of
this code or of the rules and regulations relating to trailers, or for any
other cause or conduct reasonably deemed by the Council as sufficient cause for
revocation of such permit. Before any such revocation, the city shall cause to
be served on the operator of such trailer court a notice to appear and show
cause on a specified day and at a specified time why his or her permit for such
trailer court should not be revoked. Such notice to show cause may be served by
mailing the same by U.S. mail to the address of the operator given in his or
her application in such permit, with sufficient postage affixed thereto.
   (B)   The operator of the trailer court involved shall be given reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the time fixed for his or her appearance to show
cause, and no permit for such trailer court shall be revoked until the operator
involved has been heard at the designated time if he or she desires to be
heard.
(Prior Code, § 4-407)
§ 152.08 PROHIBITED LOCATION.
   After the effective date hereof, except as otherwise provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a trailer or trailer coach within the corporate
limits for purposes of using said trailer as a dwelling or sleeping place for
one or more persons or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or
trade, or use as a selling or advertising device, except in a designated and
approved trailer court for which a permit has been issued and is currently
valid.
(Prior Code, § 4-408) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.09 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer coach, travel
trailer, camper or converted bus on any street, avenue, road, alley or highway
within the corporate limits for a period of time in excess of two hours, and
then only between the hours of sunrise and sunset and subject to any other and
further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and
parking regulations as any resolution of the City Council may provide relating
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-409) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.10 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Trailer courts shall be located on well-drained sites and shall be so
located that drainage will not endanger any water supply. All such trailer
courts shall be in areas free from marshes, swamps or other potential breeding
places for insects or rodents. The area of the trailer court shall be large
enough to accommodate the following:
      (1)   The designated number of trailer court spaces;
      (2)   Necessary streets and roadways;
      (3)   Parking areas for motor vehicles; and
      (4)   Service areas and playgrounds for trailer courts in which
independent trailer coaches only are parked.
   (B)   (1)   The number of trailers to be accommodated in any trailer court
shall not exceed the number obtained by dividing the total square foot area of
the trailer court site by 2,600. Each trailer space shall be clearly defined
and laid out in such a manner that a minimum of 20 feet of space exists between
any two trailers or ten feet between any trailer and any building, except that
a maximum 100 square foot storage shed, meeting all state fire codes, may be
placed a minimum of three feet from any trailer, other building or structure.
      (2)   No trailer shall be less than five feet from any adjacent property
of the trailer court. Each trailer space shall abut on a driveway with
unobstructed access to a public street.
      (3)   No trailer court shall be licensed unless it is large enough to
accommodate a minimum of 15 trailers.
   (C)   It shall be illegal to park a trailer coach less than two feet from
any street or highway right-of-way or so that any part of such trailer will
obstruct any roadway or walkway.
   (D)   It shall be illegal to allow any trailer coach to remain in a trailer
court while being occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes unless a trailer
space is available.
   (E)   Access roads shall be provided to each trailer space. Each access road
shall be continuous, shall connect with a street or highway and shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
   (F)   Parking areas shall be provided for motor vehicles. Such areas shall
have motor vehicle parking spaces in a number equal to or in excess of the
number of trailer coach spaces provided.
   (G)   Playground areas, when required, shall be provided and shall be
restricted to such use. These areas shall be protected from the main highway
and from parking areas. A minimum of 100 square feet per coach space shall be
made available in one or more places for such playground areas.
   (H)   Sufficient concrete or asphalt sidewalks shall be provided to ensure
that each trailer space is served by at least one such sidewalk. In all cases
there must be at least one such sidewalk constructed so that a hard-surfaced
entry connects either the parking space provided or the access road with each
trailer space.
(Prior Code, § 4-410)
§ 152.11 ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.
   (A)   No permanent enclosed additions of any kind shall be built onto nor
become a part of any trailer coach. Skirting of coaches is required within 30
days after locating such coach in the court, but such skirting shall not attach
the trailer permanently to the ground, provide a harborage for rodents or
create a fire hazard.
   (B)   Jacks or stabilizers shall be placed under the frame of each trailer
to prevent movement on the springs while it is parked and occupied. Four
anchors shall be provided for each trailer space. Each trailer shall be
anchored as soon as possible after being situated on its space.
(Prior Code, § 4-411)
§ 152.12 WATER SUPPLY.
   An adequate supply of pure water shall be furnished through a pipe
distribution system connected directly with a city water main, with supply
outlets located at every trailer space.
(Prior Code, § 4-412)
§ 152.13 PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING CODES.
   All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any court shall
be in accordance with the laws of the city regulating such work.
(Prior Code, § 4-413)
§ 152.14 TEMPORARY STORAGE.
   It shall be lawful for any person to store or otherwise keep on any premises
travel trailers or campers, propelled or drawn by their own or other motive
power, upon any area; provided, that said trailer or camper be stored as near
as possible to the rear of the premises. It further shall be lawful for any
person to keep and maintain a travel trailer or camper, propelled or drawn by
its own or other motive power, upon any premises to be used for occupancy as
dwelling or sleeping space for any period not to exceed two weeks in duration.
Any travel trailer or camper, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power, so temporarily placed shall be placed upon said premises or portion
thereof as far away as possible from the street abutting said premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-414)
§ 152.15 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or manager of any trailer court
within the city to permit the occupation of a trailer home by any occupant
until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   The owner or manager of the trailer court or the prospective occupant
shall make application for such certificate to the City Clerk and shall pay a
fee of $75.
   (C)   The City Building Inspector shall inspect such trailer and trailer
site and determine that the trailer and trailer site comply with the provisions
of the building code and the zoning ordinances then in effect in the city.
   (D)   A certificate of occupancy, when issued, shall describe the premises
and the use proposed to be made by the applicant and shall state that such
proposed use complies with the applicable codes of the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-415) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 153: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
City Property
   
153.001   Streets, alleys, walks, malls and other improvements
   
153.002   Maintenance and control
   
153.003   Regulation of snow, ice and other encroachments
   
153.004   Poles, wires and pipe lines
   
153.005   Dangerous stairways and entrances
   
153.006   Guttering and eave spouts
   
153.007   Prohibited obstructions
   
153.008   Overhanging branches
   
153.009   Cutting into paving, curb or sidewalk
   
153.010   Heavy equipment
Sale and Acquisition of Property; Public Works
   
153.025   Sale and conveyance; real property
   
153.026   Sale and conveyance; personal property
   
153.027   Acquisition or construction of public buildings; election
requirements
   
153.028   Acquisition of real property; appraisal
   
153.029   Acquisition of real property; public meeting; access for recreational
use
Sidewalks
   
153.040   Requirement to keep clean
   
153.041   New sidewalk; notice
   
153.042   Repairing sidewalk; notice
   
153.043   Reconstruction sidewalk; notice
   
153.044   Failure to construct, reconstruct or repair
   
153.045   Construction at owner’s initiative
   
153.046   Construction and repair at city direction
   
153.047   Construction by petition
Streets and Alleys
   
153.060   Opening, widening, improving or vacating
   
153.061   Vacating public ways; procedure
   
153.062   Crossings
   
153.063   Names and numbers
   
153.064   Premises identification
   
153.065   Excavations; permit; bond
   
153.066   Driving stakes
   
153.067   Mixing concrete
   
153.068   Harmful liquids
   
153.069   Discharging water
   
153.070   Construction of private drive
   
153.071   Construction assessment
   
153.072   Improvement districts; objections
   
153.073   Improvement of streets on corporate limits
   
153.074   Improvement of main thoroughfares
   
153.075   Petition for improvements
   
153.076   Deferral from special assessments
 
   
153.999   Penalty
CITY PROPERTY
§ 153.001 STREETS, ALLEYS, WALKS, MALLS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may grade, partially or to an established grade, change
grade, curb, recurb, gutter, regutter, pave, gravel, regravel, macadamize,
remacadamize, widen or narrow streets or roadways, resurface or re-lay existing
pavement, or otherwise improve any streets, alleys, public grounds, public
ways, entirely or partially, and streets which divide the city corporate area
and the area adjoining the city; construct or reconstruct pedestrian walks,
plazas, malls, landscaping, outdoor sprinkler systems, fountains, decorative
water ponds, lighting systems and permanent facilities; and construct sidewalks
and improve the sidewalk space. These projects may be funded at public cost or
by the levy of special assessments on the property especially benefited in
proportion to such benefits, except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-2428
through 19-2431. The City Council may by ordinance create improvement
districts, to be consecutively numbered, which may include two or more
connecting or intersecting streets, alleys or public ways and may include two
or more types of the improvements authorized under this section in a single
district in one proceeding. All of the improvements which are to be funded by a
levy of special assessment on the property especially benefited shall be
ordered as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-510 through 17-512, except as
otherwise provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-509.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-509)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on improvements, assessments and bonds, see Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§ 17-513 through 17-524, 18-1751, 19-2401 and 19-2408 through 19-2415
§ 153.002 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   The City Council shall have the care, supervision and control of all public
highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within the city
and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-567)
§ 153.003 REGULATION OF SNOW, ICE AND OTHER ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall have power to prevent and remove all encroachments,
including snow, ice, mud or other obstructions, into and upon all sidewalks,
streets, avenues, alleys and other city property.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-557)
   (B)   If the abutting property owner refuses or neglects, after five days’
notice by publication or, in place thereof, personal service of such notice, to
remove all encroachments from sidewalks, as provided in division (A) above, the
city through the proper officers may cause such encroachments to be removed,
and the cost of removal shall be paid out of the Street Fund. The City Council
shall assess the cost of the notice and removal of the encroachment against the
abutting property as a special assessment. The special assessment shall be
known as a special sidewalk assessment and, together with the cost of notice,
shall be levied and collected as a special assessment in addition to the
general revenue taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties as other
special assessments and shall draw interest from the date of the assessment.
Upon payment of the assessment, the assessment shall be credited to the Street
Fund.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-557.01)
§ 153.004 POLES, WIRES AND PIPE LINES.
   (A)   Poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances
of public service companies shall be located or erected over, upon or under the
streets, alleys and common grounds of the city. Application for location of
such appurtenances shall be made to the City Council in writing. Approval by
the Council shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances shall at all times erect and locate
their appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be designated by
the Council.
   (B)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and other
appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the Council. Any such removal or relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the Council and the City Clerk shall notify
any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours after
receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances to be removed or relocated. The
Council shall designate another location as closely as possible where the
appurtenances may be reset or placed.
   (C)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines or other
appurtenances shall be reset, placed or erected in such a manner that they will
not interfere with the water system; the sewerage system; any poles, wires,
conduits, mains, lines or other appurtenances of any public utility; any
adjacent buildings; or travel on the public ways and property. Whenever
possible, all poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and appurtenances
shall be confined to the alleys of the city.
§ 153.005 DANGEROUS STAIRWAYS AND ENTRANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any stairway,
open cellarway, open basement way or open entrance thereto in or adjacent to
any sidewalk, pavement or street and any such entrance is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, except that all existing stairways, open cellarways, open
basement ways or open entrances thereto in or adjacent to sidewalks, pavements
or streets may be permitted to remain from and after the adoption of this
prohibition if the person owning or using the opening in the sidewalk, pavement
or street satisfies the Street Superintendent that the opening is properly
protected by a balustrade, or coping of durable material, and furnishes the
city with a bond in the amount set by the City Council for the benefit of any
person who might suffer an injury or damage by reason of the use of the
stairway, cellarway, basement way or entrance.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.006 GUTTERING AND EAVE SPOUTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any dwelling house
or business building within the limits of the city where the dwelling or
building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper guttering and
eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the sidewalks and
streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or business building
shall be constructed to drain into the alleys or shall be buried beneath the
sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to be impossible to
drain the eave spouts into the alley.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.007 PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber, by
fences, gates, buildings, structures or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys
or sidewalks.
   (B)   The public ways and property shall be considered to be obstructed when
the owner or occupant of the adjacent property permits or suffers to remain on
any premises owned or controlled by him or her any hedge, shrubbery, bush or
similar growth within two feet adjacent to the lot line, whether there is a
sidewalk abutting or adjoining the premises or not. It shall be the duty of
owners and occupants to at all times keep trimmed and pruned all such similar
growth.
   (C)   Trees and shrubs growing upon the lot line partially on public ground
and partially upon the abutting property, or wholly upon the abutting property,
and interfering with the use, making or construction of any public improvement
or so that the roots thereof interfere with any utility wire or pipe shall be
deemed an obstruction. Such trees and shrubs and their roots may be removed by
the city at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the trees or
shrubs are partially or wholly located if the owner fails or neglects, after
notice, to do so.
   (D)   When any obstruction described in this section is determined to exist,
the city may proceed against the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to
the sidewalk space.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.008 OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting
or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extend the branches of
trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the
height of at least eight feet above the surface of the walk and at least 14
feet above the surface of the street or to the heights otherwise specified by
the City Council.
   (B)   Whenever the branches or limbs of any tree extend over streets or
sidewalks contrary to such provisions so as to interfere with the lighting of
the street from street lights or with the convenience of the public using the
street or sidewalk, the city may proceed against the owner or occupant of the
property abutting or adjacent to the street or sidewalk.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.009 CUTTING INTO PAVING, CURB OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the City
Council. Before any person obtains a permit, he or she shall inform the City
Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be done, and it shall be the duty
of the Street Superintendent to inspect the proposed place of entry into the
paving, sidewalk or curb.
   (B)   When cutting into any paving, curb or sidewalk, it shall be the duty
of the party to comply with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by
the Council or the City Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the
opening made, he or she shall inform the Street Superintendent, who shall
supervise and inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the
opening.
   (C)   It shall be discretionary with the Council to order the Street
Superintendent, under the supervision and inspection of the City Engineer or
the committee of the Council on the streets and alleys, to do the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb or sidewalk and charge the costs thereof to the
party who obtained the permit. The Council may consent to the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb or sidewalk by the party holding the permit.
   (D)   Before any permit is issued by the Council, the applicant for the
permit shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the
Council for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a
per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by
the city for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk in the event
the work is done by the city. If the Board elects to require the applicant to
replace the paving, curb or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the city
until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Street Superintendent or
of the committee of the Council on streets and alleys.
   (E)   In addition to making the deposit, the applicant shall, before any
permit is issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety
to be approved by the Council in a sum set by resolution.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.010 HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate heavy equipment
across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing on
any unpaved street without first having protected such curb, gutter, bridge,
culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk or crossing with heavy plank sufficient in
strength to warrant against the breaking or damaging of such curb, gutter,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing.
   (B)   Except as provided in Title VII, it shall be unlawful to run, drive,
move, operate or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine or
implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement; with
wheels having cutting edges; with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts or
bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent
or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter or curb, except that where
heavy vehicles, structures and machines move along paved or unpaved streets the
city police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over which
the moving of such vehicles, structures or machines will be permitted and
allowed.
Penalty, see §
153.999
SALE AND ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; PUBLIC WORKS
§ 153.025 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) below, the power of the city to
convey any real property owned by it, including land used for park purposes and
public squares, except real property used in the operation of public utilities,
shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at public auction or by
sealed bid of that property and the manner and terms of such sales, except that
the property shall not be sold at public auction or by sealed bid when:
      (1)   The property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
      (2)   The property is being conveyed to another public agency; or
      (3)   The property consists of streets and alleys.
   (B)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for real property at
which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a sealed bid.
   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of property described in division (A) above and the terms of
such sales shall be published once each week for three consecutive weeks in a
legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city.
   (D)   (1)   If within 30 days after the third publication of the notice a
remonstrance petition against the sale:
         (a)   Conforms to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-628;
         (b)   Is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to
30% of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city
election held therein; and
         (c)   Is filed with the City Council, that property shall not then,
nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the petition
falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the signatures shall be
collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely
if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council, with the
aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the petition. The City
Council shall deliver the petition to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall issue to the City Council a written receipt that the petition is in
the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each person signing
the petition with the voter registration records to determine if each signer
was a registered voter on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall also
compare the signer’s printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address with the voter registration records to determine
whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address shall be
presumed to be valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address match the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The determinations of the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the City Council
finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the petition, the sufficiency of the petition and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception and
misrepresentation in the petition process.
      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and
address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the
invalidity of the signature or address is other than the nonregistration of the
signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall set forth the reason
for the invalidity of the signature. If the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more than once
to the remonstrance and that only one person is registered by that name, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification
under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and shall count
only the earliest dated signature.
      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the City
Council the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid
remonstrance. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the
remonstrance and the certifications to the City Council within 40 days after
the receipt of the remonstrance from the City Council. The delivery shall be by
hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page shall be
counted.
      (6)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of the
remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive
testimony regarding them. The City Council shall, following the hearing, vote
on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance
if sufficient valid signatures have been received.
   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the city may be conveyed
without consideration to the state for state armory sites or, if acquired for
state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with the
conditions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1001 through 18-1006.
   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale, publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale and passing of the 30-day right-of-remonstrance
period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall be confirmed by passage
of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and terms of the sale.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-503)
   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) above shall not apply to the sale of real
property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real property, the
total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following passage of the
resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the sale shall be
posted in three prominent places within the city for a period of not less than
seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a general
description of the property offered for sale and state the terms and conditions
of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an ordinance may be required.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-503.01)
§ 153.026 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The power of the city to convey any personal property owned by it
shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms of
the sale. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the
property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places within
the city for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the
property. If the fair market value of the property is greater than $5,000,
notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the sale of the
property. The notice shall give a general description of the property offered
for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale.
   (B)   Personal property may be conveyed notwithstanding the procedure in
division (A) above when:
      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs; or
      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-503.02)
§ 153.027 ACQUISITION OR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS; ELECTION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city is authorized and empowered to purchase, accept by gift or
devise, purchase real estate upon which to erect, and erect a building or
buildings for an auditorium, fire station, city building or community house for
housing city enterprises and social and recreation purposes, and other public
buildings, including the construction of buildings authorized to be constructed
by Neb. Rev. Stat. Ch. 72, art. 14, and including construction of buildings to
be leased in whole or in part by the city to any other political or
governmental subdivision of the state authorized by law to lease such
buildings, and maintain, manage and operate the same for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below, before any such purchase can
be made or building erected, the question shall be submitted to the electors of
the city at a general city election or at an election duly called for that
purpose, or as set forth in division (D) below, and be adopted by a majority of
the electors voting on such question.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-953)
   (C)   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or construction of a
building pursuant to this section are available other than through a bond
issue, then either:
      (1)   Notice of the proposed purchase or construction shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and no election shall be
required to approve the purchase or construction unless within 30 days after
the publication of the notice, a remonstrance petition against the purchase or
construction is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to 15%
of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city election
held therein and is filed with the City Council. If the date for filing the
petition falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the signatures shall
be collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered
timely if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day. If a petition
with the necessary number of qualified signatures is timely filed, the question
shall be submitted to the voters of the city at a general city election or a
special election duly called for that purpose. If the purchase or construction
is not approved, the property involved shall not then, nor within one year
following the election, be purchased or constructed; or
      (2)   The City Council may proceed without providing the notice and right
of remonstrance required in division (C)(1) above if the property can be
purchased below the fair market value as determined by an appraisal, there is a
willing seller, and the purchase price is less than $25,000. The purchase shall
be approved by the City Council after notice and public hearing as provided in
§
153.029.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-953.01)
   (D)   (1)   The Mayor and City Council adopting the proposition to make such
purchase or erect such building or buildings for the purposes set forth in
division (A) above shall have the power to borrow money and pledge the property
and credit of the city upon its negotiable bonds. No such bonds shall be issued
until after the same have been authorized by a majority vote of the electors
voting on the proposition of their issuance, at a general city election or at a
special election called for the submission of such proposition. The question of
such purchase or erection of such a building or buildings, as set forth in
division (A) above, and the question of the issuance of the negotiable bonds
referred to in this division (D) may be submitted as one question at a general
city or special election if so ordered by resolution or ordinance.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the election shall be given by
publication in some legal newspaper printed in or of general circulation in the
city three successive weeks immediately prior thereto.
      (3)   No such election for the issuance of such bonds shall be called
until a petition therefor signed by at least 10% of the legal voters of the
city has been presented to the City Council. The number of voters voting at the
last regular city election prior to the presenting of the petition shall be
deemed the number of votes in the city for the purpose of determining the
sufficiency of the petition.
      (4)   The question of bond issues for such purpose in the city when
defeated shall not be resubmitted for six months from and after the date of
such election.
      (5)   When the building to be constructed is to be used by the state or
its agency or agencies under a lease authorized by Neb. Rev. Stat. Ch. 72, art.
14, or the building is to be leased by any other political or governmental
subdivision of the state, when the combined area of the building to be leased
by the state or its agency or agencies and the political or governmental
subdivision of the state is more than 50% of the area of the building, and when
such sum does not exceed $2,000,000, then no such vote of the electors will be
required.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-954)
§ 153.028 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY; APPRAISAL.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city shall not purchase,
lease-purchase or acquire for consideration real property having an estimated
value of $100,000 or more unless an appraisal of such property has been
performed by a certified real property appraiser.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-403)
§ 153.029 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY; PUBLIC MEETING; ACCESS FOR RECREATIONAL
USE.
   (A)   The city shall acquire an interest in real property by purchase or
eminent domain only after the City Council has authorized the acquisition by
action taken in a public meeting after notice and public hearing.
   (B)   The city shall provide to the public a right of access for
recreational use to real property acquired for public recreational purposes.
Such access shall be at designated access points and shall be equal to the
right of access for recreational use held by adjacent landowners. The right of
access granted to the public for recreational use shall meet or exceed such
right held by a private landowner adjacent to the real property.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1755)
SIDEWALKS
§ 153.040 REQUIREMENT TO KEEP CLEAN.
   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any
vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice
or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any snow, sleet,
ice, mud or other substance to remain upon the sidewalk. Unless the City
Council has provided otherwise, all sidewalks within the Business District
shall be cleaned within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the
storm or fall of snow shall have taken place during the night, in which case
the sidewalk shall be cleaned before 9:00 a.m. the following day, and sidewalks
within the residential areas of the city shall be cleaned within 24 hours after
the cessation of the storm.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.041 NEW SIDEWALK; NOTICE.
   (A)   The City Council may by resolution order the construction of a
sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the city. Notice of the City
Council’s intention to construct said sidewalk shall be given by the City Clerk
by publication of notice one time in a legal newspaper of general circulation
in the city. A copy of said notice shall be personally served upon the occupant
in possession of such property or, when personal service is not possible, said
notice shall be sent by first class mail to such premises ten days prior to the
commencement of construction. Such service shall include a form of return
evidencing personal service or mailing as herein required.
   (B)   The notice required in this section shall be prepared by the City
Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this section. Said notice shall
notify the owner of the premises of the passage of the resolution ordering him
or her to construct or cause to be constructed a sidewalk within 30 days after
the date of publication, and further, that if he or she fails to construct the
sidewalk or cause the same to be done within the time allowed, the city will
cause the sidewalk to be constructed, and the cost thereof shall be levied and
assessed as a special tax against the premises; provided, that the notice shall
contain the official estimate of the cost of said construction and no special
assessment in excess of this estimate shall be assessed against the property.
   (C)   In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in
which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special assessment
against such property, send to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any
notice required by law to be published. The last known address shall be that
address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was
first published.
(Prior Code, § 5-302)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-552 and 17-523
§ 153.042 REPAIRING SIDEWALK; NOTICE.
   Whenever the Street Superintendent shall deem it necessary that any sidewalk
shall be repaired, or it shall be required by the City Council, the Committee
on Streets and Walks or the Street Superintendent, the owner of the lot or
piece of land along and contiguous to which such sidewalk is situated shall be
notified to repair the same within two weeks from and after the giving of such
notice. Oral notice to the owner shall be deemed sufficient. If the owner is
not found by the Street Superintendent, then a written notice left in the house
situated on such lot or piece of ground, or posted upon said premises, shall be
sufficient and the two weeks shall begin to run from the leaving or posting of
such notice as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 5-303)
§ 153.043 RECONSTRUCTION SIDEWALK; NOTICE.
   Whenever the City Council shall deem it necessary that an old sidewalk shall
be replaced or reconstructed, it shall order the same to be done and the Street
Superintendent shall give notice in the manner and form provided in §
153.042 to replace or reconstruct the same within 30 days from and after such
notice.
(Prior Code, § 5-304)
§ 153.044 FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT, RECONSTRUCT OR REPAIR.
   If any such owner shall neglect or refuse, or shall have failed, after
notice has been given as provided in this chapter, to construct, repair,
replace or reconstruct any sidewalk within the time limit in the notice given
in such case and whose duty it is made by this chapter to construct, repair or
rebuild such walks, the Street Superintendent or other officer empowered herein
to act shall proceed at once to have such sidewalks constructed, repaired,
rebuilt or reconstructed, as the case may be, without further notice to such
owner, and the expense of such work shall be assessed to such lot or piece of
land and collected as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 5-305)
§ 153.045 CONSTRUCTION AT OWNER’S INITIATIVE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct or cause to be constructed any
sidewalk shall do so only as provided in this section. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall give a
description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The Street Superintendent shall issue the desired permit unless
good cause appears why the permit should be denied, except that if it is
desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed
location, grade or elevation, the Street Superintendent shall submit the
application to the City Council for determination as to whether the permit
should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
or cause to be constructed, such sidewalk at any other location, grade or
elevation than so designated by the city. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade or elevation, and if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the Street
Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.046 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR AT CITY DIRECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks or
cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor and
City Council deem necessary and assess the expense of such construction or
repairs on the property in front of which such construction or repairs are
made, after having given notice:
         (a)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city; and
         (b)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such construction or repair.
      (2)   The powers conferred under this section are in addition to those
provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-509 through 17-521 and may be exercised
without creating an improvement district.
      (3)   If the owner of any property abutting any street or avenue or part
thereof fails to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of the owner’s
property within the time and in the manner as directed and requested by the
Mayor and City Council, after having received due notice to do so, the Mayor
and City Council may cause the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and may
assess the cost of such construction or repairs against the property.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-522)
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired in conformity with
such plans and specifications as may be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Assessments made under the provisions of this section shall be made
and assessed in the following manner:
      (1)   Such assessment shall be made by the City Council at a special
meeting, by a resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries
sustained in consequence of such improvements, and the amount charged against
the same, which, with the vote, shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the
time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the city at
least four weeks before the same shall be held or, in lieu thereof, personal
service may be made upon persons owning or occupying property to be assessed;
and
      (2)   All such assessments shall be known as special assessments for
improvements and shall be levied and collected as a separate tax, in addition
to the taxes for general revenue purposes, and shall be placed on the tax roll
for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as
other city taxes.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-524)
Statutory reference:
    Authority to improve through sidewalk district, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-
2417 through 19-2419
§ 153.047 CONSTRUCTION BY PETITION.
   (A)   If the owners of record representing more than 60% of the front
footage of the directly abutting property subject to assessment for sidewalk
improvements petition the City Council to make such improvements, the City
Council shall proceed as though such construction had been ordered by it. Upon
the petition of any freeholder who is an abutting owner in fee simple of
property subject to assessment for sidewalk improvements, the City Council may
order permanent sidewalks built in accordance with this chapter upon the
freeholder’s making, executing and delivering to the city an agreement to the
effect that the petitioning freeholder will pay the engineering service fee;
all other incidental construction costs, until paid, shall be a perpetual lien
upon the real estate along which the freeholder desires such sidewalk to be
constructed and the petitioner gives and grants to the city the right to assess
and levy the costs of such construction against the freeholder’s real estate
abutting the sidewalk improvement and promises to pay such costs with interest.
The total cost of such improvement shall be levied, allocated, financed and
specially assessed as provided by law.
   (B)   In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in
which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special assessment
against such property, send to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any
notice required by law to be published. The last known address shall be that
address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was
first published.
(Prior Code, § 5-306)
STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 153.060 OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING OR VACATING.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall have power to open, widen or otherwise improve or
vacate any street, avenue, alley or lane within the limits of the city and also
to create, open and improve any new street, avenue, alley or lane. All damages
sustained by the citizens of the city, or by the owners of the property
therein, shall be ascertained in that manner as shall be provided by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated, the same
shall revert to the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side
thereof, and become a part of that property, unless the city reserves title in
the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is retained by the city,
such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such terms and
conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to the land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of that property, unless the
city reserves title in the ordinance vacating a portion of such street or
alley. If title is retained by the city, such property may be sold, conveyed,
exchanged or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the
best interests of the city.
      (4)   When the city vacates all or any portion of a street, avenue, alley
or lane, the city shall, within 30 days after the effective date of the
vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the Register of
Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is located to be indexed
against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to maintain, operate,
repair and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property is
vacated there; and
         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public utilities and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew and operate water
mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines, sound
and signal transmission lines, and other similar services and equipment and
appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, above, on or
below the surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the
time title to the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general
public or the abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish
such purposes at any and all reasonable times.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-558)
   (B)   The city shall have power to create, open, widen or extend any street,
avenue, alley, off-street parking area or other public way, or annul, vacate or
discontinue the same.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-559)
§ 153.061 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SPECIAL DAMAGES. Only those losses or damages or injuries which a
property owner suffers that are peculiar or special or unique to his or her
property and which result from the City Council vacating a street, avenue,
alley, lane or similar public way. SPECIAL DAMAGES shall not mean those losses
or damages or injuries that a property owner suffers that are in common with
the rest of the city or public at large, even though those losses or damages or
injuries suffered by the property owner are greater in degree than the rest of
the city or public at large.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best
interests of the city to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public
way, the City Council shall comply with the following procedure.
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property owners
either by first class mail to their last known address or if there is no known
address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of general
circulation in the city. The content of the notice shall advise the abutting
property owners that the City Council will consider vacating that street,
avenue, alley, lane or similar public way at its next regular meeting, or, if a
special meeting is scheduled for the discussion, then the date, time and place
of that meeting.
      (2)   Consent; waiver. The City Council may have all the abutting
property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being taken
by the City Council and waive their right of access. The signing of this form
shall have no effect on claims for special damages by the abutting property
owners but shall create the presumption that the City Council’s action was
proper. If the abutting property owners do not sign the consent/waiver form,
the City Council may still proceed with vacating the street, avenue, alley,
lane or similar public way under the authority granted by Neb. Rev. Stat. §§
17-558 and 17-559.
      (3)   Ordinance. The City Council shall pass an ordinance that includes
essentially the following provisions:
         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the public good
or in the best interests of the city;
         (b)   A statement that the city will have an easement for maintaining
all utilities; and
         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special damages to
abutting property owners.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint three or five or seven disinterested residents
of the city to a special commission to ascertain the amount of special damages
that the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and which resulted
from the City Council vacating the street, avenue, alley, lane or similar
public way. The appointees of the special commission shall be approved by the
City Council. Only special damages shall be awarded to the abutting property
owners.
   (D)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the abutting
property owners as special damages, the commission shall use the following
rule: An abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the
difference between the value of the property immediately before and immediately
after the vacating of the street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way. If
no difference in value exists, the abutting property owner is entitled to no
compensation.
§ 153.062 CROSSINGS.
   The City Council may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the Street Superintendent, those street, avenue and alley
crossings as the City Council deems necessary. When a petition for the
construction of any such crossings is filed by an interested resident in the
office of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the
Street Superintendent, who shall investigate and make a recommendation to the
City Council. Action by the City Council on the application, whether the
application is approved or rejected, shall be considered final.
§ 153.063 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   The City Council may at any time by ordinance rename any street or provide a
name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business purposes and
located along those streets shall retain those numbers as the City Council may
require. It shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent, upon the erection
of any new building, to assign the proper numbers to the building and give
notice to the owner and occupant of the same.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.064 PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Each property owner shall maintain suitable numbers marking the
property’s street address, which shall be visible and legible from the street
or road fronting the property. This identification will help to improve
response times of police, fire and rescue by making it easier to find the right
location. The address numbers should contrast with their background and be a
minimum of four inches high and one-half inch wide.
   (B)   If the residence is located too far back from the street or road for
the address numbers to be readily seen, then the numbers must be:
      (1)   Larger;
      (2)   Posted in such a way that they can be read from the street or road;
      (3)   Posted at or near the edge of the street or road; or
      (4)   Painted on the curb.
(Prior Code, § 5-202)
§ 153.065 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT; BOND.
   (A)   Permit required; procedure.  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for
any person, whether or not operating under a franchise or contract, to excavate
the surface or the ground beneath the surface of any street, avenue or alley
without making a written application for a permit from the Building Inspector
and the payment of a fee associated therewith. The applicant for a permit shall
specify in the application the location, extent and character of the work
proposed to be done and the time when it is to be done.
   (B)   Permit terms; time limit. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be numbered consecutively and each shall be valid for a period of ten
days. No work shall be done under any such permit after the expiration of such
ten days. Each permit shall contain the name of the party authorized to use the
same, the time limit within which the same may be used and the location and
nature of the work to be done.
   (C)   Pavement breaking by sawing. It is unlawful for any person to break
paving except by sawing to a depth of at least two inches; provided, however,
sawing is not required if the paving is partially granite or if permission is
obtained from the Street Superintendent to break by means other than sawing.
   (D)   Refilling by city; charges.
      (1)   Where any permit is issued for excavating in any street, avenue or
alley (excluding that area commonly called the parkway, being that area between
the curb line and the lot line), all work of replacing paving, filling trenches
or holes and tamping in the same shall be done by the Public Works Department
or its representatives.
      (2)   The charges for replacing concrete or brick paving where cuts have
been made for installing sewer, water, gas or conduits of any nature, whether
telephone, electric or otherwise, and for filling in excavations in unpaved
streets, avenues and alleys and tamping the same with a mechanical tamper shall
be set by resolution of the City Council and kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
      (3)   Tunneling or undercutting is not permitted, and if such does occur,
the holder of the permit shall be penalized on a square foot basis on all
tunneling or undercutting.
      (4)   When it is necessary to remove material unfit for filling trenches
and substitute suitable material, there shall be an extra charge based on the
time required for the removal and replacement of such material.
   (E)   Refilling measurement. All excavations regulated by this chapter shall
be measured by the Street Superintendent before filling. Such measurements
shall be reported to the City Clerk, who shall check such figures with the
minimum charge. Where excavations are larger than set forth according to the
minimum charge, the City Clerk shall collect for such excavations according to
the schedule as set forth in division (D) above.
   (F)   Refilling parkway area.
      (1)   Where any permit is obtained for the excavating in any street,
avenue or alley, which includes the parkway (being that area between the curb
line and the lot line), all work of replacing any paving, filling any trenches
or holes, tamping and reseeding in such parkway shall be done by the plumber or
other person having the permit. Replacement of the parkway excavation shall be
done in a workmanlike manner so that the area excavated shall be returned
substantially to its previous condition. This shall include the repaving or
replacing of sidewalk, reseeding or resodding and appropriate tamping, all as
may be necessary, to restore such parkway to its previous condition.
      (2)   Such parkway area between curb line and lot line is the property of
the city, and the plumber or other excavator when working in such area shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this code and all appropriate
ordinances, resolutions and rules governing the use of streets, avenues and
alleys and particularly shall comply with division (G) below.
   (G)   Permit requirements, notice. Permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
issued only to bonded and/or insured persons. Back charges shall be paid
immediately and no permit shall be issued to anyone who has an unpaid charge
hereunder. The holder of each permit shall notify the Public Works Department
not later than 1:00 p.m. every Friday of any excavations that have been
inspected and are ready to fill. The holder of each permit shall light and
maintain until the following Monday all excavations not reported by 1:00 p.m.
Friday. Such person shall provide, at his or her own expense, substantial
barricades with his or her name clearly marked thereon. These barricades shall
be Type II of the federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets
and highways. In addition to the barricades, sufficient lights shall be used to
protect the public.
   (H)   Inspections. The Building Inspector shall make such inspections as are
necessary to determine whether the work performed by any plumber pursuant to
this section is in accordance with the requirements of the same. If the
Building Inspector determines that the replacement of any parkway excavation is
not performed in compliance herewith, he or she shall immediately notify said
plumber to correct the deficiency. If the plumber shall fail to do so, the
Public Works Department shall make a report in writing, which shall be placed
on the agenda for the consideration of the Mayor and Council.
   (I)   Bond required. Every person engaged in excavating the streets,
avenues, alleys or other public places of the city for the purpose of laying,
removing or repairing gas mains or pipes is hereby required to file with the
City Clerk and have approved by the Mayor and Council a bond, payable to the
city, with two or more good and sufficient sureties or reputable surety company
as surety in the sum of $5,000, conditioned that such person will indemnify and
keep harmless the city from any liability for damages or injuries to persons or
property arising from any negligence or mismanagement in doing or protecting
such work, and that such person will restore the streets, sidewalks and
pavements over all pipes laid or repaired, and fill all excavations made by him
or her so as to leave such streets, avenues, alleys and public places in their
original condition so far as practicable, and keep and maintain the same in
good order to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department for a period of
90 days thereafter. Such bond shall be for the period ending on April 1
following and shall be renewable annually on or before April 1. The regulations
contained in this section are in addition to those contained elsewhere in this
chapter and shall not be construed to modify, alter, waive or repeal any other
provision of this chapter.
   (J)   Unprotected, dangerous. No person shall excavate on any lot or part of
a lot contiguous to any sidewalk and leave the same open and exposed in such a
manner as to endanger the safety of any person passing along any street, avenue
or sidewalks therein or adjacent thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-204) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-567
§ 153.066 DRIVING STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind
into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written
consent of the Street Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.067 MIXING CONCRETE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.068 HARMFUL LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street any waste gasoline, kerosene or high lubricating oils, which
damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.069 DISCHARGING WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged
any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or
unpolluted industrial waters into or onto any street or alley of the city from
October 1 of any year through April 1 of the following year.
(Prior Code, § 5-221) (Ord. 305, passed 11-9-1993) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.070 CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE DRIVE.
   (A)   Application for construction of private drive. Before any person, firm
or corporation constructs a private drive onto any public street or alley, an
application shall first be made to the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 5-401)
   (B)   Application requirements. All driveway applications shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The addition, block and lot which the driveway is to serve;
      (2)   The location of the proposed driveway with reference to adjacent
lot lines; and
      (3)   The width of the driveway and type of street surface to which the
driveway will connect.
(Prior Code, § 5-402)
   (C)   Issuance of permit. In the event that the Building Inspector
determines that such application is in due and proper form and that the same
complies with this chapter, he or she shall issue a permit for construction of
such requested driveway.
(Prior Code, § 5-403)
§ 153.071 CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements as may be
authorized by law, the City Council shall have power and authority to levy and
collect special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground
adjacent to, abutting upon or especially benefiting from the street, avenue,
alley or sidewalk in whole or in part opened, widened, curbed, curbed and
guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled, macadamized, parked, extended,
constructed or otherwise improved or repaired. The City Council, sitting as the
Board of Equalization, shall review all such improvements in accordance with
the procedure provided by law.
   (B)   All special assessments shall be made by the City Council at a regular
or special meeting by resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or
injuries sustained in consequence of such improvements and the amount charged
against the same. The vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the time
of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall be
published in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the
city at least four weeks before the same shall be held. In lieu of such
aforementioned notice, personal service may be had upon the persons owning or
occupying the property to be assessed. Such assessments shall be known as
special assessments for improvements and, with the cost of notice, shall be
levied and collected as a special tax in addition to the taxes for general
revenue purposes. Said assessments shall be subject to the same penalties and
collected in like manner as other municipal taxes and shall be certified by the
City Clerk to the County Clerk forthwith after the date of levy for collection
by the County Treasurer unless otherwise specified.
   (C)   After it has become delinquent, said assessment shall draw interest at
the legal interest rate per annum. In the event the property owner is a
nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the city shall, before
levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice
required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the nonresident property owner. The
last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the
time such required notice was first published.
(Prior Code, § 5-212)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 17-511, 17-524, 19-2428 through
19-2431 and 45-104.01
§ 153.072 IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS; OBJECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the City Council shall deem it necessary to make any
improvements allowed by statute, it shall, by ordinance, create a paving,
graveling or other improvement district or districts, and after the passage,
approval and publication or posting of such ordinance shall publish notice of
the creation of any such district for six days in a legal newspaper of the
city, if a daily newspaper, or for two consecutive weeks if the same be a
weekly newspaper.
   (B)   If the owners of record representing more than 50% of the front
footage of the property directly abutting on any street or alley to be improved
shall file written objections to the creation of such district(s) with the City
Clerk within 20 days after the first publication of said notice, said
improvements shall not be made as provided in said ordinance but it shall be
repealed. If said objections are not filed against the district in the time and
manner aforesaid, the City Council shall forthwith cause such work to be done
or such improvement to be made and shall contract therefor and levy assessments
on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such street or alley
especially benefited in such district in proportion to such benefits to pay the
cost of such improvement.
(Prior Code, § 5-213)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-511
§ 153.073 IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS ON CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall have the power to improve any street or
part thereof which divides the city corporate area and the land adjoining the
city. When creating an improvement district, including land adjacent to the
city, the Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of special
benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially
benefited thereby.
(Prior Code, § 5-214)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-509
§ 153.074 IMPROVEMENT OF MAIN THOROUGHFARES.
   The Mayor and City Council shall have the power by a three-fourths vote to
create by ordinance a paving, graveling or other improvement district and to
order such work done upon any federal or state highway in the city or upon a
street or route designated by the Mayor and City Council as a main thoroughfare
that connects on both ends to either a federal or state highway or a county
road. The City Council shall contract therefor and shall have the power to
assess, to the extent of special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon
the properties found especially benefited thereby.
(Prior Code, § 5-215)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-512
§ 153.075 PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Whenever a petition signed by the owners of record title representing more
than 60% of the front footage of the property directly abutting upon any
street, alley, public way or public grounds proposed to be improved shall be
presented and filed with the City Clerk, the City Council shall by ordinance
create a paving, graveling or other improvement district, and shall cause such
work to be done or such improvement to be made, and shall contract therefor,
and levy assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to
such street or alley especially benefited in such district in proportion to
such benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement. The City Council shall have
the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the area has
not previously been improved with a water system, sewer system and grading of
streets. If the City Council should deny a requested improvement district
formation, it shall state the grounds for such denial in a written letter to
interested parties.
(Prior Code, § 5-216)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-510
§ 153.076 DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever the City Council creates an improvement district which
includes land adjacent to the city within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record of such adjacent land
may apply for a deferral from special assessments. For the purpose of this
section, the terms AGRICULTURAL USE and AGRICULTURAL USE ZONE shall have the
meaning specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-1343.
   (B)   Any owner of record eligible for the deferral granted by this section
shall make application to the City Council within 90 days after creation of an
improvement district. Any owner of record who makes application for the
deferral provided by this section shall notify the County Register of Deeds of
such application in writing prior to approval by the City Council. The Council
shall approve the application of any owner of record, upon determination that
the property is within an agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for
agricultural use, and the owner has met the requirements of this section.
   (C)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any
of the following events:
      (1)   Notification by the owner of record to the City Council to remove
such deferral;
      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application
within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in division (C)(3)
below;
      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who
does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;
      (4)   Use of land is no longer agricultural; or
      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
   (D)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this
section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record of such
property shall pay to the city an amount equal to:
      (1)   The total amount of special assessments which would have been
assessed against such property, to the extent of special benefits, had such
deferral not been granted; and
      (2)   Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the
rate of 6% from the dates at which such assessments would have been payable if
no deferral had been granted.
   (E)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as
the result of a sale or transfer described in divisions (C)(2) or (C)(3) above,
the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day preceding such
sale or transfer.
(Prior Code, § 5-217)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-2428 through 19-2431
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any and all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter
for which penalty is not therein provided shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum of not more
than $500 for each offense. Each day’s maintenance of the same shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-501)
   (B)   Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or shall
violate any requirements or provisions of §
153.065 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. He or she shall be charged a
double fee for the permit, and the minimum fee for the type of pavement being
replaced shall be doubled.
(Prior Code, § 5-204)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
153.069 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours that such pumping shall occur.
(Prior Code, § 5-221)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of §
153.070, and who constructs a driveway onto a city street or alley without
first securing a permit therefor, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500. Each day’s maintenance of the same
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-404)
(Ord. 305, passed 11-9-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-567
CHAPTER 154: TREES
Section
   
154.01   Tree Board
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Street tree species to be planted
   
154.04   Spacing of street tree plantings and required distances and clearances
for planting
   
154.05   Utilities
   
154.06   Public tree care
   
154.07   Consent of property owner
   
154.08   Tree topping
   
154.09   Hazardous, dead or diseased tree removal; private property
   
154.10   Pruning; clearance
   
154.11   Public community forest; abuse of trees prohibited
   
154.12   Removal of stumps
   
154.13   Damage and compensation
   
154.14   Arborist’s license
§ 154.01 TREE BOARD.
   (A)   Creation and establishment of Tree Board; members and terms;
administration and operation; quorum.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the city,
which shall consist of five members. Such members shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The term of each Tree Board member
shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term
of any member, a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired term.
      (2)   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a minute book of its proceedings. The rules and
regulations, or any revisions or amendments thereto, shall not be effective
without approval of the City Council.
      (3)   A majority of the members of the Tree Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
   (B)   Compensation. Members of the Tree Board shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. Such plan shall be presented annually to the City Council and, upon its
acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree
plan. The Tree Board, when requested by the Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to review city
ordinances pertaining to the city’s urban forest as necessary and present
proposed changes to City Council for consideration.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to grant, review
or revoke arborist licenses.
   (D)   Interference with Tree Board. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of its agents while they
are engaging in and about the examining, planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying, injecting or removing of any street trees, park trees or
trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
   (E)   Review by City Council. The City Council shall have the right to
review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Board. Any person may appeal
any ruling or order of the Board to the Council. Such appeal must be in writing
and must be filed with the City Clerk, who shall place the appeal on the agenda
for the next regular meeting for consideration. The Council shall decide the
appeal and such decision shall be final.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   PRIVATE COMMUNITY FOREST. All trees within city boundaries but not owned by
the city.
   PRIVATE TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
privately owned.
   PUBLIC COMMUNITY FOREST. All street and park trees owned by the city as a
total resource.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
with the city.
   URBAN FOREST. All woody vegetation, both public and private, within city
boundaries as a total resource.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.03 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The tree list adopted by the Tree Board and published by it constitutes the
official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included
in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the
Tree Board.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.04 SPACING OF STREET TREE PLANTINGS AND REQUIRED DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES
FOR PLANTING.
   (A)   The spacing of street tree plantings will be in accordance with the
three species size classes listed in the tree list, and no trees may be planted
closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40
feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed by a
landscape architect and approved by the Tree Board.
   (B)   The distance which trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in
the tree list, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than
the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large
trees, four feet.
   (C)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curb or curb lines.
   (D)   No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fire
hydrant.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.05 UTILITIES.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in the tree
list may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.06 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, subject to §
154.07, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of
all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds. All costs of such elective tree care shall be
borne by the city.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.07 CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   The Tree Board shall plant no trees on public right-of-way without the
consent of the adjacent property owners. Such consent shall be in writing and
shall be maintained as part of the official Tree Board records.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.08 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
Tree topping on private property is strongly discouraged.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, TOPPING is defined as the reduction
of tree size by cutting live branches and leaders to stubs, without regard to
long-term tree health or structural integrity.
   (C)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the Tree
Board.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.09 HAZARDOUS, DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   All trees, or any parts of trees, which are in a diseased, dying, dead
or structurally weakened condition are declared to be a public nuisance and
shall be removed by the property owner from the private property on which they
are located. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section,
the Tree Board shall have the authority to enter on private property to inspect
the trees thereon. Unless an immediate danger is suspected to exist, the city
shall provide 24-hour advanced reasonable notice of entry to the property owner
or resident. In the event that the trees are diseased, dying, dead or
structurally weakened, notice shall be given to the owner of the property by
mail or personal service. Such notice shall allow the owner 60 days to remove
the tree or trees unless an immediate threat to public safety is identified, in
which case a shorter period of time for compliance may be demanded.
   (B)   In the event that the owner is a nonresident, notice shall be made by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation or by certified mail if the
name and address are known. The person charged with the removal may enter into
an agreement with the city that such work be accomplished by the city, or city
contractor, and the expense shall be declared to be a lien upon such property
from the time the same becomes due until paid. If the owner fails, neglects or
refuses to enter into such an agreement or to remove the trees, the Tree Board
may enter upon the property and proceed to direct the removal of the trees; the
cost thereof shall be chargeable to the property owner. If the owner fails to
reimburse the city after being properly billed, the costs shall be assessed
against the property and certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer to
be collected in the manner prescribed by law.
   (C)   In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in
which the property lies, before levying any special assessment against that
property the city shall send to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any
notice required by law to be published. The last known address shall be that
address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was
first published.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.10 PRUNING; CLEARANCE.
   (A)   The owner, agent or occupant of any land abutting a sidewalk, street
or alley shall keep the trees located within the section of the sidewalk or
street right-of-way or alley so abutting trimmed, pruned and sprayed in such
manner as will remove any hazard to life or property and preserve or promote
the health and vigor of the trees and shall water and otherwise care for the
trees to maintain them in a healthy, vigorous, growing condition; provided,
however, that the Tree Board may direct pesticide be applied to these trees for
insect or disease control at city expense when doing so is considered in the
public interest.
   (B)   A clearance of 14 feet must be maintained over streets and alleys.
   (C)   A clearance of eight feet must be maintained over sidewalks.
   (D)   No property owner or occupant shall permit the limbs, branches and/or
foliage of any tree or shrub upon such property to obstruct the light from any
streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.11 PUBLIC COMMUNITY FOREST; ABUSE OF TREES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Abuse of trees prohibited. Unless specifically authorized by the city,
no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, graffiti, transplant or
remove any tree belonging to the city; attach any rope, wire, nails,
advertising posters or other contrivance to any such tree; allow any gaseous,
liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact
with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat
thereof will injure any portion of any such tree.
   (B)   Protection of tree roots. Unless specifically authorized by the city,
no person shall deposit, place, store or maintain, upon any public place of the
city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the
free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing
therein, except by written permit of the city.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.12 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed to a minimum depth of
12 inches below the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.13 DAMAGE AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Any person who shall injure, damage (including by excessive pruning,
topping or improper pruning techniques) or destroy any tree situated upon the
public right-of-way or other public place shall repair said damage to the
satisfaction of the Tree Board.
   (B)   If the Tree Board deems the tree to be beyond repair, the responsible
party shall compensate the city for the lost monetary value of the tree to the
satisfaction of the Tree Board. Tree values shall be in accordance with the
most recent edition of The Guide for Plant Appraisal. Such compensation may
include tree replacement of adequate value.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 154.14 ARBORIST’S LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating or removing any trees within the city’s
urban forest without first applying for and procuring a license. The license
fee and renewal fee shall each be $25. No license shall be required of any city
employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.
Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file with the
City Clerk evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts
of $100,000 for bodily injury and $300,000 for property damage, indemnifying
the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such
endeavors as herein described.
   (B)   The applicant for an arborist’s license required by the provisions of
this chapter shall meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Provide evidence of currently holding at least one of the following
credentials:
         (a)   International Society of Arboriculture: certified arborist or
Board-certified master arborist;
         (b)   State Arborist Association; certified arborist;
         (c)   City of Omaha arborist license first class; or
         (d)   City of Omaha arborist license, second class.
      (3)   If an arborist intends to apply pesticides, an arborist must
provide evidence of currently holding a State Department of Agriculture
commercial pesticide applicator license for ornamentals.
   (C)   Every arborist license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be valid from the date of issuance up to and including the next December
31, unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed before the expiration date
thereof by submitting the required application form, qualifying credentials,
certificate of insurance, and fee.
   (D)   The Tree Board may revoke the license or certificate of compliance of
any arborist, or of any firm, partnership or corporation, found using improper
methods as herein defined, or who in any other way digresses from good
arboriculture practice.
(Ord. 790, passed 5-9-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 155: MUNICIPAL PLANNING
Section
Municipal Limits
   
155.01   “Municipal limits” defined
   
155.02   Original plats
Zoning and Subdivisions
   
155.15   Zoning ordinance adopted
   
155.16   Zoning map
   
155.17   Comprehensive plan
   
155.18   Future land use map
   
155.19   Subdivision regulations
Municipal Plan Review Fees
   
155.30   Intent
   
155.31   Fees
 
   
155.99   Penalty
MUNICIPAL LIMITS
§ 155.01 “MUNICIPAL LIMITS” DEFINED.
   All additions, lots, lands, subdivisions and parcels of ground included
within the official municipal map and plat on file at the office of the County
Register of Deeds having been by act or ordinance of the City Council or by law
duly annexed to or made a part of this city, or by the act, authority,
acquiescence, consent, platting and dedication of their respective owners,
created either as the original townsite or as additions to the city, are hereby
declared to be within the corporate limits of the city. Lawfully constituted
additions or changes in said municipal limits shall be indicated upon said map
and plat by the City Engineer after such addition or change has been completed
in accordance with the ordinances of this city and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 9-101)
§ 155.02 ORIGINAL PLATS.
   Each and every plat, lot, block, addition, subdivision, outlot and parcel of
ground included within the corporate limits of the city and not vacated of
record prior to the enactment of this chapter, including the original plat of
the city, is hereby accepted, approved and confirmed as valid; and each and
every one of said lots, blocks, additions, subdivisions and outlots as
heretofore platted and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds
and not heretofore vacated, and all other parcels of ground included within
said corporate limits, are hereby declared to be within said city and an
integral part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-102)
ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
§ 155.15 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The city’s zoning ordinance, dated 2017 and prepared by Marvin Planning
Consultants, be and the same hereby is adopted as the official zoning ordinance
of the city. Three copies of the zoning ordinance shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-201) (Ord. 709, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 155.16 ZONING MAP.
   An official zoning map was developed and is maintained in accordance with §
3.02 of the zoning ordinance. A copy of the map shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk. Amendments to the map are made on a regular basis to
incorporate changes to the zoning designations of land and changes to the
boundaries and zoning jurisdiction of the city due to the subdivision and
annexation of land.
(Prior Code, § 9-202)
§ 155.17 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The comprehensive development plan update 2017 to 2042 for the city, dated
2017 and prepared by Marvin Planning Consultants, be and the same is hereby
adopted as the official comprehensive development plan of the city. Three
copies of the comprehensive development plan update 2017 to 2042 shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-203) (Ord. 708, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 155.18 FUTURE LAND USE MAP.
   A future land use map was developed and is maintained in accordance with the
comprehensive plan of the city, establishing the location, size, shape and
boundaries of the current and future land uses approved by the City Council for
the guidance of future development as provided. A copy of the same shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. Amendments to the map are made on
a regular basis to incorporate changes to the zoning designations of land and
changes to the boundaries and zoning jurisdiction of the city due to the
subdivision and annexation of land; therefore, such map will be readopted on an
annual basis.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)
§ 155.19 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   To provide for harmonious development of the city and its environs; for the
integration of new subdivision streets with other existing or planned streets
or with other features of the comprehensive plan; for adequate, open spaces for
traffic, recreation, light and air; for the distribution of population and
traffic in a manner which will tend to create conditions favorable to health,
safety, convenience or prosperity; to ensure conformance of subdivision plans
with capital improvements programs of the city; and to secure equitable
handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards
for observance by subdividers, the Planning Commission and the City Council,
the subdivision regulations for the city, as prepared by Marvin Planning
Consultants and reviewed by the City Engineer and the city and reviewed and
recommended for adoption by the City Planning Commission, are hereby adopted as
the official subdivision ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-205) (Ord. 721, passed 6-11-2019)
MUNICIPAL PLAN REVIEW FEES
§ 155.30 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide for the collection of fees
for review of preliminary plats, review of final plats, review of lot splits
and plan review and administrative review fees. The fees required by this
subchapter shall be collected by the City Clerk at the times stipulated herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-301)
§ 155.31 FEES.
   The following are the municipal plan review fees to be charged by the city.
   (A)   Preliminary plats. The review fee shall equal the total costs and
expenses incurred by the city and its consultants to review and approve the
preliminary plat. Costs and expenses shall include engineering, legal, fiscal,
administrative and other associated services. The total review fee shall be
calculated by the city, submitted to the applicant and paid by him or her prior
to official city approval of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   Final plats. The review fee shall equal the total costs and expenses
incurred by the city and its consultants to review and approve the final plat.
Costs and expenses shall include engineering, legal, fiscal, administrative and
other associated services. The total review fee shall be calculated by the
city, submitted to the applicant and paid by him or her prior to official city
approval of the final plat.
   (C)   Lot splits, administrative plats and lot line adjustments. The review
fee shall equal the total costs and expenses incurred by the city and its
consultants to review and approve the lot split, administrative plat, or lot
line adjustment. Costs and expenses shall include engineering, legal, fiscal,
administrative and other associated services. The total review fee shall be
calculated by the city, submitted to the applicant and paid by him or her prior
to official city approval of the lot split, administrative plat or lot line
adjustment.
   (D)   Review of construction plans. The review fee shall equal the total
costs and expenses incurred by the city and its consultants to review and
approve the construction plans. Costs and expenses shall include engineering,
legal, fiscal, administrative and other associated services. The total review
fee shall be calculated by the city, submitted to the applicant and paid by him
or her prior to official city approval of the construction plans.
(Prior Code, § 9-302)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter, whether set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not more than $500 for each
offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours
of such failure to comply.
(Prior Code, § 9-401)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREET VACATIONS
      
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
III.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: STREET VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Vacating a portion of the existing right-of-way of
791      6-13-2023   Cottonwood Drive, located in the northeast quarter of the
                     northwest quarter in Section 6, Township 14 north, Range
                     10 east of the Sixth PM.
                     Vacating a portion of the existing right-of- way of Meigs
800      12-12-2023  Street, located in the northeast quarter of the northeast
                     quarter in Section 6, Township 15 north, Range 10 east of
                     the Sixth PM.
                    
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning Lots 24 through 43, inclusive, Still Water Lake,
                     a subdivision, as surveyed, platted and recorded, shall be
795      8-15-2023   rezoned to R-3. Rezoning Lots 44-49, inclusive, and Outlot
                     C, Still Water Lake, a subdivision, as surveyed, platted
                     and recorded, shall be rezoned to CMD; said CMD to be
                     attached to the underlying C-3 District.
                     Amending the future land use map as it relates to part of
812      6-11-2024   the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 15 north,
                     Range 10 east of the 6th PM.
                     Rezoning Lots 1 through 14, inclusive, Valley Landing, a
                     subdivision, as surveyed, platted and recorded in the
814      7-9-2024    county to C-1 General Commercial District. Rezoning Lots
                     15 through 16 inclusive, and Outlot A, Valley Landing, a
                     subdivision, as surveyed, platted and recorded in the
                     county to R-2 Medium-High Density Residential District.
                     Rezoning Lot 1, Catalina, a subdivision as surveyed,
                     platted and recorded in the county to C-3 Highway
                     Commercial. Rezoning Lots 4 through 15, inclusive, Outlots
                     A - C, inclusive, Catalina, a subdivision as surveyed,
824      11-12-2024  platted and recorded in the county to R-3 Lakefront
                     Residential. Rezoning Lots 2 and 3, Lots 16 through 72,
                     inclusive, and Outlot D, Catalina, a subdivision as
                     surveyed, platted and recorded in the county to R-
                     2 Medium-High Density Residential District.
827      12-10-2024  Rezoning the DC West Parcel from I-3 General Industrial to
                     C-3 Highway Commercial.
                    
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
810      5-14-2024   Granting Black Hills Nebraska Gas, LLC (Black Hills
                     Energy) a natural gas franchise for 25 years
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Cites Code Section
Neb. RS Cites                Code Section
7-949                        90.17;
                             90.18
10-101 through 10-143        34.09
10-606 through 10-612        34.09
11-101                       31.02
11-104                       31.01
11-105                       31.01
11-109                       31.01
11-110                       31.01
11-111                       31.01
11-112                       31.01
11-113                       31.01
11-114                       31.01
11-115                       31.01
11-116                       31.01
11-117                       31.01
11-118                       31.01
13-403                       153.028
13-501 et seq.               34.31
13-504                       34.27
13-505                       34.27
13-506                       34.28
13-507                       34.28
13-508                       34.28;
                             34.29
13-509                       34.29
13-510                       34.30
13-511                       34.31
                             34.28;
13-518 through 13-522        34.29;
                             34.31
13-519                       33.03
13-606                       34.01
13-801 et seq.               32.21
13-903                       34.04
13-1802                      32.21
13-2016.01                   51.08
13-2203(3)                   34.12
13-2501 et seq.              32.21
16-230                       51.04—
                             51.07
16-231                       51.04—
                             51.07
16-246                       51.04—
                             51.07
16-691.01                    34.08
16-901                       51.04—
                             51.07
17-102                       30.15
17-103                       30.15
17-104                       30.15
17-105                       31.42
17-106                       31.42
                             30.01—
                             30.03;
17-107                       31.15;
                             31.21;
                             32.23
17-108                       31.60
17-108.02                    30.15;
                             31.16
17-110 through 17-117        30.02
17-111                       30.40
17-118                       32.21
17-119                       31.23
17-121                       31.21;
                             32.03
17-129                       130.020
17-130 through 17-132        150.001
17-138                       92.05
                             130.021;
17-142                       130.022;
                             150.020
17-148                       30.16
17-150                       31.24
17-501 through 17-560        31.22
17-502                       11.02
17-503                       153.025
17-503.01                    153.025
17-503.02                    153.026
17-505                       10.99;
                             30.35
17-509                       153.001;
                             153.073
17-509 through 17-521        153.046
17-510                       153.075
17-510 through 17-512        153.001
17-511                       153.071;
                             153.072
17-512                       153.074
17-513 through 17-524        153.001
17-522                       153.046
17-523                       153.041
17-524                       153.046;
                             153.071
17-525                       110.01
                             92.02;
                             92.21—
                             92.23;
17-526                       92.25;
                             92.26;
                             92.29;
                             92.30
17-531                       52.002
17-534                       52.002
                             52.004;
                             52.006;
17-537                       52.009;
                             52.013;
                             52.016
17-538                       50.05
17-540                       34.08;
                             52.090
17-541                       31.15;
                             31.22
17-542                       52.010;
                             52.091
17-543                       31.22
17-547                       92.02
17-548                       92.31
17-549                       93.11;
                             93.50
17-550                       93.10;
                             150.001
17-552                       153.041
17-555                       130.021—
                             130.023
17-556                       93.53;
                             130.020
                             130.021;
17-557                       130.022;
                             153.003
17-557.01                    153.003
17-558                       153.060;
                             153.061
17-559                       153.060;
                             153.061
                             153.002;
17-567                       153.065;
                             153.999
17-568                       31.24
17-568.01                    31.24;
                             34.02
17-602                       33.02
17-604                       31.01;
                             31.60
17-605                       31.18
17-606 through 609           31.19
17-607                       34.07
17-608                       34.08
17-609                       34.08
17-610                       31.20
17-611                       31.60
17-612                       31.60
                             30.38;
17-613                       30.41—
                             30.43
                             10.15;
17-614                       30.38—
                             30.40;
                             30.44
17-615                       30.42
17-616                       30.39
17-701                       34.25
17-702                       34.06
17-708                       34.03
17-710                       34.05
17-711                       34.03
17-714                       34.04
17-715                       34.04
17-803                       34.08
17-804                       31.22
17-919                       31.24
17-920                       130.023
17-925.01                    50.05
17-948                       90.15
17-949                       90.03;
                             90.16
17-951                       90.15
17-952                       90.01;
                             90.15
17-953                       153.027
17-953.01                    153.027
17-954                       153.027
17-1001                      150.001
18-131                       30.41
18-132                       30.35
18-305 through 18-312        31.61
18-412.01                    34.02
18-503                       50.05
18-1001 through 18-1006      153.025
18-1208                      110.01
                             130.055;
                             150.035;
18-1720                      150.036;
                             150.038;
                             150.039
                             10.99;
                             150.035;
18-1722                      150.036;
                             150.038;
                             150.039
                             150.035;
18-1722.01                   150.036;
                             150.038;
                             150.039
18-1736                      72.31
18-1737                      72.31;
                             72.32
18-1741.01                   72.30
18-1743                      150.003
18-1751                      153.001
18-1752                      51.04—
                             51.07
18-1755                      153.029
18-1801 through 18-1805      34.09
18-2101 through 18-2144      32.05
18-2101.01                   32.05
18-2102.01                   32.01
18-2715                      32.01
18-2801 et seq.              34.25
18-2804                      34.01
18-3301                      31.24
19-613                       30.15
19-901                       32.02
19-901 et seq.               32.01;
                             32.02
19-901 through 19-914        32.02
19-901 through 19-915        32.02
19-903                       32.01
19-903 through 19-904.01     32.02
19-907                       32.02
19-908                       32.02
19-909                       32.02
19-910                       32.02
19-912                       32.02
19-912.01                    32.02
19-915                       30.44
19-916                       32.01
19-922                       30.35
19-925 through 19-933        32.01
19-926                       32.01
19-927                       32.01
19-928                       32.01
19-929                       32.01
19-929(3)                    32.02
19-930 through 19-933        32.01
19-1101                      31.19
19-1102                      31.18
19-1104                      31.18
19-1301                      34.06
19-1302                      34.06
19-1303                      34.06
19-1304                      34.06
19-1305                      52.002
19-1309                      34.10
19-1310                      34.10
19-1311                      34.10
19-1312                      34.10
19-2401                      153.001
19-2408 through 19-2415      153.001
19-2417 through 19-2419      153.046
                             153.001;
19-2428 through 19-2431      153.071;
                             153.076
19-2902                      34.01
19-2903                      34.01
19-2904                      34.01
19-2905                      34.01
19-2906 through 19-2909      34.01
19-3701                      30.43
23-114.02                    32.02
25-505.01                    33.13
25-1801                      50.04
25-2703                      30.35
25-21,275                    50.04
25-21,276                    50.04
25-21,277                    50.04
25-21,278                    50.04
28-318                       130.075
28-515.02                    50.03
28-520                       130.002
28-521                       130.002
28-523                       90.02;
                             130.057
28-610                       130.040
28-806                       130.075
28-903                       130.041
28-906                       92.08;
                             130.042
28-1008                      92.05
28-1009                      92.05
28-1012                      92.05
28-1013                      92.05
28-1237                      93.28—
                             93.36
                             93.28—
28-1239.01                   93.36;
                             130.058
28-1241                      93.26;
                             130.058
28-1243                      93.28—
                             93.36
28-1249                      93.28—
                             93.36
28-1322                      130.024
28-1465                      32.21
28-1466                      32.21
28-1472                      32.21
29-215                       32.21
29-422 through 29-429        92.05
                             30.01;
32.101 et seq.               33.01;
                             33.03;
                             34.06
32-101                       30.15
32-109                       30.15
32-110                       33.02
32-115                       33.02
32-404                       33.01
32-405                       33.03;
                             33.13
32-533                       30.01;
                             30.15
32-552                       30.15
32-553                       30.15
32-554                       30.15
32-556                       33.01
32-557                       30.15
32-558                       33.09
32-559                       33.03
32-560                       30.03;
                             30.18
32-560 through 32-572        30.03;
                             30.18
32-561                       30.03;
                             30.18
32-562                       33.13
32-567 through 32-570        33.13
32-568                       30.03;
                             30.18
32-569                       30.18
32-574                       33.13
32-603                       30.15
32-604                       30.15
32-608                       33.06;
                             33.07
32-615                       33.07
32-616                       33.07
32-617                       33.07
32-618                       33.07
32-621                       33.07
32-625(2)                    33.07
32-627                       33.07
32-628                       33.07;
                             153.025
32-629                       33.07;
                             33.13
32-630                       33.07;
                             33.13
32-710                       33.07
32-918                       33.08
32-952 through 32-959        33.03
32-1033                      33.09
32-1122                      33.05
32-1202                      33.03;
                             33.11
32-1301                      33.13
32-1302                      33.13
32-1303                      33.13
32-1304                      33.13
32-1305                      33.13
32-1306                      33.13
32-1307                      33.13
                             30.03;
32-1308                      30.18;
                             33.13
32-1309                      33.13
32-1524                      33.08
32-1525                      33.08
35-106                       110.01
37-1254.01                   32.21
37-1254.02                   32.21
39-301                       130.022
39-302                       130.022
39-307                       130.056
39-2512                      31.23
45-104.01                    153.071
49-801(16)                   10.05
49-1408                      31.61
49-1425                      31.61
49-1499.03 through 49-14,103 31.61
49-1499.04                   31.61
49-14,102                    31.61
49-14,103.01                 31.61
49-14,103.02                 31.61
49-14,103.03                 31.61
49-14,103.04                 31.61
49-14,103.05                 31.61
49-14,103.06                 31.61
51-201                       90.30
51-201 through 51-219        90.31
51-201.01                    90.35
51-205                       90.31
51-207                       90.31
51-209                       90.30
51-211                       90.31;
                             90.35
51-212                       90.35
51-213                       90.36
51-215                       34.06
51-216                       34.06
53-101 et seq.               110.01;
                             111.23
53-103.01 through 53-103.42  111.01
53-116.01                    111.03;
                             111.20
53-118                       111.35
53-123.04(3)                 130.059
53-123.11(1)(c)              130.059
53-123.12                    111.17
53-124                       111.17;
                             111.19
53-124.01                    111.17
53-124.12                    111.19
53-124.17                    111.17
53-129                       111.17;
                             111.39
53-131                       111.17
53-132                       110.01;
                             111.17
53-132(3)(a)                 111.16
53-133                       111.17
                             111.16;
53-134                       111.17;
                             111.22
53-134.03                    111.17;
                             111.35
53-134.04                    111.22;
                             111.23
53-135                       111.18
53-135.01                    111.17;
                             111.18
53-148                       111.21
53-160                       110.01
53-168.06                    111.15
53-179                       111.36
53-180                       111.02
53-183                       111.37
53-186                       111.03
53-186(2)                    111.03
53-186.01                    111.03
53-1,115                     111.22
53-1,121                     111.04
54-601                       92.29
54-603                       92.21—
                             92.23
54-605                       92.24
54-606                       92.20;
                             92.29
54-607                       92.02;
                             92.25
55-133                       70.01
56-602                       92.29
Ch. 60                       73.999
Ch. 60, art. 1               73.066
Ch. 60, art. 3               73.066
60-301(1)                    91.20
60-331.01                    72.30
60-331.02                    72.30
60-3,113 through 60-3,113.07 72.31;
                             72.32
Ch. 60, art. 4               73.066
60-462                       70.02
60-489                       70.02
Ch. 60, art. 5               73.066
60-601                       Ch. 70
60-606 through 60-676        70.01
60-607                       70.01
60-610                       70.01
60-613                       70.01
60-624                       70.01;
                             73.045
60-631                       70.01
60-638                       70.01
60-646                       70.01
60-654                       70.01
60-656                       70.01
60-658.01                    70.01
60-661                       70.01
60-669                       70.01
60-670                       70.01
60-671                       70.01
60-672                       70.01
60-676                       70.01
60-678                       73.068
                             72.01;
60-680                       72.07;
                             72.12
60-683                       70.02
60-699                       73.051
60-6,348                     73.067
60-6,352                     73.065
60-6,353                     73.065
60-2107                      73.065
60-4,126                     73.046
60-4,163                     32.21
60-4,164                     32.21
60-6,110                     70.03
60-6,118                     70.01
60-6,129                     71.09
60-6,139                     71.26
60-6,142                     73.001
60-6,164                     72.02
60-6,165                     72.17
60-6,166                     72.03
60-6,167                     72.14
60-6,178                     71.34
60-6,183                     71.27
60-6,192                     71.20
60-6,196                     32.21
60-6,197                     32.21
60-6,211.01                  32.21
60-6,211.02                  32.21
60-6,211.08                  111.03;
                             130.059
60-6,213                     71.22
60-6,214 through 60-6,218    71.22
60-6,306 through 60-6,308    73.015
60-6,308                     71.26
60-6,315                     73.001
60-6,316                     71.33
60-6,317                     73.001
60-6,318                     73.001
60-6,335                     73.030
60-6,337                     73.032
60-6,338                     73.033
60-6,343                     73.034;
                             73.999
60-6,355                     73.045
60-6,356                     73.046
60-6,357                     73.047
60-6,358                     73.048
60-6,359                     73.049
60-6,360                     73.050
60-6,361                     73.051
60-6,362                     73.999
66-489                       110.01
66-489.02                    110.01
66-4,140                     110.01
66-4,145                     110.01
66-4,146                     110.01
70-624.04                    31.61
70-1601                      50.01
70-1601 through 70-1615      50.03
70-1602                      50.02
70-1605                      50.02;
                             52.091
70-1606                      50.02
70-1607                      50.02
70-1608 through 70-1614      50.02
70-1615                      50.02
71-423                       111.04
71-4401                      92.20
71-4401 through 71-4412      92.21
71-4408                      92.31
71-4412                      92.21
71-5301                      52.008
72-1260 et seq.              34.08
Ch. 72, art. 14              153.027
74-1323                      116.02
Ch. 77                       73.066
77-1343                      153.076
77-1725                      150.039
77-2337                      34.06
77-2341                      34.08
77-2362                      34.07
77-2363                      34.07
77-2364                      34.07
77-2365.01                   34.07
77-2366                      34.07
77-2386                      34.07
77-2602                      110.01
77-2704.24                   110.01
77-3442                      90.30
77-3443                      90.30
77-3444                      33.03
77-4008                      110.01
81-201                       92.05
81-520.01                    93.09;
                             93.99
81-829.51                    34.31
81-829.65                    32.21
81-2101 et seq.              150.071
84-712                       31.18;
                             31.19
84-1201 through 84-1220      31.18
84-1407 et seq.              31.40;
                             31.44
84-1410                      31.43
84-1411                      31.41
84-1412                      31.44
86-704                       110.01
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
1-101              11.01
1-104              30.02
1-107              30.17
1-109              30.19
1-110              30.20
1-201              31.15
1-203              31.17
1-204              31.18
1-205              31.19
1-206              31.19
1-207              31.19
1-209              31.21
1-213              31.25
1-214              31.27
1-215              31.28
1-216              31.26
1-301              11.02
1-304              31.40
1-309              31.48
1-407              30.40
1-508              34.02
1-602              33.04
1-603              33.05
1-609              33.09
1-610              33.10
1-612              33.11
1-613              33.12
1-703              32.22
1-704              32.23
1-1103             90.03
1-1104             90.15
1-1105             90.16
1-1106             90.17
1-1107             90.18
1-1108             90.04
1-1203             90.32
1-1204             90.33
1-1206             90.34
1-1301             32.04
1-1302             32.04
1-1303             32.04
1-1501             32.05
1-1502             32.05
1-1503             32.05
1-1504             32.05
1-1505             32.05
1-1601             32.06
1-1602             32.06
2-103              130.025
2-104              130.026
2-106              130.001
2-107              130.002
2-108              130.076
2-109              130.077
2-125              131.20;
                   131.99
2-126              131.21
2-127              130.058
2-128              130.005
2-201              131.35
2-202              131.36
2-203              131.37
2-204              131.38
2-205              131.99
2-301              92.21
2-302              92.22
2-303              92.23
2-304              92.20
2-305              92.24
2-306              92.25
2-307              92.26
2-308              92.27;
                   92.99
2-309              92.08
2-310              92.03
2-315              92.31
2-401              92.32
2-402              92.32
2-501              92.06
2-506              92.07
2-701              131.01
2-702              131.02
2-703              131.99
2-704              131.03
2-705              131.04
2-706              131.05
2-801              130.999
3-102              71.01
3-103              71.02
3-104              71.03
3-105              71.03
3-106              71.03
3-107              71.03
3-108              71.04
3-109              71.04
3-110              71.05
3-111              71.05
3-112              71.23
3-113              71.34
3-114              71.24
3-115              71.06
3-116              71.07
3-117              71.25
3-118              Ch. 74, Schd. I
3-119              71.28
3-120              71.27
3-121              71.27
3-122              71.29
3-124              71.08
3-125              71.20
3-126              71.21
3-127              71.22
3-128              71.22
3-129              71.36
3-133              71.30
3-134              71.26
3-135              71.32
3-136              71.31
3-137              71.35
3-138              71.37
3-139              71.37
3-140              Ch. 74, Schd. II
3-201              91.20
3-202              91.21
3-203              91.22
3-204              91.23
3-205              91.24
3-308              72.04
3-310              72.07
3-312              72.10
3-315              72.12
3-316              72.12
3-319              72.31
3-320              72.32
3-321              72.30
3-322              72.33
3-323              72.34
3-324              72.35
3-401              73.001
3-402              73.002
3-404              71.33
3-405              73.015
3-406              73.016
3-407              73.030
3-408              73.031
3-409              73.032
3-410              73.033
3-411              73.034;
                   73.999
3-412              73.045
3-413              73.046
3-414              73.047
3-415              73.048
3-416              73.049
3-417              73.050
3-418              73.051
3-419              73.999
3-420              73.052
3-421              73.065
3-422              73.066
3-423              73.067
3-424              73.068
3-425              73.080
3-426              73.081
3-427              73.082
3-501              70.99
4-203              111.16
4-205              111.36
4-208              111.23
4-215              111.38
4-216              111.39
4-217              111.40
4-218              111.41
4-219              111.42
4-220              111.43
4-221              111.44
4-222              111.45
4-223              111.46
4-229              111.47
4-301              110.20
4-302              110.21
4-303              110.22
4-401              152.01
4-402              152.02
4-403              152.03
4-404              152.04
4-405              152.05
4-406              152.06
4-407              152.07
4-408              152.08
4-409              152.09
4-410              152.10
4-411              152.11
4-412              152.12
4-413              152.13
4-414              152.14
4-415              152.15
4-501              112.01
4-502              112.02
4-503              112.03
4-504              112.04
4-505              112.05
4-506              112.06
4-507              112.07
4-508              112.08
4-509              112.09
4-510              112.99
4-511              112.10
4-512              112.11
4-513              112.12
4-514              112.13
4-515              112.14
4-601              116.01
4-602              116.02
4-603              116.03
4-701              113.01
4-702              113.02
4-703              113.03
4-704              113.03
4-705              113.04
4-706              113.04
4-707              113.05
4-708              113.06
4-709              113.07
4-710              113.08
4-801              151.01
4-802              151.02
4-803              151.03
4-804              151.04
4-805              151.05
4-806              151.06
4-807              151.07
4-808              151.08
4-809              151.09
4-810              151.10
4-811              151.11
4-901              114.01
4-902              114.02
4-903              114.03
4-904              114.04
4-905              114.05
4-906              114.06
4-907              114.07
4-908              114.08
4-1001             115.01
4-1002             115.02
4-1003             115.03
4-1004             115.04
4-1005             115.05
4-1006             115.06
4-1101             110.99
5-202              153.064
5-204              153.065;
                   153.999
5-212              153.071
5-213              153.072
5-214              153.073
5-215              153.074
5-216              153.075
5-217              153.076
5-221              153.069;
                   153.999
5-302              153.041
5-303              153.042
5-304              153.043
5-305              153.044
5-306              153.047
5-401              153.070
5-402              153.070
5-403              153.070
5-404              153.999
5-501              153.999
6-201              52.002
6-202              52.001
6-203              52.003
6-204              52.004
6-205              52.004
6-206              52.090
6-207              52.091
6-208              52.092
6-209              52.093
6-210              52.094
6-211              52.095
6-212              52.005
6-213              52.006
6-214              52.006
6-215              52.007
6-216              52.008
6-217              52.009
6-218              52.010
6-219              52.010
6-220              52.010
6-221              52.011
6-222              52.096
6-223              52.012
6-224              52.013
6-225              52.014
6-226              52.016
6-227              52.017
6-228              52.019
6-229              52.018
6-230              52.015
6-231              52.030
6-232              52.031
6-233              52.032
6-234              52.033
6-235              52.033
6-236              52.034
6-237              52.034
6-238              52.034
6-239              52.034
6-240              52.034
6-241              52.035
6-242              52.036
6-243              52.037
6-244              52.038
6-245              52.050
6-246              52.051
6-247              52.052
6-248              52.053
6-249              52.054
6-250              52.055
6-251              52.056
6-252              52.057
6-301              53.001
6-302              53.002
6-303              53.003
6-304              53.020
6-305              53.021
6-306              53.022
6-307              53.004
6-308              53.005
6-309              53.091
6-310              53.090
6-311              53.092
6-312              53.092
6-313              53.093
6-315              53.094
6-316              53.095
6-317              53.035
6-318              53.036
6-319              53.037
6-320              53.038
6-321              53.039
6-322              53.040
6-323              53.041
6-324              53.042
6-325              53.006
6-326              53.007
6-327              53.008
6-328              53.055
6-329              53.056
6-330              53.056
6-331              53.057
6-332              53.058
6-333              53.059
6-334              53.070
6-335              53.071
6-336              53.072
6-337              53.073
6-338              53.074
6-339              53.075
6-340              53.076
6-341              53.077
6-342              53.009
6-401              51.01
6-402              51.02
6-403              51.03
6-404              51.04
6-405              51.05
6-406              51.06
6-407              51.07
6-408              51.08
6-409              51.09
6-410              51.10
6-411              51.99
6-501              53.999
7-101              93.01
7-102              93.02
7-103              93.03
7-104              93.04
7-105              93.50
7-106              93.05
7-107              93.06
7-108              93.07;
                   93.99
7-109              93.08
7-111              93.10
7-112              93.10
7-113              93.10
7-114              93.11
7-115              93.12
7-201              93.51
7-202              93.52
7-203              93.53
7-204              93.54
7-301              93.25
7-302              93.26
7-303              93.27
7-304              93.28
7-305              93.29
7-306              93.30
7-307              93.31
7-308              93.32
7-309              93.33
7-310              93.34
7-311              93.35
7-312              93.36
7-401              93.99
8-105              150.001
8-203              150.022
8-205              150.023
8-206              150.024
8-301              150.005
8-302              150.005
8-401              150.006
8-402              150.006
8-403              150.006
8-404              150.006
8-405              150.006
8-601              150.070
8-602              150.071
8-603              150.072
8-604              150.073
8-605              150.074
8-606              150.075
8-607              150.076
8-608              150.075
8-609              150.075
8-610              110.35
8-611              110.36
8-612              150.072
8-613              150.072
8-614              150.072
8-615              150.071
8-616              150.073
8-617              150.077
8-801              52.070
8-802              52.071
8-803              52.072
8-804              52.073
8-805              52.074
8-806              52.075
8-807              52.076
8-809              52.077
8-810              52.078
8-811              52.079
8-901              150.999
9-101              155.01
9-102              155.02
9-201              155.15
9-202              155.16
9-203              155.17
9-204              155.18
9-205              155.19
9-301              155.30
9-302              155.31
9-401              155.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
55       12-5-1978      92.03;
                        92.21
178      5-6-1986       92.31
212      7-12-1988      92.27;
                        92.99
271      8-13-1991      130.005
305      11-9-1993      153.069;
                        153.999
356      12-10-1996     130.005
                        92.24;
431      7-10-2001      92.27;
                        92.31;
                        92.99
486      2-10-2004      130.005
522      5-16-2006      52.094
579      2-10-2008      31.40
580      2-10-2008      34.02
559      3-11-2008      Ch. 74, Schd. I
562      4-8-2008       53.092
565      8-12-2008      53.092
567      10-28-2008     52.093;
                        53.095
568      10-28-2008     53.095
570      11-11-2008     32.05
571      11-11-2008     131.35—
                        131.38
                        52.004;
572      12-9-2008      52.011;
                        52.093
574      1-13-2009      32.04
576      2-10-2009      150.071
600      12-28-2009     93.25;
                        93.26
                        73.045—
614      2-8-2011       73.052;
                        73.999
617      2-8-2011       93.25—
                        93.36
                        93.26—
620      4-12-2011      93.28;
                        93.32
621      4-12-2011      53.092
634      3-13-2012      150.071
630      4-3-2012       32.22;
                        32.23
635      4-10-2012      150.077
645      4-9-2013       53.092
646      5-14-2013      150.005
658      5-13-2014      52.093
659      5-13-2014      53.095
663      9-9-2014       150.071
671      3-10-2015      73.045
672      3-10-2015      30.02;
                        30.40
673      3-10-2015      150.071
674      4-4-2015       52.092
675      4-4-2015       53.092
676      6-9-2015       32.04
684      2-9-2016       150.070
685      2-9-2016       150.072
686      2-9-2016       150.073
687      2-9-2016       150.074
688      2-9-2016       150.075
689      2-9-2016       150.076
691      4-12-2016      53.092
692      4-12-2016      52.091
699      5-9-2017       90.03
703      10-10-2017     150.001
708      2-13-2018      155.17
709      2-13-2018      155.15
717      11-13-2018     115.01—
                        115.06
720      3-12-2019      92.22
721      6-11-2019      155.19
728      12-10-2019     90.03
729      12-10-2019     90.03
737      4-14-2020      130.026
739      1-12-2021      92.06;
                        92.07
                        52.003;
745      1-12-2021      52.004;
                        52.094
750      6-8-2021       90.03
752      6-8-2021       Ch. 74, Schd. I
                        131.20;
753      6-8-2021       131.21;
                        131.99
                        31.15;
756      8-10-2021      31.17—
                        31.19
774      4-12-2022      111.36
775      5-10-2022      32.22;
                        32.23
776      6-14-2022      52.050—
                        52.057
777      7-12-2022      90.04
783      11-8-2022      93.12
784      1-10-2023      52.092
787      4-11-2023      93.07;
                        93.99
789      4-11-2023      53.092
                        110.05;
790      5-9-2023       154.01—
                        154.14
791      6-13-2023      TSO Table I
792      6-13-2023      72.99
793      7-11-2023      52.092;
                        53.092
794      8-8-2023       150.035—
                        150.041
795      8-15-2023      TSO Table II
797      11-14-2023     90.31
798      12-12-2023     90.01
800      12-12-2023     TSO Table I
801      12-12-2023     92.22;
                        92.32
807      2-13-2024      52.092
808      2-13-2024      53.092
810      5-14-2024      TSO Table III
811      5-14-2024      34.11
812      6-11-2024      TSO Table II
814      7-9-2024       TSO Table II
                        91.01—
815      8-13-2024      91.05;
                        91.99
820      9-10-2024      150.071
824      11-12-2024     TSO Table II
825      11-12-2024     130.060;
                        130.061
827      12-10-2024     TSO Table II
828      12-10-2024     52.092,
                        53.092
830      1-14-2025      52.092
831      1-14-2025      Adopting Ordinance
833      1-14-2025      34.12
838      8-12-2025      52.050,
                        52.053
                       
 
City of Valley
Douglas County, Nebraska
Zoning Ordinance
Adopted by the City of Valley, Nebraska
2025 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
Article 1: Title and Purpose
Section 1.01   Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
Section 1.02   Purpose
This ordinance has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to lessen
congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to promote the distribution of population, land
classifications and land development to support provisions for adequate
transportation, water flows, water supply, drainage, sanitation, recreation,
and other public requirements; to protect property against blight and
depreciation; and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.
Section 1.03   Comprehensive Plan Relationship
These zoning ordinances are designed to implement various elements of the
comprehensive plan as required by state statutes. Any amendment to the district
ordinances or map shall conform to the comprehensive plan adopted by the
governing body.
Article 2: Definitions
Section 2.01   Rules
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following rules shall apply:
2.01.01   Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and
numbers used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future.
2.01.02   The word "persons" includes a corporation, members of a partnership
or other business organization, a committee, board, council, commission,
trustee, receiver, agent or other representative.
2.01.03   The word "shall" is mandatory. The word “may” is permissive.
2.01.04   The words "use", "used", "occupy" or "occupied" as applied to any
land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged"
or "designed" to be used or occupied.
2.01.05   The word "commission" shall refer to the Planning Commission of
Valley, Nebraska.
2.01.06   Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary
meaning in relation to the context.
2.01.07   In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of the
Ordinance and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall apply.
Section 2.02   Abbreviations and Acronyms
For purposes of these Regulations this section contains a listing of
abbreviations and acronyms used throughout this document.
ADA     = Americans with Disabilities Act
A.U.    = Animal Unit
CFR     = Code of Federal Regulations
DU      = Dwelling Unit
DNR     = Department of Natural Resources
FAA     = Federal Aviation Administration
FCC     = Federal Communication Commission
FEMA    = Federal Emergency Management Agency
FT      = Foot or Feet
GFA     = Gross Floor Area
HUD     = US Department of Housing and Urban Development
KV      = Kilovolt
KW      = Kilowatt
NDEQ    = Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
NDOT    = Nebraska Department of Transportation
NEM     = Nebraska Emergency Management Agency
NHHS    = Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services
NPDES   = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NRCS    = Natural Resources Conservation Service
R.O.W.  = Right-of-Way
SF      = Square Feet
Sq. ft. = Square Feet
SY      = Square Yard
USC     = United States Code
USACE   = United States Army Corps of Engineers
USDA    = United States Department of Agriculture
YD      = Yard
 
Section 2.03   Definitions
A
ABANDONMENT  shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity without
intent to resume as distinguished from short term interruptions such as during
periods of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods of vacation or seasonal
closure.
ABUT  shall mean to border on, be contiguous with or have common property or
district lines, including property separated by a public street or alley
ACCESS or ACCESS WAY  shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians
and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a
property or use as required by this Regulation.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT  shall mean a second dwelling unit either in or added to an
existing single-family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure
on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living
facility with provisions within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating,
sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main
dwelling.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or STRUCTURE  shall mean a detached subordinate building or
structure located on the same lot with the principal building or structure, the
use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
Customary accessory buildings and structures include farm buildings, garages,
carports, and storage sheds but not portable storage containers.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS  shall mean living quarters within an accessory
building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by
temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no
kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling
unit.
ACCESSORY   DWELLING   UNIT  shall mean a separate, complete housekeeping unit
with a separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom facilities,
which is an attached or detached extension to an existing single-family
structure, also referred to as “Granny Flats”.
ACCESSORY USE  shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly
subordinate to the main use of the lot or building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-26.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.png]
 
ACREAGE  shall mean any tract or parcel of land, used for single-family
residential purposes, that does not qualify as a farm or farmstead.
ADJACENT  see “Abut”.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE  shall mean any structure used as an outdoor display,
regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the
origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such Advertising
Structure.
AESTHETIC ZONING  shall mean zoning to accomplish a standard of exterior
architectural appeal and/or neighborhood harmony.
AGENT  shall mean any person showing written verification that he/she is acting
for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
AGRICULTURAL COOPERATIVE PRODUCTION/DISTRIBUTION FACILITY   shall mean any
facility owned and operated by a cooperative or other corporation for the
purpose of manufacturing, distributing, and storage of fertilizers, herbicides
and grain. This includes the offices, scales and parking areas necessary for
trucks and other vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.png]
 
AGRICULTURAL OR FARM BUILDINGS  shall mean any building or structure which is
necessary or incidental to the normal conduct of a farming operation, including
but not limited to, residence of hired persons, barns, buildings and sheds for
housing livestock, poultry and farm machinery, buildings for the storage or
shelter of grain, hay and other crops, silos, windmills and water storage
tanks.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES  shall mean establishments or uses engaged in the
large-scale storage or initial processing of agricultural products and supplies
that cannot be otherwise categorized as light, general, or heavy industries,
some of which may involve storage of potentially hazardous materials. Typical
uses include grain elevators and anhydrous ammonia storage facilities.
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE  shall mean an establishments or places of
business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm
equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally
related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service
is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships,
feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
AGRICULTURE  shall mean the use of land for agricultural purposes, for
obtaining a profit by raising, harvesting, and selling crops or by the feeding,
breeding, management, and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-
bearing animals, or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products,
or any other agricultural or horticultural use.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE  shall mean any motorized off-highway vehicle which (i) is
fifty inches or less in width, (ii) has a dry weight of nine hundred pounds or
less, (iii) travels on three or more low-pressure tires, (iv) is designed for
operator use only with no passengers or is specifically designed by the
original manufacturer for the operator and one passenger, (v) has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and (vi) has handlebars or any
other steering assembly for steering control.
ALLEY  shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
ALTERATION  shall mean any change, addition or modification to the construction
or occupancy of an existing structure.
AMENDMENT  shall mean a change in the wording, context, or substance of this
Ordinance, or an addition, deletion or change in the district boundaries or
classifications upon the Official Zoning Map.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE  shall mean a building or a part of a building where five or
more pinball machines, video games, or similar player-oriented amusement
devices are available and are maintained for use.
AMUSEMENT PARK  shall mean a facility, primarily outdoors, that may include
structures and buildings, where are various devices for entertainment,
including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, buildings
for shows and entertainment, and restaurants and souvenir sales.
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC  see Household Pet.
ANIMAL, FARM  shall mean livestock associated with agricultural operation,
commonly kept or raised as a part of an agricultural operation including but
not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, turkeys.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL  shall mean a place where animals are given medical care and
the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use.
ANIMAL UNIT  shall mean any farming operation or the feeding, farrowing, or
raising cattle, swine, sheep, poultry, or other livestock, in a confined area
where grazing is not possible, and where the confined area is for more than 6
months in any one calendar year, and where the number of animals so maintained
exceeds 300 Animal Units as defined below. The confined area of the Livestock
Feeding Operation (LFO) shall include the pens, corrals, sheds, buildings, feed
storage areas, waste disposal ponds, and related facilities. Such facilities
shall be constructed and operated in conformance with applicable county, state,
and federal regulations. Two or more LFO's under common ownership are deemed to
be a single LFO if they are adjacent to each other or if they utilize a common
area of system for the disposal of livestock wastes. Animal Units (A.U.) are
defined as follows:
One (1) A.U. = One Cow/Calf combination;
One (1) A.U. = One Slaughter, Feeder Cattle;
One (1) A.U. = One-half Horse;
One (1) A.U. = Seven Tenths Mature Dairy Cattle;
One (1) A.U. = Two and One Half Swine (55 lbs. or more);
One (1) A.U. = Twenty-Five Weaned Pigs (less than 55 lbs.);
One (1) A.U. = Two Sows with Litters;
One (1) A.U. = Ten Sheep;
One (1) A.U. = One Hundred Chickens;
One (1) A.U. = Fifty Turkeys;
One (1) A.U. = Five Ducks.
ANTENNA  shall mean any attached or external system of wires, poles, rods,
reflecting disks or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves. Also, see Satellite Dish Antenna and Tower.
ANTIQUE SHOPS  shall mean a place offering primarily antiques for sale. An
antique for the purpose of this ordinance shall be a work of art, piece of
furniture, decorative object, or the like, that is at least 30 years old.
APARTMENT  shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or
multiple family dwelling arranged, intended or designed as a place of residence
for a single family or group of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit, including culinary accommodations. Also, see Dwelling Unit.
APARTMENT COMPLEX  shall mean a building or buildings containing apartments
used as a place of residence for more than two households.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.png]
 
APARTMENT HOTEL  shall mean a building designed for or containing both
apartments and individual hotel guest rooms under resident supervision,
maintaining an inner lobby through which all tenants must pass to gain access
to apartments and hotel rooms.
APARTMENT HOUSE  see Dwelling, Multiple.
APPEARANCE  shall mean the outward aspect visible to the public.
APIARY  shall mean a place where bee colonies are kept.
APPLICANT  shall mean the owner or duly designated representative of land
proposed to be subdivided, or for which a special use permit, conditional use
permit, temporary use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, building
permit, or certificate of occupancy and other similar administrative permits
has been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner or his legal
representative in writing except for building permits.
APPLICATION, COMPLETED  shall mean an application for a zoning request that
contains the following: (1) submittal and completion of all applicable
application forms; (2) submittal of all required supporting application
information; and, (3) submittal of all required fees.
APPROPRIATE  shall mean fitting the context of the site and the whole
community.
APPURTENANCES  shall mean the visible, functional objects accessory to and part
of buildings.
AQUIFER  shall mean a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a
formation capable of yielding, storing, or transmitting a usable amount of
groundwater to wells or springs for domestic or animal use.
ARBORIST  shall mean an individual trained in arboriculture, forestry,
landscape architecture, horticulture, or related fields and experienced in the
conservation and preservation of native and ornamental trees.
ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE  shall mean the architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the
kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and
character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant
elements.
ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER  see Architectural Concept
 
ARCHITECTURAL [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
CONCEPT       fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
              IMAGES/0-0-0-34.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-38.png]
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
LINES         fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
              IMAGES/0-0-0-40.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-42.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
MASS          fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
              IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-48.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-50.png]
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
TEXTURE       fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
              IMAGES/0-0-0-52.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-54.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-56.png]
ARCHITECTURAL [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
STYLE         fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
              IMAGES/0-0-0-58.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-60.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-62.png]
 
ARCHITECTURAL COMPOSITION  shall mean the scale, height, mass, proportion,
color, form, style, detail, treatment, construction material, and roof design
of a project or building.
ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT  shall mean the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or
group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development
that produces the architectural character.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE  shall mean a prominent or significant part or element of
a building, structure, or site. Architectural features may include special
lines, massing, and/or texture.
   1.   LINES  shall mean visual elements of the building, either within the
façade or on the building edge, which are in linear form either horizontally or
vertically and may be composed of masonry, glass, or other related materials.
   2.   MASS  shall mean volume or bulk of a building or structure.
   3.   TEXTURE  shall mean the quality of a surface, ranging from mirror
finish, smooth, to course and unfinished.
ARCHITECTURAL STYLE  shall mean the characteristics form and detail, as of
buildings of a particular historic period.
ARTISAN PRODUCTION SHOP  shall mean a building or portion thereof used for the
creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by more than three
but less than six artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use.
ARTIST STUDIO  shall mean a place designed to be used, or used as, both a
dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson,
including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine
arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music,
painting, sculpture, and writing.
ATTACHED  shall mean a foundation, wall or roof of a building or structure
which is connected to and supported by the foundation, wall, or roof of another
building or structure.
ATTACHED PERMANENTLY  shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to
require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or
structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.
AUTO BODY REPAIR  shall mean the Repair, painting, or refinishing of the body,
fender, or frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational
vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and
similar vehicles or equipment. Typical uses include body and fender shops,
painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing garages.
AUTO SERVICES  shall mean the provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and
accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and
cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor
homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and
servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include service stations, car
washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel
and brake shops, and similar repair and service activities but exclude
dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE (ATM)  shall mean an automated device that performs
banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling
financial institution.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.png]
 
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL AND SALES  shall mean sale or rental of automobiles,
noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats,
including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include
new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer, and
recreational vehicle dealerships.
AUTOMOBILE SALES-RETAIL  shall mean a retail business housed either in a
structure or on a tract of land that sells or leases new or used automobiles,
trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, boats or motorcycles or other similar
motorized transportation vehicles. Retail automobile sales shall include any
operation with three or more vehicles, as stated above, for sale at any time
and/or a total of 10 sold during the course of a calendar year.
AUTOMOBILE SALES – WHOLESALE  shall mean a wholesale business housed either in
a structure or on a tract of land that sells new or used automobiles, trucks,
vans, recreational vehicles, boats, or motorcycles or other similar motorized
transportation vehicles to automobile sales retail outlets.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD  shall mean any lot, or the use of any portion of a
lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles, tractors, farm machinery,
or other motor vehicles, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and
equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking.
AUTOMOTIVE AND MACHINERY REPAIR SHOP  shall mean a building used for the repair
of motor vehicles or machinery; when such repair shall be wholly within a
completely enclosed building. This definition also includes body repair and
painting.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AREA  shall mean an open area, other than a street, used for
display or sale of new or used motor vehicles and trailers by one required to
be licensed as a motor vehicle dealer by the State of Nebraska, and where no
repair work is done except minor incidental repair of motor vehicles or
trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
B
BALLROOM  shall mean a place or hall used for dancing, other than those listed
under the definition of “Adult Cabaret”. Ballrooms shall also be used for
reunions, weddings and receptions.
BAR  shall mean any establishment whose principal business is serving alcoholic
beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. Also, see Nightclub and
Tavern.
BASE FLOOD  shall mean the flood, from whatever source, having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, otherwise referred to as
the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION  shall mean that elevation, expressed in feet above mean
sea level, to which flooding can be expected to occur on a frequency of once in
every 100 years, or which is subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE ZONING DISTRICT  shall mean a district established by this Ordinance that
prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development standards.
BASEMENT  shall mean the substructure or foundation of a building; the lowest
habitable story of a building, usually below ground level. A basement used for
independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the
purposes of height measurement.
BEACON  shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the
light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN  shall mean a dwelling that is used for the purpose of
offering overnight lodging and meals to travelers for a fee which dwelling has
unique structural and/or site characteristics which create the appearance of an
Inn type setting. Such dwelling shall have a maximum of six guest rooms
available for travelers lodging and no more than 12 guests may stay at any
time. Guests who stay at the bed and breakfast shall not remain for a period of
more than 30 consecutive days.
BEDROOM  shall mean a room within a dwelling unit planned and intended for
sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door.
BEER GARDEN  shall mean a permanent establishment which includes any area out-
of-doors and not completely contained within a building in which alcoholic
beverages or food is served.
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION  shall mean that site grading is the beginning of
construction.
BERM  shall mean a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the
aesthetic character.
BEST INTERESTS OF COMMUNITY  shall mean interests of the community at large and
not the interest of the immediate neighborhood.
BIG BOX RETAIL STORE  shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user who
occupies no less than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically
requires high parking to building area ratios and has a regional sales market
regional retail/wholesale can include, but are not limited to, membership
warehouse clubs that emphasizes bulk sales, discount stores, and department.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.png]
 
BILLBOARD  see Sign, Billboard.
BLOCK  shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public
streets or by waterways, rights-of-way, non-platted land, City or County
boundaries, or adjoining property lines.
BLOCK FRONTAGE  shall mean that section of a block fronting on a street between
two intersecting streets or other block boundary.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.png]
 
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT  shall mean that Board that has been created by the City
and which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals from,
interpretations of, and variances to the zoning regulations.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE  shall mean a building other than a hotel or motel,
but containing a single dwelling unit and provisions for three but not more
than 20 guests, where lodging is provided with or without meals for
compensation.
BOAT SLIP (STATION)  shall mean a space designed for the mooring of a single
watercraft. Such spaces may extend from a dock or shoreline but shall not be
allowed to project from a community pier.
BOAT DOCK  shall mean a structure built over a floating upon water and used as
a landing place for boats and other marine transport, fishing, swimming, and
other recreational uses.
BOAT PIER (COMMUNITY)  shall mean a boat-docking facility associated with a
subdivision or similar residential area or with a condominium, apartments, or
other multi-family dwelling units. Community pier does not include a private
pier or a mooring.
BOAT PIER (PRIVATE)  see Boat Dock
BREW-ON PREMISES STORE  shall mean a facility that provides the ingredients and
equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Brew-on-
premises stores do not include the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the
owner of the brew-on-premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.
BREW PUB  shall mean a restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer
as an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and
yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. By definition,
these establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale
annually. The area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and
kegging shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial
space. Also see Brewery, Craft.
BREWERY  shall mean a facility for brewing ales, beers, meads and/or similar
beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more
than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.
BREWERY, CRAFT  shall mean a brew pub or a microbrewery.
BREWERY, MICRO  shall mean a facility for the production and packaging of malt
beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or
off premises, with a capacity of not more than 10,000 barrels per year. The
development may include other uses such as standard restaurant, bar, or live
entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
BUFFER  shall mean a strip of land established to protect one type of land use
from another incompatible land use or between a land use and a private or
public road. Also, see Screening.
BUFFER AREA  shall mean an open and unobstructed ground area of a plot in
addition to any no building zones or street widening around the perimeter of
any plot where required.
BUFFERYARD  shall mean a landscaped area intended to separate and partially
obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
BUILDABLE AREA  shall mean that part of a zoning lot not included within the
required yards or subject to other restrictions herein required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.png]
 
BUILDING  shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support,
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind,
but shall not include temporary buildings as defined in "Structure, Temporary".
Trailers, with or without wheels, shall not be considered buildings.
BUILDING AREA  shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied
by all buildings and structures on a lot.
BUILDING CODE  shall mean the various codes of the City of Valley that regulate
construction and require building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and other
permits to as well as other codes adopted by the City that pertain to building
construction.
BUILDING COVERAGE  shall mean the area of a site covered by buildings or roofed
areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features.
BUILDING ENVELOPE  shall mean the three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other
applicable municipal requirements have been met.
BUILDING HEIGHT  shall mean the vertical distance above grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the average height of the highest point of a gable, hip, or shed roof, measured
from the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five feet
horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-72.png]
 
BUILDING LINE  shall mean the outer boundary of a building established by the
location of its exterior walls.
BUILDING OFFICIAL  shall mean the designee of the City Council, responsible for
the enforcement of the building and land use regulations of the City of Valley.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE  shall mean the required zoning distance between a
building and the lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.png]
 
BULK REGULATIONS  shall mean regulations controlling the size and relationship
of structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Bulk
regulations include regulations controlling: (1) maximum height (2) maximum lot
coverage and (3) minimum size of yard and setbacks.
BUSINESS  shall mean activities that include the exchange or manufacture of
goods or services on a site.
BUSINESS CENTER  shall mean a building containing more than one commercial
business, or any group of nonresidential buildings within a common development,
characterized by shared parking and access.
BUSINESS SERVICES  shall mean uses providing services to people, groups,
businesses, dwellings and other buildings. Business services shall include
janitorial services, carpet and upholstery cleaning, painting and decorating,
building maintenance, swimming pool maintenance, security service, graphics/
advertising agency, photocopying/duplication, quick print shops, printing,
blueprinting, sign painting, non-vehicle equipment rental, photographic
studios.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES  shall mean establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies and
materials or the provision of services used by office, professional and service
establishments to the firms themselves but excluding automotive, construction
and farm equipment; or engaged in the provision of maintenance or custodial
services to businesses. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms,
small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms,
janitorial services, photography studios, and convenience printing and copying.
C
CABIN  shall mean a small one story house built and designed for temporary use.
CABIN, HUNTING AND FISHING  Buildings used only during hunting and fishing
season as a base for hunting and fishing, and outdoor recreation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-76.png]
 
CAMPER  shall mean any coach, cabin, house trailer, house car or other vehicle
or structure intended for or capable of temporary occupancy as living and
sleeping quarters as is primarily required during camping or vacation travels.
Such facility has characteristics similar to a mobile home in that it can be
conveyed on the streets. However, in no way is it intended to become a
residence.
CAMPGROUND  shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of
tents, campers, and major recreational vehicles for which the primary purpose
is recreational, and having open areas that are natural in character.
CAMPGROUND, LEASED  (See “Leased Campground”)
CAMPING TRAILER  See Camper.
CAR WASH  shall mean a building or structure or an area of land with machine or
hand operated facilities for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of
motor vehicles.
CAR WASH, INDUSTRIAL  shall mean a mechanical facility for the washing, waxing
and vacuuming of heavy trucks and buses.
CARPORT  shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two
enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.
CELLAR  shall mean a building space having less than one-half of its height
below the average adjoining grade lines.
CEMETERY  shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbarium, crematoriums, and
mausoleums.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY  shall mean an official certificate issued by the
Building Official or his/her designee, upon finding of conformance with the
zoning regulations and other applicable ordinances of the City and authorizing
legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
CHANNEL  shall mean the geographical area located within either the natural or
the artificial banks of a watercourse or drainageway.
CHARITABLE  shall mean a public or semi-public institutional use of a
philanthropic, charitable, benevolent, religious, or eleemosynary character,
but not including sheltering or caring of animals.
CHILD CARE CENTER  shall mean an establishment other than a public or parochial
school, which provides day care, play groups, nursery schools or education for
nine or more children under age 13, at any one time, from families other than
that of the provider. In addition to these regulations, Child Care Centers
shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
CHILD CARE HOME  shall mean an operation in the provider's place of residence,
which serves at least four, but not more than eight children at any one time
from families other than that of the provider. A Family Child Care Home
provider may be approved to serve no more than two additional school-age
children during non-school hours. In addition to these regulations, Child Care
Homes shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
CHURCH, STOREFRONT  shall mean a religious facility contained within a store or
similar structure not typically used for religious activities that are now used
as a meeting place for a congregation, including but not limited to, barns,
stores, warehouses, old public buildings, and single-family dwellings.
CITY  shall mean the City of Valley, Nebraska. Also, “City Council” or
“Governing Body.”
CITY ATTORNEY  shall mean the City Attorney of the City of Valley or his/her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CITY COUNCIL  shall mean the City Council of Valley, Nebraska.
CITY ENGINEER  shall mean the City Engineer as hired or appointed by the Mayor,
City Council and City Council or his/her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
CITY LIMITS  shall mean the established corporate boundary of the City of
Valley.
CLEAR VIEW ZONE  See Sight Triangle.
CLUB  shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated),
religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which
are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for
profit.
CLUSTERED DEVELOPMENT  shall mean a development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to
be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically
or environmentally sensitive features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-78.png]
 
CODE  shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
COFFEE KIOSK  shall mean a retail food business in a freestanding building that
sells coffee, or other nonalcoholic beverages, and pre-made bakery goods from a
drive- through window to customers seated in their automobiles for consumption
off the premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating.
COMMISSION  shall mean the Planning Commission of Valley, Nebraska.
COMMON AREA OR PROPERTY  shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with
the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the
Owners of the individual building sites in a Planned Development or condominium
development.
COMMON DEVELOPMENT  shall mean a development proposed and planned as one
unified project not separated by a public street or alley.
COMMON OPEN SPACE  shall mean land within or related to a development that is
not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally
intended for the common use of the residents of the development.
COMMUNICATION SERVICES  shall mean establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished
through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those
classified as Utilities. Typical uses include television studios,
telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound
recording facilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER  shall mean a place, structure, or other facility used for and
providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally
open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve various segments of
the community.
COMPATIBILITY  shall mean harmony in the appearance of two or more external
design features in the same vicinity.
COMPATIBLE USE  shall mean the degree to which two or more different land use
types are able to exist together in close proximity, with no one use having
significant negative effects on any other use.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN  shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan
of Valley, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for
the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the
purposes and requirements set forth in the Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-903.
CONDITIONAL USE  shall mean a use where allowed by the district regulations,
that may not be appropriate throughout the zoning district without
restrictions, but which, if controlled as to number, size, area, location,
relationship to the neighborhood or other minimal protective characteristics
will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT  shall mean a permit issued by the Planning Commission
and City Council that authorizes the recipient to make a conditional use of
property in accordance with the provisions of
Article 6 and any additional conditions placed upon, or required by said
permit.
CONDOMINIUM  shall mean real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, pursuant to the Nebraska
Condominium Act, as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 76-825 to 76-894
(R.R.S.1997).
CONE OF DEPRESSION  shall mean the three-dimensional area of water table
created by a pumping well. The pumping well creates an artificial discharge
area by drawing down (lowering) the water table around the well.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-80.png]
 
CONFLICTING LAND USE  shall mean the use of property which transfers over
neighboring property lines negative economic or environmental effects,
including, but not limited to, noise, vibration, odor, dust, glare, smoke,
pollution, and water vapor, or consists of mismatched land uses, density,
height, mass, or layout of adjacent uses, or results in a loss of privacy.
CONGREGATE HOUSING  shall mean a residential facility for four or more persons
aged 55 years or over and their spouses, providing living and sleeping
facilities including meal preparation, dining areas, laundry services, room
cleaning and common recreational, social, and service facilities for the
exclusive use of all residents including resident staff personnel who occupy a
room or unit in the residential facility. Also, see Life Care Facility.
CONSERVATION  shall mean the management of natural resources to prevent waste,
destruction, or degradation.
CONSERVATION AREA  shall mean an area of environmentally sensitive and valuable
lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their
ecological integrity, balance or character, except in the case of an overriding
public interest, including but not limited to: wetlands, floodways, flood
plains, drainage ways, river or stream banks, and areas of significant
biological productivity or uniqueness.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT  shall mean a development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to
be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically
or environmentally sensitive features.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT  shall mean, as defined by Nebraska RRS 76-2,111 a right,
whether or not stated in the form of an easement, restriction, covenant, or
condition in any deed, will, agreement, or other instrument executed by or on
behalf of the owner of an interest in real property imposing a limitation upon
the rights of the owner or an affirmative obligation upon the owner appropriate
to the purpose of retaining or protecting the property in its natural, scenic,
or open condition. Assuring its availability for agricultural, horticultural,
forest, recreational, wildlife habitat, or open space use, protecting air
quality, water quality, or other natural resources, or for such other
conservation purpose as may qualify as a charitable contribution under the
Internal Revenue Code.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION  shall mean wholly or in majority, a residential
subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site
development regulations, provided 1) there is no increase in the overall
density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district,
and 2) the remaining land area is used for common space.
CONSTRUCTION BATCH PLANT  shall mean a temporary demountable facility used for
the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials
intended for specific construction projects.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE DISPOSAL AREA  shall mean any area for the
sole purpose of disposal of construction and demolition waste.
CONSTRUCTION YARDS  shall mean establishments housing facilities of businesses
primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental storage of
materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses are
building contractor's yards.
CONVALESCENT SERVICES  shall mean a use providing bed care and inpatient
services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a
facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a
facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or
communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes.
CONTIGUOUS  see Abut.
CORPORATE LIMITS  shall mean all land, structures and open space that has been
annexed into the City’s jurisdiction. This does not include the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.
COURT  shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building or buildings and bounded on two or more sides by such building
or buildings.
COURT, INNER  shall mean a court enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of
a building or buildings.
COURT, OUTER  shall mean a court enclosed on all but one side by exterior walls
of building or buildings or lot lines on which fences, hedges, or walls are
permitted.
COURTYARD  shall mean an open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides
by the walls of the building.
CONVENIENCE STORE  shall mean a one-story, retail store containing less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell
primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who
purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket."), it is
dependent on, and is designed to attract and accommodate large volumes of stop-
and-go traffic.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-82.png]
 
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION  shall mean a subdivision which literally meets all
nominal standards of the Land Development Ordinance for lot dimensions,
setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations.
CREATIVE SUBDIVISION  shall mean a subdivision that, while complying with the
Subdivision Ordinance, diverges from nominal compliance with site development
regulations in the Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a
higher level of pre-planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be
employed for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of
superior community design. Types of Creative Subdivisions include Cluster
Subdivisions and New Urban Residential Districts.
CROP PRODUCTION  shall mean the raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops
for field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. This definition may
include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.
CUL-DE-SAC  shall mean a short public way, which has only one outlet for
vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-84.png]
 
CULTURAL SERVICES  shall mean a library, museum, or similar registered
nonprofit organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of
community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
CURVE LOT  see Lot, Curve.
D
DATE OF SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION  shall mean the date certified by the local
building inspector or zoning administrator when the work, or a designated
portion thereof is sufficiently complete, so the owner may occupy the work or
designated portion thereof for the use for which it is intended.
DECIDUOUS SCREEN  shall mean landscape material consisting of plants which lose
their leaves in winter and eventually will grow and be maintained at six feet
in height, at least.
DECK  shall mean a flat, floored, roofless structure. Roofless does not include
a roll-out awning or a canopy provided that all the vertical sides, other than
the residential structure are open.
DENSITY  shall mean the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENTENTION BASIN  shall mean a facility for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff.
DENTENTION FACILITY  shall mean a publicly or privately operated or contracted
use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to
isolate those individuals from the community.
DEVELOPER  shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is
responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit,
conditional use permit or sign permit.
DEVELOPMENT  shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations for
which necessary permits may be required.
DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT PLAN  see Site Plan.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW  shall mean the review, by the City, of subdivision plats,
site plans, rezoning requests, or permit review.
DISTRICT OR ZONE  shall mean a section or sections of the Zoning Area for which
uniform regulations governing the use of land, the height, use, area, size, and
intensity of use of buildings, land, and open spaces are established.
DOG KENNEL  see Kennel, Boarding or Training, and Kennel, Commercial.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS  see Household Pet.
DOWNZONING  shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a less
intensive or more restrictive district, such as from commercial district to
residential district or from a multiple family residential district to single
family residential district.
DRAINAGEWAY  shall mean any depression two feet or more below the surrounding
land serving to give direction to a current of water less than nine months of
the year, having a bed and well-defined banks; provided, that when there is
doubt as to whether a depression is a watercourse or drainageway, it shall be
presumed to be a watercourse.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY  shall mean an establishment where customers can be served
without leaving the confinement of their vehicle.
DRIVEWAY  shall mean any vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading
facility.
DUMP  shall mean a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding by
burial, incineration, or by any other means for any garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. Such use shall not
involve any industrial or commercial process.
DUPLEX  see Dwelling, Two Family.
DWELLING  shall mean any building or portion thereof, which is designed and
used exclusively for single family residential purposes, excluding mobile
homes.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME  shall mean a factory-built structure which is to
be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped
with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a
permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame
any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in
compliance with standards promulgated by the HUD.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME  shall mean any prefabricated structure, composed of one
or more parts, used for living and sleeping purposes, shipped or moved in
essentially a complete condition and mounted on wheels, skids or rollers, jacks
blocks, horses, skirting or a permanent or temporary foundation or any
prefabricated structure which has been or reasonably can be equipped with
wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place,
whether by motor power or other means. The term mobile home shall include
trailer home and camp car, but the definition shall not apply to any vehicle
lawfully operated upon fixed rails.
   a)   Permanently Attached: Attached to real estate in such a way as to
require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent continuous
foundation or structural change in such mobile home in order to relocate it on
another site in accordance to manufacturers recommendations.
   b)   Permanent Foundation: Base on which building rests, to be constructed
from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be
placed a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
DWELLING, MODULAR  shall mean any dwelling whose construction consists entirely
of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not
fabricated on the final site for the dwelling unit, which units are movable or
portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities,
pursuant to the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, as
set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 71-1557 to 71- 1568.01 (Cum.Supp.2000).
Further, such dwelling must also meet or be equivalent to the construction
criteria set forth in the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units
Act. Such dwelling is considered to be a conventional type single-family
dwelling, and those that do not meet the above criteria shall be considered a
mobile home.
DWELLING, MODULAR (HOME SEAL)  shall mean a device or insignia issued by the
Nebraska Department of Health to be displayed on the exterior of the modular
housing unit to evidence compliance with departmental standards.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE  shall mean a building or buildings designed and used for
occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other,
and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
DWELLING, SEASONAL  shall mean a dwelling designed and used as a temporary
residence and occupied less than six months in each year.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY  shall mean a building having accommodations for or
occupied exclusively by one family, which meets all the following standards.
This definition applies to all “double-wide” mobile or manufactured homes that
meet the following standards.
   a)   The home shall have no less than 800 square feet of floor area, above
grade, for single story construction;
   b)   The home shall have no less than a 18 feet exterior width;
   c)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-
half inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
   d)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with existing site-built, single family residences;
   e)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or simulates
asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock. However, standing seam roofs are
allowable provided it’s non-reflective;
   f)   The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and have
wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed, and
   g)   The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are uniformly
applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning district.
   h)   The home shall have a permanent foundation, to be constructed from
either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed
a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED  shall mean a portion of a residential
building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family, and
which is located on a separate lot of record apart from the remaining portions
of the building. Each such dwelling may be sold independently of other
portions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-86.png]
 
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE  shall mean a one-family dwelling in a row of at least two
such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more vertical wall(s).
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY  shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for
the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having
separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
DWELLING UNIT shall mean one or more rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease
on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other
rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, SPECIAL TYPES shall mean any dwelling type consisting of single-
family detached; single-family attached, multi-family, mobile home that does
not meet the typical construction style of traditional stick framed structures.
   1.   Cargo Container Dwelling: A dwelling unit constructed of one or more
new or used cargo containers used for multi-modal shipping and meeting the
definition of dwelling unit above.
   2.   Grain Bin Dwelling Unit : A dwelling unit constructed of one or more
grain bins, new or used meeting the definition of Dwelling Unit above.
   3.   Quonset home : A home constructed beneath and in a structure referred
to as a Quonset.
   4.   Shouse : A structure that combines a dwelling space with a shop or
garage is primarily used as a dwelling. Shouses are often made of steel or
wood, and can be built in a variety of sizes and designs. A dwelling where the
garage square footage exceeds the dwelling square footage. Also known as a
Barndominium. See
9.22.06.
   5.   Tiny House : A structure containing living spaces including sleeping
and kitchen areas which measure 500 square feet or less in area. Tiny houses
can be either portable, on wheels similar to a recreational vehicle, or on a
permanent foundation.
   6.   Tree House : A dwelling unit where the primary structure of the unit is
based on one or more tree clusters.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-88.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-90.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-92.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-94.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-96.png]
Cargo Container Apartment                 Cargo Container Home                      Cargo Container Home                      Grain Bin Home                            Grain Bin Home
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-98.png]                      IMAGES/0-0-0-100.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-102.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-104.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-106.png]
Shouse                                    Shouse                                    Grain Elevator Apartment                  Tiny House                                Tiny House
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/ fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-108.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-110.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-112.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-114.png]                     IMAGES/0-0-0-116.png]
Tree House                                Tree House                                Quonset home                              Quonset home                              Quonset home
E
EASEMENT  shall mean a grant, made by a property owner, to the use of his or
her land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific purposes, such
as access to another property or the construction of utilities, drainage ways
or roadways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-118.png]
 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION  shall mean a public or nonprofit institution or
facility which conducts regular academic instruction at preschool,
kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and collegiate levels, including graduate
schools, universities, junior colleges, trade schools, nonprofit research
institutions and religious institutions. Such institutions must either: (1)
Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards established by
the State Board of Education; or (2) Confer degrees as a college or university
or undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) Conduct research; or (4) Give
religious instruction. Private schools, academies, or institutes incorporated
or otherwise, which operate for a profit, and commercial or private trade
schools are not included in this definition.
EFFECTIVE DATE  shall mean the date that this chapter shall have been adopted,
amended, or the date land areas became subject to the regulations contained in
this chapter as a result of such adoption or amendment.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SUBSTATION  shall mean an electric substation with a
primary voltage of less than 161 KV, with distribution circuits served
therefrom.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION SUBSTATION  shall mean an electric transformation or
switching station with a primary voltage of more than 161 KV without
distribution circuits served therefrom.
ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION  shall mean an institution supported by charity and
designed to assist persons, for example; those recovering from mental or
emotional illness.
EMERGENCY SHELTER MISSION  shall mean a facility which provides temporary
housing for one or more individuals who are indigent, needy, homeless or
transient.
EMERGENCY RESIDENTIAL SERVICES  shall mean a facility or use of a building to
provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including
emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse, or
physical beatings.
ENCLOSED TRAILER, also known as a cargo trailer, shall mean a device that is
towed by a motor vehicle and has a roof and walls to protect the items being
hauled and stored.
ENCROACHMENT  shall mean an obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion
into a delineated floodway, right-of-way, or adjacent property.
ENLARGEMENT  shall mean the expansion of a building, structure, or use in
volume, size, area, height, length, width, depth, capacity, ground coverage, or
in number.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SALES  shall mean the sale or rental of trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar
heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing.
Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and
mobile home sales establishments.
EQUIPMENT REPAIR SERVICES  shall mean the Repair of trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment.
Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair
services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and
fender repair services.
ERECTED  shall mean constructed upon or moved onto a site.
ETHANOL PLANT  shall mean a facility where the conversion of biomass into an
alcohol fuel product is undertaken. The facility also includes the processing
of certain by-products resulting from the fermentation and distillation
process.
EVERGREEN OR CONIFEROUS SCREEN  shall mean landscape material consisting of
plants which retain leaves or needles throughout the year which eventually will
grow and be maintained at six feet in height, at least.
EXISTING AND LAWFUL  shall mean the use of a building, structure, or land was
in actual existence, operation, and use, as compared to the use being proposed,
contemplated, applied for, or in the process or being constructed or remodeled.
In addition, the use must have been permitted, authorized, or allowed by law or
any other applicable regulation prior to the enactment of a zoning regulation
when first adopted or permitted, authorized or allowed by the previous zoning
regulation prior to the adoption of an amendment to that zoning regulation.
EXPRESSWAY  shall mean a street or road that provides fast and efficient
movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic between areas and does not
provide direct access to property.
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION  shall mean the area beyond the corporate limits
of the City, in which the State has granted the City the power to exercise
zoning jurisdiction and building regulations.
F
FAÇADE  shall mean the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from
the building’s exterior.
FACTORY  shall mean a structure or plant within which something is made or
manufactured from raw or partly wrought materials into forms suitable for use.
FAMILY  shall mean one or more persons living together and sharing common
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities within an individual housing
unit, no more than 4 of whom may be unrelated. The following persons shall be
considered related for the purpose of this title:
   1.   Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption;
   2.   Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption;
   3.   Not more than eight persons under 19 years of age, residing in a foster
house licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska.
   4.   Not more than eight persons 19 years of age or older residing with a
family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the
State of Nebraska.
   5.   Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I  shall mean a child care operation in the provider’s
place of residence which serves between four and eight children at any one
time. A Family Child Care Home I provider may be approved to serve no more than
two additional school-age children during non-school hours. In addition to
these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirement of the State of
Nebraska.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME II  shall mean a child care operation either in the
provider’s place of residence or a site other than the residence, serving
twelve or fewer children at any one time. In addition to these regulations, a
Child Care Home shall meet requirement of the State of Nebraska.
FARM  an area containing at least 20 acres or more which is used for growing or
storage of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, and grain, as
well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, and
which produces 1,000 dollars or more per year of farms products raised on the
premises. The term farming includes the operating of such area for one or more
of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the
produce and the feeding of livestock as hereinafter prescribed provided such
accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals.
FARMER’S MARKET  shall mean an occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or in a structure where groups of sellers offer for sale to the public
such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts
items, and food and beverages (but not to include second hand goods) dispensed
from booths located on-site.
FEDERAL  shall mean the federal government of the United States of America.
FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL  shall mean a lot or building or combination of lots and
buildings intended to be used for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or
holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which
manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a
vegetation cover cannot be maintained in the enclosure. This definition does
not include the pasturing of livestock.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-120.png]
 
FENCE  shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary
above ground.
FENCE, INVISIBLE  shall mean an electronic pet containment system that includes
the burying of wire and the use of transmitters for complete enclosure of a
yard or creating sectional areas within a yard.
FENCE, OPEN  shall mean a fence, including gates, which has 50 percent or more
of the surface area in open spaces, which affords direct views through the
fence.
FENCE, SOLID  shall mean any fence, which does not qualify as an open fence.
FINANCIAL SERVICES  shall mean the provision of financial and banking services
to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are
provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations,
savings banks, and loan companies.
FIREWORKS  shall mean any substance or combination of substances or articles
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible and audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which
explosives other than paper caps are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky
rockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks containing
any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing
any explosive substance. Nothing in this regulation shall be construed as
applying to tot paper caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain (16.20
milligrams) of explosive composition per cap.
FIREWORKS STAND  shall mean any tent used for the retail sale of fireworks, on
a temporary basis.
FIREWORKS STORAGE  shall mean any permanent building and/or structure where
fireworks are stored for any portion of a year provided there is no retail
sales made from the storage location. Said storage facility may also be used
for the delivery and distribution of fireworks on a wholesale basis.
FLOOD  shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal
waters, or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOODPLAIN  shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
FLOOD PROOFING  shall mean any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY  shall mean the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FLOOR AREA  shall mean the square feet of floor space within the outside line
of the walls, including the total of all space on all floors of the building.
Floor area shall not include porches, garages, or spaces in a basement, cellar,
or attic.
FOOD SALES  shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical
uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy
shops.
FOOD SALES (LIMITED)  shall mean food sales establishments occupying 10,000
square feet or less space.
FOOD SALES (GENERAL)  shall mean food sales establishments occupying more than
10,000 square feet of space; typically, a supermarket.
FOUNDATION  shall mean that part of a building or wall, wholly or partly below
grade, that constitutes a structural base for such building or wall.
FREESTANDING CANOPY  shall mean a permanent, freestanding, unenclosed roof
structure, typical of gas stations and financial institutions, designed to
provide patrons shelter from the elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-122.png]
 
FRONTAGE  shall mean that portion of a parcel of property that abuts a
dedicated public street or highway.
G
GARAGE, PRIVATE  shall mean a detached accessory building up to and including
1,000 s.f., including carports, on the same lot as a dwelling, used to house
vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling. Private garages shall not have any
sort of repair service facilities or function as a location where motor
vehicles are kept for rental or sale.
GARAGE, PUBLIC  shall mean any garage other than a private garage designed or
used for equipment, repairing, hiring, servicing, selling, or storing motor
driven vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR  shall mean a building designed and used for the storage, care,
repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major
mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. Also, see Service Station.
GARAGE, STORAGE  shall mean a detached accessory building over 1,000 s.f., on
the same lot as a dwelling, used to house vehicles, recreational vehicles, and
other consumables owned by the occupants of the dwelling.
GARBAGE  shall mean any waste food material of an animal or vegetable nature,
including that which may be used for the fattening of livestock.
GATED COMMUNITY  shall mean a residential area containing more than four lots
in which access to the subdivision streets are restricted by the use of
guardhouse, gate, or electronic arm, to which residents may gain entry by using
electronic cards, identification stickers, codes, or remote control devices.
GENERAL OFFICES  shall mean the Use of a site for business, professional, or
administrative offices. Typical uses include real estate, insurance,
management, travel, or other business offices; organization and association
offices; banks or financial offices; or professional offices.
GRADE  shall mean the horizontal elevation of the finished surface of ground,
paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line.
   1.   For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the street.
   2.   For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall
be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street.
   3.   For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the
average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the building.
GRAPHIC ELEMENT  shall mean a letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia,
or other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-124.png]
 
GREENHOUSE  shall mean a building or premises used for growing plants,
preparing floral arrangements for off-site delivery to customers, cold storage
of flowers or dry storage of materials used for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL  shall mean a building constructed primarily of
glass, plastic or similar material in which temperature and humidity can be
controlled for the cultivation of fruit, herbs, flowers, vegetables or other
plants intended for private use and not for sale.
GREENWAY  shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation;
usually a strip of land set-aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridle path, or
other similar access-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-126.png]
 
GROSS FLOOR AREA  shall mean the total enclosed area of all floors of a
building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls. This
definition excludes the areas of basements, elevator shafts, airspaces above
atriums, and enclosed off- street parking and loading areas serving a principal
use.
GROUNDCOVER  shall mean plant material used in landscaping which remains less
than 12 inches in height at maturity.
GROUNDWATER  shall mean water naturally occurring beneath the surface of the
ground that fills available openings in the rock or soil materials such that
they may be considered saturated.
GROUP CARE HOME  shall mean a home, which is operated under the auspices of an
organization which is responsible for providing social services,
administration, direction, and control for the home which is designed to
provide 24-hour care for individuals in a residential setting.
GROUP HOME  shall mean a dwelling with resident staff shared by four or more
handicapped persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a
long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care,
education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the
primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in
order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term "handicapped"
shall mean having: (1) A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person
is incapable of living independently; or (2) A record of having such an
impairment; (3) being regarded as having such impairment.
GROUP HOUSING  shall mean two or more separate buildings on a lot, each
containing one or more dwelling units.
GUEST ROOM  shall mean a room, which is designed to be occupied by one or more
guests for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including
dormitories.
H
HALF-STORY  shall mean a story under a sloped roof which has the intersection
of the roof line and exterior wall face not more than three feet above the
floor of such story.
HALFWAY HOUSE  shall mean a licensed home for individuals on release from more
restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, living together as a single housekeeping
unit, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to
mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.
HARD SURFACED  shall mean any surface used for movement of vehicular and/or
pedestrians which is properly designed and paved with either concrete, asphalt,
or masonry brick or pavers.
HARMONY  shall mean a quality that represents an appropriate and congruent
arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and
landscape elements.
HAZARDOUS WASTE  shall mean any discarded material, refuse, or waste products,
in solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous form, that cannot be disposed of
through routine waste management techniques because they pose a present or
potential threat to human health, or to other living organisms, because of
their biological, chemical, or physical properties.
HEALTH CLUB  shall mean a privately-owned facility operated for profit, such as
gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, recreational clubs, reducing salons,
and weight control establishments.
HEALTH RECREATION FACILITY  shall mean an indoor or outdoor facility including
uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, whirlpool spa and/
or sauna and pro shop.
HEDGE  shall mean a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape
material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER  shall mean a facility of more than 30,000 square feet
of gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware
lines, such as tools, builders’ hardware, paint, glass, housewares, household
appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery.
HOME OCCUPATION  shall mean an “in-home” or “home based” or entrepreneurial
business operating from a residential dwelling within Valley. Any portion of a
residential property, including a home phone, computer, mailing address, etc.,
used in deriving income or sales, will require a resident to obtain a Home
Occupation Permit. Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers are not considered a
Home Occupation.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION  shall mean a private, nonprofit corporation or
association of homeowners of properties in a fixed area, established for the
purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining various common properties and
facilities.
HORTICULTURE  shall mean the growing of horticultural and floricultural
specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or
landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under
certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and
greenhouses.
HOSPICE  shall mean a facility serving as a medical and residential facility
for end of life treatment, providing inpatient services and support services
for families of the residents and patients.
HOTEL  shall mean a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings,
offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public
and providing services associated with restaurants, meeting rooms, and
recreational facilities. The word "hotel" includes but is not limited to motel,
inn, automobile court, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist court, and
motor hotel.
HOUSEHOLD PET  shall mean an animal that is customarily kept for personal use
or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but not be limited to
domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, fish, and rodents.
I
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE  shall mean the total horizontal area of all buildings,
roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any
other site improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of the site to
absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface water area of
pools is excluded from this definition.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE  shall mean a surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material making the surface highly resistant to infiltration by
water, such as compacted sand, rock, gravel, or clay and conventionally
surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and driveways.
INCIDENTAL USE  shall mean a use, which is subordinate to the main use of a
premise.
INDUSTRIAL USES  shall mean the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction
or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment
thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance
thereof, and any storage facilities operated in conjunction with an industrial
use or for a fee, including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses,
wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.
INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL  shall mean enterprises engaged in the processing,
manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of
materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without
noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property
lines.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY  shall mean enterprises involved in the basic processing and
manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with noticeable
noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a
use or process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially or
actually hazardous, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other commonly
recognized hazardous materials.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT  shall mean establishments engaged in the manufacture or
processing of finished products from previously prepared materials, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products,
and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These establishments are
characterized by having no major external environmental effects across property
lines and include no unscreened or unenclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses
include commercial bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink
bottling, apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print
shops and publishing houses.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT  shall mean the construction of a building or structure on a
vacant parcel located in a predominantly built up area.
INFILL SITE  shall mean any vacant lot, parcel or tract of land within
developed areas of the City and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire
protection have already been constructed or are provided. a predominately built
up area.
INFRASTRUCTURE  shall mean facilities and services needed to sustain industry,
residential, commercial, and all other land-use activities, including water
lines, sewer lines, and other utilities, streets and roads, communications, and
public facilities such as fire stations, parks, schools, etc.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE  shall mean any motor vehicle which: (1) Does not have
a current state license plate; or, (2) Which is disassembled or wrecked in part
or in whole, or is unable to move under its own power; or, (3) is not equipped
as required by Nebraska State Law for operation upon streets or highways. A
vehicle that is wholly or partially dismantled shall not be considered
inoperable when said vehicle is inside a completely enclosed building.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING  shall mean a public and public/private group use of a
nonprofit nature, typically engaged in public service (i.e. houses of worship,
nonprofit cultural centers, charitable organizations).
INTENSITY  shall mean the degree to which land is used referring to the levels
of concentration or activity in uses ranging from uses of low intensity being
agricultural and residential to uses of highest intensity being heavy
industrial uses. High intensity uses are normally uses that generate
concentrations of vehicular traffic and daytime population and are less
compatible with lower intensity uses.
INTENT AND PURPOSE  shall mean that the Commission and Council by the adoption
of this Regulation, have made a finding that the health, safety, and welfare of
the Community will be served by creation of the District and by the regulations
prescribed therein.
J
JUNK  shall be any worn-out, cast-off, old, or discarded articles of scrap,
copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, and other
old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
JUNK YARD  shall mean any lot, land parcel, building, or structure or part
thereof for storage, collection, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of
machinery, farm machinery, and including motor vehicles, parts and equipment
result from dismantling or wrecking, or keeping of junk, including scrap metals
or other scrap materials, with no burning permitted. For motor vehicles, see
"Automobile Wrecking Yard".
K
KENNEL, BOARDING, or TRAINING  shall mean a use on any lot or premises in which
dogs, cats or any other household pets, at least four months of age, are
raised, boarded, bred, or trained.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL  shall mean an establishment where three or more dogs or
cats, or any combination thereof, other household pets, or non-farm/non-
domestic animals at least four months of age, excluding vicious animals, are
raised, bred, boarded, trained, groomed or sold as a business
KENNEL, PRIVATE  shall mean an establishment where three or more dogs or cats,
or combination thereof, other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic animals
at least four months of age, excluding vicious animals, are raised, bred, or
boarded
L
LAGOON  shall mean a wastewater treatment facility that is a shallow,
artificial pond where sunlight, bacterial action, and oxygen interact to
restore wastewater to a reasonable state of purity. This includes both human
and livestock wastes. All lagoons shall meet the minimum design criteria
established by the NDEQ and the NHHS. All lagoons shall have the proper permits
approved prior to starting construction.
LANDFILL, CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL  shall mean the use of a site as a depository
for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown
under conditions normally associated with land disposal operations. Typical
disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick,
lumber, roofing materials and ceramic tile.
LANDFILL, SOLID WASTE  see Sanitary Landfill
LANDSCAPE  shall mean plant materials, topography, and other natural physical
elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
LANDSCAPED AREA  shall mean the area within the boundaries of a given lot, site
or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including but not
limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant
materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that the appearance of
the area is primarily landscaped.
   1.   Perimeter Landscaped Area: Any required landscaped area that adjoins
the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common development.
   2.   Interior Landscaped Area: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive
of required perimeter landscaping.
LANDSCAPING  shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in
conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued
maintenance thereof.
LARGE BOX RETAIL  shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user that occupies
no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. These uses typically
include: membership wholesale clubs emphasizing in large bulk sales, discount
stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, especially warehouse style point of sale
concepts and departments.
LAUNDRY, SELF SERVICE  shall mean an establishment that provides home-type
washing, drying, and/or ironing facilities for customers on the premises.
LIFE CARE FACILITY  shall mean a facility for the transitional residency of the
elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to
congregate apartment living where residents share common meals, culminating in
full health, and continuing care nursing home facility. Also, see Congregate
Housing.
LIGHT CUT-OFF ANGLE  shall mean an angle from a vertical, extending downward
from luminaries, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination
outward at the ground plane.
LIMITS OF GRADING  shall mean the outermost edge of the area in which the
existing topography is to be altered by cutting and/or filling.
LIQUID MANURE  shall mean that type of livestock waste that is in a liquefied
state, collected in manure pits or lagoons in order to be sprayed/applied on
the surface or injected beneath the surface.
LIQUID MANURE STORAGE PITS  shall mean earthen, concrete or lined pits located
wholly or partially beneath a semi or totally housed (ECH) livestock animal
feeding operation or at some removed location used to collect waste production.
LIQUID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  shall mean a system where the majority of the
animal waste in the lots, pens and/or buildings of a LFO is removed by flushing
out such waste with water.
LIQUOR SALES  shall mean Establishments or places of business engaged in retail
sale for off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include
liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or wine for
off-site consumption.
LIVESTOCK  shall mean cattle, buffalo, horses, sheep, goats, swine, poultry,
and other animals or fowl, which are being produced primarily for use as food
or food products for human consumption.
LIVESTOCK FEEDING OPERATION (LFO)  shall mean any farming operation in a
confined area where grazing is not possible, and where the confined area is for
more than six months in any one calendar year, and where the number of animals
so maintained exceeds 1,000 Animal Units as defined below. The confined area of
the LFO shall include the pens, corrals, sheds, buildings, feed storage areas,
waste disposal ponds, and related facilities. Such facilities shall be
constructed and operated in conformance with applicable county, state, and
federal regulations. Two or more LFO's under common ownership are deemed to be
a single LFO if they are adjacent to each other and utilize a common area of
system for the disposal of livestock wastes.
LIVESTOCK LAGOON  (see “Waste Handling System”)
LIVESTOCK PASTURING OPERATION  shall mean any livestock operation that uses
pasture, as defined under this regulation, as the primary source of feed for
the animals.
LIVESTOCK SALES  shall mean the use of a site for the temporary confinement and
exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sale barns.
LIVESTOCK SALES YARD  shall mean an enclosure or structure designed or used for
holding livestock for purposes of sale or transfer by auction, consignment, or
other means.
LIVESTOCK WASTES  shall mean animal and poultry manure including associated
feed losses, bedding, spillage, or overflow from watering systems, wash and
flushing waters, sprinkling waters from livestock cooling, precipitation
polluted by falling on or flowing onto a livestock operation, and other
materials polluted by livestock or their direct product.
LIVESTOCK WASTE CONTROL FACILITIES OR FACILITY OR FACILITIES  (see “Waste
Handling System”)
LOADING AREA/SPACE  shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot
with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a
street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.
LOCAL STREET  shall mean a street or road primarily for service to abutting
properties.
LOGIC OF DESIGN  shall mean accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY  shall mean a facility as defined in Title 15, Chapter
3 Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and NRS Section 71-2017.01.
These facilities include:
   1.   Nursing Facilities;
   2.   Boarding Home;
   3.   Adult Care Home;
   4.   Assisted Living Facility;
   5.   Center for the Developmentally Disabled;
   6.   Group Residence;
   7.   Swing Bed; and
   8.   Adult Day Care.
LOT  shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use
herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required,
that has frontage upon an improved street, and is a part of a recorded
subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the Regulation,
or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-
split or sub- parceling map as filed in the office of the Douglas County
Register of Deeds and abutting at least one improved public street or right-of-
way, two thoroughfare easements, or one improved private road.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-128.png]
 
LOT, CORNER  shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than
135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The setbacks for a
front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, or THROUGH  shall mean a lot having a frontage on two
non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FLAG  shall mean an interior lot, the majority of which has frontage and
access provided by means of a narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR  shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, TRIPLE FRONTAGE  shall mean a lot which is bounded on three sides by a
dedicated street and its associated right-of-way.
LOT AREA  shall mean the total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot
lines of a lot.
LOT COVERAGE  shall mean the portion of a lot or building site which is
occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and
swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended
for human occupancy or not.
LOT DEPTH  shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE  shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible
street right-of-way other than an alley or an improved county road. For the
purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets or roads shall be considered frontage.
LOT LINE  shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT  shall mean the property line abutting a street.
LOT LINE, REAR  shall mean a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite
and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE  shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING  shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that
required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created
prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements
were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the
office of the Merrick County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public
road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the
effective date of this Regulation.
LOT OF RECORD  shall mean a lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been
recorded in the records of the Merrick County Register of Deeds at the time of
the passage of a regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot
is located.
LOT WIDTH  shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot
line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.
M
MANUFACTURED HOME  see Dwelling, Manufactured Home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK  shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that
has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing used or
to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufacture home spaces are not
offered for sale or sold. The term “manufacture home park” does not include
sales lots on which new or used manufactured homes are parked for the purpose
of storage, inspection, or sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION  shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract or
plot of ground subdivided and used or intended to be used for the purpose of
selling lots for occupancy by manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURING  shall mean the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into new products. Manufacturing uses are usually
described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power
driven machines and materials handling equipment. Assembling component parts of
manufactured products is also considered manufacturing if the new product is
neither a structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending
of material such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors.
Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for
interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct
sale to the domestic consumer.
MANUFACTURING, CUSTOM  shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in the on-
site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures,
involving:
   1.   The use of hand tools, or
   2.   The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding 2 horsepower, or
   3.   A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.
   This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of only
those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom
jewelry manufacturing, and candle making shops.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT  shall mean shall mean any building, room, place, or
establishment other than a regularly licensed and established hospital or
dispensary where non-medical or non-surgical manipulative exercises or devices
are practiced upon the human body manually or otherwise by any person other
than a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist, occupational and/or physical
therapist, chiropractor, or osteopath with or without the use of therapeutic,
electrical, mechanical, or bathing device. Said establishment shall comply with
all state regulations as per §71-1,278 through §71-1,283, Nebr. R.R.S., 1943
MASTER FEE SCHEDULE  shall mean a fee schedule maintained by the City of Valley
and passed, and amended periodically, which establishes the required fees to be
collected for specific Planning, Zoning, and Subdivision activities.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT  shall mean equipment, devices, and accessories, the use
of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and similar purposes.
MEDICAL OFFICES  shall mean the use of a site for facilities which provide
diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide
prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by
doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners licensed for practice in the State
of Nebraska.
MICRO-DISTILLERY shall mean a distillery located in Nebraska licensed to
distill liquor 10,000 gallons or fewer. Requires micro-distillery license from
the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission.
MINI-STORAGE OR MINI-WAREHOUSE  see Self-Service Storage Facility.
MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES  shall mean structures, other than buildings, visible
from public ways. Examples are memorials, staging, antennas, water tanks and
towers, sheds, shelters, fences, and walls, kennels, and transformers.
MIXED USE  shall mean properties where various uses, such as office,
commercial, institutional, and residential are combined in a single building or
on a single site in an integrated development project with significant
functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design.
MIXED USE BUILDING  shall mean a building or structure that incorporates two or
more use types within a single building or structure, provided that each use
type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning District in which the
building or structure is to be located.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT  shall mean a single development that incorporates
complementary land use types into a single development.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT  shall mean a temporary food service establishment that is a
vehicle-mounted and is designed to be readily movable.
MOBILE HOME  see Dwelling, Mobile Home.
MOBILE HOME PARK  shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that has
been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured or mobile housing
used or to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured or mobile home
spaces are not offered for sale or sold. The terms "manufactured home park" or
“mobile home park” do not include sales lots on which new or used manufactured
or mobile homes are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection, or sale.
The terms "manufactured home park" or “mobile home park” shall include the term
“trailer camp”, as defined in the Valley Code.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION  shall mean a parcel of land that has been subdivided
and used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling lots for occupancy
by manufactured or mobile homes.
MONOTONY  shall mean repetitive sameness, lacking variety and variation, and or
reiteration.
MOTEL  see Hotel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL  shall mean a building or area in which freight brought
by motor truck is received, assembled or stored and dispatched for routing by
motor truck which may include motor truck storage.
MOTOR VEHICLE  shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon
rails, except self-propelled wheel Mayors.
N
NEBRASKA REVISED REISSUED STATUTES  shall mean the 1943 and the abbreviated
term Nebr. R. R. S., 1943 are one and the same.
NIGHTCLUB  shall mean a commercial establishment dispensing beverages for
consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment
is provided. Also, see Bar.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM  shall mean any public water supply system
that is not a community water supply system.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING/DEVELOPMENT  shall mean a building or portion thereof
which was lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently
established zoning or zoning regulations.
NONCONFORMING LOT  shall mean a lot which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of
such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of
the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-
conforming characteristics of the lot.
NONCONFORMING SIGN  shall mean a sign that was legally erected prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by
reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning ordinance.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE  shall mean a structure which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by
reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would
increase the nonconforming characteristics of the structure.
NONCONFORMING USE  shall mean any use existing and lawful at the time of
adoption of these regulations occupying a building, structure or land but is no
longer allowed.
NON-FARM BUILDINGS  shall mean all buildings except those buildings utilized
for agricultural purposes on a farm
NUISANCE  shall mean anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of
property, endangers personal health or safety, or is offensive to the senses
such as noise, dust, odor, smoke, gas, pollution, congestion, lighting, and
litter.
NURSERY  shall mean the use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and
growth of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like from seed or stock, and
the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and
the like purchased elsewhere and transplanted into the soil of the premises. In
connection with the sale of plants, such fungicides, insecticides, chemicals,
peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to be used in
preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.
NURSING HOMES OR CONVALESCENT HOMES  shall mean an institution or agency
licensed by the State of Nebraska for the reception, board, care, or treatment
of three or more unrelated individuals, but not including facilities for the
care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.
O
OFFICE  shall mean a building or a portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving, primarily, administrative, professional, or clerical
operations.
OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP  shall mean a map delineating the boundaries of
zoning districts which, along with the zoning text, is officially adopted by
the Valley City Council.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA  shall mean all off street areas and spaces designed,
used, required, or intended to be used for parking, including driveways or
access ways in and to such areas.
OPEN LOTS  shall mean pens or similar concentrated areas, including small shed-
type areas or open-front buildings, with dirt, or concrete (or paved or hard)
surfaces, wherein animals or poultry are substantially or entirely exposed to
the outside environment except for possible small portions affording some
protection by windbreaks or small shed-type areas.
OPEN SPACE  shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment,
exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking
areas, structures, and buildings.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON  shall mean a separate and distinct area set aside as open
space within or related to a development, and not on individually owned lots or
dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use
or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Rights-of-way, private
streets, driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for
vehicular use or required yards shall not be included as common open space.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING  see Advertising Structure and Sign.
OUTDOOR STORAGE  shall mean the storage of materials, parts, or products that
are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding three days.
OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS  shall mean an “outdoor storage container” is
defined as a fully enclosed, detached, and self-supporting structure, by itself
incapable of motion or movement and not exceeding 8 feet in width, 12 feet in
height, and 40 feet in length or a total enclosed floor area of 320 square
feet. The unit must be manufactured/assembled off-site and transportable, by
means other than its own, to a location where it is set into place on a graded
surface of concrete, asphalt, or gravel and not upon a foundation or wheels. It
shall be made of metal or a similar stable, durable, and acceptable material
and shall not include a foundation, electricity, plumbing, or other mechanical
systems as part of its assembly or use.
OUTLOT  shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting,
which is intended as open space or other designated use.
OVERLAY DISTRICT  shall mean a district in which additional requirements are
imposed upon a use, in conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The
original zoning district designation does not change.
OWNER  shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land.
P
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE  shall mean an establishment in which alcoholic beverages
in original containers are sold for consumption off the premises.
PAINTBALL  shall mean all guns and other devices used for the purpose of firing
pellets containing a latex paint at a person or target.
PAINTBALL COURSE  shall mean a commercial recreational park containing obstacle
courses for the purpose of staging paintball battles. Said facility generally
collects a fee, either as membership or on a visit by visit basis that allows
individuals to participate in paintball activities.
PARCEL  shall mean a lot or a contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, which may be considered as a unit for purposes of
development.
PARK  shall mean any public or private land available for recreational,
educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE  shall mean an area, other than a street, used for the
parking of automotive vehicles capable of moving under their own power and
restricted from general public use.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC  shall mean an area, other than a private parking area or
street used for the parking of vehicles capable of moving under their own
power, either free or for remuneration.
PARKING LOT  shall mean an area consisting of one or more parking spaces for
motor vehicles together with a driveway connecting the parking area with a
street or alley and permitting ingress and egress for motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE  shall mean an area, other than a street or alley,
reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having a dimension not
less than nine feet by 20 feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to
afford adequate ingress and egress.
PARKWAY  shall mean an arterial highway with full or partial control of access,
and located within a park or ribbon of park like development.
PAVED  shall mean permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers,
or asphalt.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE  shall mean a financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in
compliance with these regulations as well as with approved plans and
specifications of a development.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION  shall mean a base constructed from either poured concrete
or laid masonry rock or brick and placed on a footing located below ground
level to a point below the frost line upon which a building or structure is
permanently attached.
PERMANENT STORAGE  shall mean the long-term storage on-site within an accessory
building or structure.
PERMITTED USE  shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a
zoning district.
PERMANENTLY ATTACHED  shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to
require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or
structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.
PERSON  shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or
combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Valley,
Nebraska.
PERSONAL SERVICES  shall mean uses providing human services exclusively to
private individuals as the ultimate consumer. Personal services shall not be
limited to but including grocery shopping services, tailoring and alterations,
hair salons, spas, nail salons, barber shops, private household services and
temporary personal in-home care.
PET SHOP  shall mean a retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of
domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding
exotic animals and farm animals.
PLANNING COMMISSION  shall mean the Planning Commission of Valley, Nebraska.
PLANT MATERIALS  shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass,
perennials, annuals, and bulbs and other such vegetation.
PLAT  shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description
of individual properties.
POLE BUILDING  shall mean a structure built with no foundation or footings,
using poles embedded directly in the ground as its primary support to hold
metal, plastic, fiberglass or wood covering to form the building.
POLICY  shall mean a statement or document of the Valley, such as the
comprehensive plan, that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making
decisions.
PORCH, UNENCLOSED  shall mean a roofed or unroofed open structure projecting
from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more than
thirty inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with
supporting structure.
POULTRY, COMMERCIAL FEEDING  shall mean a poultry commercial feed lot, whether
the confined feeding operations are enclosed or outdoors.
PREMISES  shall mean a tract of land, consisting of one lot or irregular tract,
or more than one lot or irregular tract, provided such lots or tracts are under
common ownership, contiguous, and used as a single tract. A building or land
within a prescribed area.
PRESCHOOL  shall mean an early childhood program which provides primarily
educational services, where children do not nap and where children are not
served a meal.
PRESERVATION  shall mean the act of protecting an area, parcel of land, or
structure from being changed or modified from the present character to another
that is not representative of a specific period or condition.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE  shall mean the main building or structure on a lot, within
which the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located.
PRINCIPAL USE  shall mean the main use of land or structure, as distinguished
from an accessory use.
PRIVATE WELL  shall mean a well that provides water supply to less than 15
service connections and regularly serves less than 25 individuals.
PROHIBITED USE  shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is
not listed as a permitted use, conditional use or accessory use within a zoning
district.
PROMOTIONAL DEVICE  shall mean any sign intended to be displayed either with or
without a frame, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or other
material, on a fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political
subdivisions, or symbolic flags of any institutions or business shall be
considered a promotional device for the purpose of this definition. Banners,
pennants, inflatable characters, streamers, or fringe-type ribbons or piping
shall be considered as a promotional device.
PROPORTION  shall mean a balanced relationship of parts of a building,
landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole.
PROTECTED ZONE  shall mean all lands that fall outside the buildable areas of a
parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all
areas required as landscaping strips according to the provisions of the Zoning
Regulation.
PUBLIC FACILITY  shall mean any building, location, or structure, owned by a
public entity such as a library, fire station, school, park, and other similar
facilities and uses
PUBLIC USE  shall mean a specified activity or area that either through actual
public ownership or through dedication of easements allows the general public
access and use.
PUBLIC UTILITY  shall mean any business which furnishes the general public
telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas, water and
sewer, or any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject
to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the state or federal
government.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY  shall mean a water supply system designed to provide
public piped water fit for human consumption, if such system has at least 15
service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals. This
definition shall include: (1) Any collection, treatment, storage, or
distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and
used primarily in connection with such system; and (2) Any collection or
pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily
in the connection with such system.
Q
QUARRY  shall mean an open pit from which building stone, sand, gravel,
mineral, or fill is taken to be processed for commercial purposes.
QUARRY REHABILITATION  shall mean providing slopes to be covered with a layer
of soil and revegetated where practical. It applies to the rehabilitation of
all kinds of sand, gravel, and rock excavations to obtain fill or construction
materials and from which no further removal of materials is intended, as well
as to resource extraction. Rehabilitation is intended to minimize the hazardous
and unsightly nature of abandoned pits, and if practical, to return the area to
some productive use.
R
RAILROAD  shall mean the land use including the right-of-way abutting railroad
properties occupied by uses pertinent to the railroad operation and
maintenance, but not including properties owned by the railroad and leased for
use by others.
RECREATION, INDOOR  shall mean a facility for relaxation, diversion, amusement
or entertainment where such activity occurs within a building or structure.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR  shall mean a facility for relaxation, diversion, amusement
or entertainment in which some or all of the activities occur on the exterior
but within the property of the facility.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY  shall mean facilities for the use by the public for
passive and active recreation including tennis, handball, racquetball,
basketball, track and field, jogging, baseball, soccer, skating, swimming, or
golf. This shall include country clubs and athletic clubs, but not facilities
accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests, nor arenas
or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. In
addition, recreational facilities shall mean museums, amphitheaters, race
tracks (including all motor-powered vehicles) and wildlife conservation areas
(used for public viewing), and theme parks.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV)  shall mean a vehicular unit primarily designed as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use having either
its own power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle.
Recreational vehicle includes motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, camping
trailer, and fifth wheel.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK  shall mean a tract of land upon which two or
more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living
quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers, vacationers, or
travelers.
RECYCLING CENTER  shall mean a building in which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to
manufacture new products. The facility is not junkyard.
RECYCLING COLLECTION  shall mean a collection point for small refuse items,
such as bottles and newspapers, located either in a container or small
structure.
RECYCLING PROCESSING  shall mean any site which is used for the processing of
any postconsumer, nondurable goods including, but not limited to glass,
plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities.
REDEVELOPMENT  shall mean the act of preserving and/or rehabilitating existing
buildings. In extreme cases, a building or structure could be demolished for
the purpose of a new use or building.
REINSPECTION FEE  shall mean any fee charged for an inspection other than the
initial inspection when required work has not or was not completed and results
in additional trips to the site by the inspector or agent of the City.
REMOTE PARKING  shall mean a supply of off-street parking at a location not on
the site of a given development.
RENEWABLE ENERGY  shall mean energy sources including wind, solar power,
biomass, and hydropower, that can be regenerated and that is much less
polluting than nuclear or fossil fuels.
RENEWABLE RESOURCE  shall mean a natural resource that is able to regenerate,
either by itself or with human assistance, over a short to moderate time
period, including food crops and trees.
RESIDENCE  shall mean a building used, designed, or intended to be used as a
home or dwelling place for one or more families.
RESTAURANT  shall mean a public eating establishment operated for profit at
which the primary function is the preparation and serving of food primarily to
persons seated within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN  shall mean a restaurant establishment that has the
facilities to serve prepared food and/or beverages to customers seated within
motor vehicles for consumption either on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT, ENTERTAINMENT  shall mean a restaurant establishment where food and
drink are prepared, served, and consumed, within a building or structure that
integrally includes electronic and mechanical games of skill, simulation, and
virtual reality, play areas, video arcades or similar uses, billiards, and
other forms of amusement.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD   shall mean an establishment whose principal business is
the sale of food and/or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for
consumption either within the establishment, for carryout, or drive-in; and
where food and/or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, or other
disposable containers.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION  shall mean a use involving on-site extraction of surface
or subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding the grading and
removal of dirt. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel
operations, mining.
RETAIL SALES  shall mean establishments engaged in selling of goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption.
RETAIL SERVICES  shall mean establishments engaged in selling of goods or
merchandise including household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs,
cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty
items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel
jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household
electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home
furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint
and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating
services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and
automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).
RETAIL SERVICES, GENERAL  shall mean establishments providing retail services,
occupying facilities of more than 5,000 square feet for any single
establishment or more than 10,000 square feet for a multi-tenant facility.
Typical establishments provide for general purpose retailing oriented to Valley
and its immediate vicinity.
RETAIL SERVICES, LIMITED  shall mean establishments providing retail services,
occupying facilities of 5,000 square feet or less for any single establishment
or 10,000 square feet or less for a multi-tenant facility. Typical
establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to Valley
and a local market.
RETENTION BASIN  shall mean a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent
storage of stormwater runoff.
RETIREMENT RESIDENCE  shall mean a building or group of buildings which provide
residential facilities for more than four residents of at least sixty-two years
of age, or households headed by a householder of at least sixty-two years of
age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential building types
and may also provide support services to residents, including but not limited
to food service, general health supervision, medication services, housekeeping
services, personal services, recreation facilities, and transportation
services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in
independent units or meal service in one or more common areas. Retirement
residences may include additional health care supervision or nursing care.
REVERSE SPOT ZONING  shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small
tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and
that uniquely burdens an individual owner largely to secure some public
benefit. Reverse spot zoning usually results from downzoning a tract of land to
a less intensive use classification than that imposed on nearby properties.
REZONING  shall mean an amendment to or change in the zoning regulations either
to the text or map or both.
REZONING, PIECEMEAL  shall mean the zoning reclassification of individual lots
resulting in uncertainty in the future compatible development of the area.
RIGHT-OF-WAY  shall mean a strip of land, generally linear, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a system that conveys people, traffic, fluids,
utilities, or energy from one point to another. Rights-of-way may include
streets and roads, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails, railroads or
fixed guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water
mains, or sewer mains.
ROAD, PRIVATE  shall mean a way, other than driveways, open to vehicular
ingress and egress established for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties.
Also, see Right-of-way and Street.
ROAD, PUBLIC  shall mean all public rights-of-way reserved or dedicated for
street or road traffic. Also, see Right-of-Way and Street.
ROOM  shall mean an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit,
excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways, and service porches.
S
SALVAGE SERVICES  shall mean places of business engaged in the storage, sale,
dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not
intended for reuse in their original forms.
SAND OR GRAVEL PIT shall mean land used for the extraction of sand and/or
gravel for public and/or commercial use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-130.png]
 
SANITARY LANDFILL shall mean a type of operation in which garbage and refuse,
or garbage, or refuse is deposited by a plan on a specified portion of land,
and is compacted by force applied by mechanical equipment, and then is covered
by compacted suitable covering material to a depth of at least six to twelve
inches over individual cells of garbage and/or refuse, which are closed at the
end of each day, and to a depth of at least twenty- four inches over the
finished land fill.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-132.png]
 
SANITARY TRANSFER STATION  shall mean a collection point for temporary storage
of refuse. No processing of refuse would be allowed. The transfer station must
be in conformance with the requirements of all State and Federal Agencies.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA  shall mean a round, parabolic antenna incorporating a
reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the
shape of a shallow dish, or cone and used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves. Also, see Antenna.
SCHOOL, BUSINESS OR TRADE  shall mean a use providing education or training in
business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational
pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university,
or public or private educational facility.
SCHOOL, DAY, PRE-, OR NURSERY  shall mean a school or center for children under
school age, whether licensed as a day care center or not. Such shall be
approved by the Nebraska State Fire Marshall as being in conformance with
safety provisions pursuant to the National Fire Protection Association,
Pamphlet 101, known as the Life Safety Code and shall be approved by the
Nebraska Department of Health and Welfare as meeting their health and welfare
standards.
SCREENING  shall mean a structure or planting that conceals from public view
the area behind such structure or planting.
SELECTIVE CLEARING  shall be the careful and planned removal or trees, shrubs,
and plants using specific standards and protection measures.
SELF-SERVICE STATION  shall mean an establishment where motor fuels are stored
and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the
service station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of
other retail products.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY  shall mean a building or group of buildings
containing individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or
lockers for storage.
SEPARATE OWNERSHIP  shall mean ownership of a parcel of land by a person who
does not own any of the land abutting such parcel.
SEPTIC SITE  shall mean the area bounded by the dimensions required for the
proper location of the septic tank system.
SERVICE STATION  shall mean buildings and premises where the primary use is the
supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires,
and motor vehicle accessories and where light maintenance activities such as
engine tune-ups, lubrications, and washing may be conducted, but not including
heavy maintenance and repair such as engine overhauls, painting, and body
repair.
SETBACK  shall mean the minimum distance, as prescribed by this regulation,
measured from the edge of the eve or other similar building component located
closest to the lot line.
SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD  see Yard, Front
SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD  see Yard, Rear
SETBACK LINE, SIDE YARD  see Yard, Side
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-134.png]
 
SHOPPING CENTER  shall mean a group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking
provided on-site,
SHOPPING CENTER, COMMERCIAL STRIP  shall mean a commercial development, usually
one store deep, that fronts on a major street for a distance of one city block
or more. Includes individual buildings on their own lots, with or without on-
site parking and small linear shopping centers with shallow on-site parking in
front of the stores.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-136.png]
 
SHOPPING CENTER, OUTLET  shall mean a commercial development that consists
mostly of manufacturers’ outlet stores selling their own brands at a discounted
price. This definition includes all forms of centers, such as strip style,
enclosed mall style, and City clustered style centers.
SHRUB  shall mean a multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
SIDEWALK CAFE  shall mean an area adjacent to a street level eating or drinking
establishment located adjacent to the public pedestrian walkway and used
exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. The area may be
separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping or a
combination thereof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-138.png]
 
SIGHT TRIANGLE  is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the
grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the
point of intersection of the centerline of the streets along the centerline of
the streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-140.png]
 
SIMILAR USE  shall mean the use of land, buildings, or structures of like kind
or general nature with other uses within a zoning district as related to bulk,
intensity of use, traffic generation and congestion, function, public services
requirements, aesthetics or other similarities.
SITE  shall mean the parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may
encompass a single lot; a portion of a lot; or a group of lots developed as a
common development under the special and overlay districts provisions of this
ordinance.
SITE BREAK  shall mean a structural or landscape device used to interrupt long
vistas and create visual interest in a site development.
SITE PLAN  shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, drives, parking, drainage, landscape features, and
other principal site development improvements for a specific parcel of land.
SKATE, IN-LINE  shall mean a boot-type device, which is placed on an
individual’s feet. In-line skates contain wheels on the bottom of the boot,
which are attached in linear fashion.
SKATE PARK  shall mean a recreational facility containing skateboard ramps and
other obstacle courses and devices for the use with skateboards and in-line
skates.
SKATEBOARD  shall mean a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels and is
usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies upon
the device while it is in motion.
SKATEBOARD or HALF PIPE  shall mean an outdoor structure that is shaped into a
half circle or oval that is designed and principally intended to permit persons
on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other.
SKATEBOARD RAMP  shall mean an outdoor structure with an upward inclined
surface, essentially one of the sides of a pipe, which are designed and
principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal
to vertical and back to horizontal.
SLUDGE  shall mean solids removed from sewage during wastewater treatment and
then disposed of by incineration, dumping, burial, or land application.
SOLID WASTE  shall mean waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse,
rubble, sewage, offal, dead animals, or paunch manure.
SPOT ZONING  shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of
land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and primarily
promotes the private interest of the owner rather than the general welfare.
Spot zoning usually results from an upzoning to a more intensive use
classification.
STABLE AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES  shall mean the buildings, pens and pasture
areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or other equine not
owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction in
riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine for hire.
STANDARD SYSTEM  shall mean a sewage treatment system employing a building
sewer, septic tank, and a standard soil absorption system.
STATE shall mean the State of Nebraska.
STOCKPILING  shall mean the accumulation of manure in mounds, piles, or other
exposed and non- engineered site locations for storage or holding purposes for
a period of not more than one year.
STORAGE  shall mean the keeping, in a roofed or unroofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles on the same tract or premises for more
than 30 days.
STORAGE CONTAINER, PORTABLE  shall mean any container that can be loaded onto
the chassis of a semi- trailer for the purpose of hauling materials and
commodities. Portable storage containers are intended to be used as a load on-
site and haul-off for storage off-site. Another name for these containers is
Portable On Demand Storage.
STORM DRAIN  shall mean a conduit that carries natural storm and surface water
drainage but not sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling
water.
STORMWATER DETENTION  shall mean any storm drainage technique that retards or
detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  shall mean the collecting, conveyance, channeling,
holding, retaining, detaining, infiltrating, diverting, treating, or filtering
of surface water, or groundwater, and/or runoff, together with applicable
managerial (non-structural) measures.
STORMWATER RETENTION AREA  shall mean an area designed by a licensed
professional engineer and approved by the City to retain water to control the
flow of stormwater.
STORMWATER RUNOFF  shall mean surplus surface water generated by rainfall that
does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies
of water.
STORY  shall mean a space in a building between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor above, or if there is not floor above, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STREET  shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or
condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane,
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this
Regulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL  shall mean a street designed with the primary function of
efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of a City or
county with controlled access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR  shall mean a street or highway, which is intended to carry
traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the
principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for
circulation within the development.
STREET, COURT  shall mean an approved private right-of-way which provides
access to residential properties and meets at least three of the following
conditions:
   1.   Serves twelve or fewer housing units or platted lots.
   2.   Does not function as a local street because of its alignment, design,
or location.
   3.   Is completely internal to a development.
   4.   Does not exceed 600 feet in length.
STREET, CURVILINEAR  shall mean local streets that deviate from straight
alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
STREET, LOCAL  shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides
direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
STREET, LOOPED  shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting
streets and having its two outlets connected to the same street.
STREET, MAJOR  shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high
volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial
streets.
STREET, PRIVATE  shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or
alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal
means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street"
includes the term "place".
STREET, SIDE  shall mean that street bounding a corner or reversed corner lot
and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the
depth of the lot.
STREET CENTERLINE  shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as
established by official surveys.
STREET FRONTAGE  shall mean the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot
adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the
furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
STREET, FRONTAGE ACCESS  shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major
street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily
for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major
street by a dividing strip.
STREET HARDWARE  shall mean man-made objects other than buildings that are part
of the streetscape. Examples include but are not limited to lamp posts, utility
poles, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter
boxes, and fire hydrants.
STREET LINE  shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land
and the contiguous street.
STREETSCAPE  shall mean the scene as may be observed along a public street or
way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving,
plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
STRUCTURE  shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground
or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming
and wading pools and covered patios, excepting outdoor areas such as paved
areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION  shall mean any change in the support members of a
building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling
joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls
or similar components.
SUBDIVISION  shall mean the division of land, lot, tract, or parcel into two or
more lots, parcels, plats, or sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose
of sale, lease, offer, or development, whether immediate or future. The term
shall also include the division of residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, or other land whether by deed, metes, and bounds description,
lease, map, plat, or other instrument.
SUPERMARKET  see “Food Sales”
SURFACE WATERS  shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state,
including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands,
watercourses, waterways, springs, canal systems, drainage systems, and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial, public or
private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.
SURPLUS SALES  shall mean businesses engaged in the sale of used or new items,
involving regular, periodic outdoor display of merchandise for sale. Typical
uses include flea markets and factory outlets or discount businesses with
outdoor display.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE  shall mean a pool which is an accessory use to a
residence and for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residential
building and their guests.
T
TANNING STUDIO  shall mean any business that uses artificial lighting systems
to produce a tan on an individual’s body. These facilities may be either a
stand-alone business or as an accessory use in spas, gymnasiums, athletic
clubs, health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any type
of adult establishment.
TATTOO PARLOR/BODY PIERCING STUDIO  shall mean an establishment whose principal
business activity is the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the body of
paying customers.
TAVERN  see Bar.
TAXIDERMY SERVICES  shall mean an operation conducted solely within an enclosed
building to include on-site preparation, stuffing, and mounting of heads and
skins of animals. Exterior storage or processing of carcasses or parts of
animals shall be prohibited.
TEMPORARY USE  shall mean a use intended for limited duration to be located in
a zoning district not permitting such use.
TERRACE  shall mean a raised earthen embankment with the top leveled. A terrace
may be supported by a retaining wall.
THEATER  shall mean a building or structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion
pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is
received and limited audience participation or meal service.
TOWER  shall mean a structure situated on a site that is intended for
transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications. Also,
see Antenna.
TOWNHOUSE  shall mean a one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance in a
group of three or more units where the unit and land are in the ownership of
the same owner, which part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and
rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation.
TRACT  shall mean a lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE  shall mean a vehicle without motive power, designed and
constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares and to be used for human
habitation or for carrying property, including a trailer coach.
TREE COVER  shall mean an area directly beneath the crown and within the
dripline of the tree.
TRUCK REPAIR  shall mean the repair, including major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or other work that may include
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in gasoline service stations, of trucks having a hauling
capacity of over one ton and buses but excluding pickups and other vehicles
designed for the transport of under eight passengers.
TRUCK WASH  shall mean a mechanical facility for the washing, waxing and
vacuuming of heavy trucks and buses.
U
UPPER STORY HOUSING  shall be defined as one or more dwelling units located
above the first floor where allowed within a commercial district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-142.png]
 
UPZONING  shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a more
intensive or less restrictive district such as from residential district to
commercial district or from a single family residential district to a multiple
family residential district.
USE  shall mean the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are
designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, BEST  shall mean the recommended use or uses of land confined in an
adopted comprehensive plan. Such use represents the best use of public
facilities, and promotes health, safety and general welfare.
USE, CONDITIONAL  shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning district
upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified
in the zoning ordinance and authorized by the approving agency.
USE, HIGHEST  shall mean an appraisal or real estate market concept that
identifies the use of a specific tract of land that is most likely to produce
the greatest net return on investment.
USED MATERIALS YARD  shall mean any lot or a portion of any lot used for the
storage of used materials. This shall not include "Junk Yards" or "Automobile
Wrecking Yards".
UTILITARIAN STRUCTURE  shall mean a structure or enclosure relating to
mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.
UTILITY EASEMENT  see Easement
UTILITY HARDWARE  shall mean devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and
vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that
are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a
project.
UTILITY TRAILER shall mean a trailer having a gross weight, including load
thereon, of 9,000 pounds or less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1432.jpg]
UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "LOCAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OF”  shall mean
the local service distribution circuit or lines and related appurtenances
served from a substation, town border station, reservoir, or terminal facility
which is served from a main supply line, main transmission line, or main feeder
line as may be applicable to electric, communications, gas, fuel, petroleum,
fertilizer, or other chemical utilities. Local electric distribution systems
shall include all lines and appurtenances carrying a primary voltage of less
than 161 KV from an electric transformer substation to the consumer. The local
telephone distribution system shall be limited to include the local exchange
lines, the local toll lines, and the local communications equipment facilities
structure.
UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "TRANSMISSION LINE, SUPPLY LINE, WHOLESALE
CARRIER OR TRUNK LINE, MAIN FEEDER LINE" , or other applicable designation
shall mean the main supply or feeder line serving a local distribution system
of utilities, and shall include but is not limited to pumping stations,
substations, regulating stations, generator facilities, reservoirs, tank farms,
processing facilities, terminal facilities, towers, and relay stations, and
treatment plants.
UTILITY SERVICE  shall mean any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit,
which carries gas, water, electricity, oil and communications into a building
or development.
V
VALUE  shall mean the estimated cost to replace a structure in kind, based on
current replacement costs.
VARIANCE  shall mean a relief from or variation of the provisions of this
chapter, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of
property, as distinct from rezoning.
VEGETATION  shall mean trees, shrubs, and vines.
VEHICLE  shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved
solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE, MOTOR  see Motor Vehicle.
VEHICLE STORAGE  shall mean storage of operating or non-operating vehicles for
a period of no more than 21 days. Typical uses include storage of private
parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage.
VEHICLE STORAGE, LONG TERM  shall mean storage of operating or non-operating
vehicles for a period exceeding 21 days. Typical uses include storage of
private parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage.
VENDING MACHINE  shall mean any unattended self-service device that, upon
insertion of a coin, coins, tokens, debit and/or credit cards or by similar
means, dispenses food, beverage, goods, rental materials, wares, merchandise,
or services.
VENDING MACHINE, REVERSE  shall mean an automated mechanical device that
accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including but
not limited to aluminum cans and glass or plastic bottles and that issues a
cash refund or a redeemable credit, provided that the entire process is
enclosed within the entire machine. A reverse vending machine may be designed
to accept more than one container at a time, paying by weight instead of the
container.
VETERINARY SERVICES  shall mean services and hospitals for animals. Typical
uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, pet cemeteries, and veterinary
hospitals for livestock and large animals.
VISUAL OBSTRUCTION  shall mean any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, wall or structure
exceeding two feet in height, measured from the crown of intersecting or
intercepting streets, alleys or driveways, which limit the visibility of
persons in motor vehicles on said streets, alleys, or driveways. This does not
include trees kept trimmed of branches below a minimum height of eight feet.
W
WAREHOUSE  shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION  shall mean a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
WAREHOUSING (ENCLOSED)  shall mean uses including storage, warehousing,
distribution, and handling of goods and materials within enclosed structures.
Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and van and
storage companies.
WAREHOUSING (OPEN)  shall mean uses including open air storage, distribution,
and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards,
materials yards, open storage.
WASTE HANDLING SYSTEM  shall mean any and all systems, public or private, or
combination of said structures intended to treat human or livestock excrement
and shall include the following types of systems
   1.   Holding pond shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an
excavated pit, dam, embankment or combination of these for temporary storage of
liquid livestock wastes, generally receiving runoff from open lots and
contributing drainage area.
   2.   Lagoon shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit,
dam, embankment or combination of these for treatment of liquid livestock waste
by anaerobic, aerobic or facultative digestion. Such impoundment predominantly
receives waste from a confined livestock operation.
   3.   Liquid manure storage pits shall mean earthen or lined pits located
wholly or partially beneath a semi or totally housed livestock operation or at
some removed location used to collect waste production.
   4.   Sediment shall mean a pond constructed for the sole purpose of
collecting and containing sediment.
WASTEWATER LAGOON  see Lagoon.
WATERCOURSE  shall mean natural or once naturally flowing water, either
perennially or intermittently, including rivers, streams, creeks, and other
natural waterways. Includes waterways that have been channelized, but does not
include manmade channels, ditches, and underground drainage and sewage systems.
WATERS OF THE STATE  shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this
state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water surface or underground,
material or artificial, public or private, situated wholly within or bordering
upon the state.
WETLAND  shall mean an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under
normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soiled conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT  shall mean an establishment for the on-premises sales
of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
WHOLESALE TRADE  shall mean the selling merchandise to retailers; to
industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or
to other wholesalers; or buyers acting as agents or brokers in buying
merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. The
principal types of establishments included are: Merchant wholesalers; sales
branches and sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing
enterprises apart from their plants for the purpose of marketing their
products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;
petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged in
cooperative marketing of farm products. The chief functions of uses in
wholesale trade are selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm and professional; and bringing buyer and seller
together. In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale
establishments include maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit;
physically assembling, sorting and grading goods in large lots, breaking bulk
and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and various types
of promotion such as advertising and label designing.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER  shall mean a structure for the transmission or
broadcast of cellular, radio, television, radar, or microwaves which exceed the
maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located; provided,
however, that noncommercial radio towers not exceeding 50 feet in height shall
not be considered wireless communication towers.
X
Y
YARD  shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling
group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
to the sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or
structures permitted by this Regulation.
YARD, FRONT shall mean all that area between the front property line and a line
drawn along the front face or faces of the principal structure on the property
and extending to the side property lines.
YARD, REAR  shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear
lot line, extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE  shall mean a space extending from the front yard or from the front
lot line where no front yard is required by this Regulation, to the rear yard,
or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-144.png]
 
Z
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR  shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered
by the City to administer and enforce the requirements of this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT  see District
ZONING DISTRICT, CHANGE OF  shall mean the legislative act of removing one or
more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing them in another
zoning district on the zone map of the City.
ZONING LOTS, ODD CONFIGURATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-146.png]
(Ord. 806, passed 3-12-2024; Ord. 832, passed 1-14-2025; Ord. 836, passed 5-13-
2025)
Article 3: Districts and Official Map
Section 3.01   Districts
In order to regulate and restrict the height, location, size and type of
buildings, structures and uses allowed on land in the City and the area within
one mile of the corporate boundaries, the City is hereby divided into
districts.
To_view_the_Zoning_Map_in_PDF,_click_here.
Section 3.02   Provision for Official Zoning Map
3.02.01   The City is hereby divided into districts, as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by
the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section
3.02 of Ordinance No. (  ) of the City of Valley, Nebraska", together with the
date of the adoption of this Ordinance. If, in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the
Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City
Council.
3.02.02   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map.
The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions
in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect
of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment
thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under
the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (Ordinance No. (   ))
of the City of Valley Nebraska." Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been
lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts
thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
Article 4: General Provisions
Section 4.01   Planning Commission Recommendations
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-901, it shall be the purpose of the Planning
Commission to hold public hearings upon, and make recommendation to the
legislative body, regarding proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and
zoning regulations within the jurisdiction of the City.
The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon
before submitting its final report, and the City Council shall not hold its
public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the
Commission.
Section 4.02   District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation
No such regulation, restriction, or boundary shall become effective until after
a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearings shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general
circulation in the City at least one time ten days prior to such hearing.
Section 4.03   Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the
City of Valley, Nebraska, and within the territory beyond said corporate limits
as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of one mile, as established on the
map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Valley, Nebraska", and as
may be amended by subsequent annexation.
Section 4.04   Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this
Ordinance are in conflict with the provisions of any other ordinance or
municipal law, the ordinance or municipal law with the most restrictive
provisions shall govern.
Section 4.05   Zoning Affects Every Building and Use
No building or land shall hereafter be used or reused and no building or part
thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted
by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed may be
restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming use.
Section 4.06   Lot
4.06.01   Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case,
shall there be more than one principal building on a lot unless otherwise
provided.
4.06.02   No building or use of land for other than agricultural purposes shall
be established on a lot that does not abut a public street.
4.06.03   More than one principal building of a single permitted use may be
located upon a lot or tract in the following instances if recommended by the
Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
   1.   Institutional buildings
   2.   Public or semi-public buildings
   3.   Multiple-family dwellings
   4.   Commercial or industrial buildings
   5.   Home for the aged
   6.   Agricultural buildings
   7.   Clustered/Mixed Use Development
Section 4.07   Reductions in Lot Area Prohibited
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record,
shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width,
building area, or other requirements of this Ordinance are not maintained. This
section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public
purpose.
Section 4.08   Obstructions to Vision at Street Intersections Prohibited
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the center line of streets at a
distance of 60 feet from their intersections, there shall be no obstruction to
vision between a height of two and one-half feet and a height of 10 feet above
the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from
the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets. At the intersection
of major or arterial streets, the 60-foot distance shall be increased to 90
feet for each arterial leg of the intersection. The requirements of this
section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. See
“Sight Triangle,” as defined in
Article 2 of this Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-151.png]
 
Section 4.09   Yard Requirements
4.09.01   Yard requirements shall be set forth under the Schedule of Lot, Yard,
and Bulk Requirements for each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated and
shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as herein
permitted.
4.09.02   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space, required in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with this regulation, shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, or off-street parking or loading space required for another building and
or lot.
4.09.03   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this regulation
shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this regulation shall
meet the minimum requirements herein.
4.09.04   All accessory buildings when connected to the principal building
(e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal building, unless otherwise specified.
4.09.05   The Building Inspector may permit a variation in front yard setbacks
to allow new or relocated structures to conform to the average existing setback
provided that 1.) More than 40 percent of the frontage on one side of a street
between intersecting streets is occupied by structures on the effective date of
this Ordinance, and 2.) A minority of such structures have observed or
conformed to an average setback line, see illustration for different
provisions:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-153.png]
 
4.09.06   Any side or rear yard in a residential district which is adjacent to
any existing industrial or commercial use shall be no less than 25 feet and
shall contain the owner shall install and maintain landscaping and planting
suitable to provide effective screening.
4.09.07   Any yard for a commercial or industrial use located within any
Commercial or Industrial Zoning District, which is adjacent to any residential
use, or district shall be increased to 40 feet and shall contain landscaping
and planting suitable to provide effective screening; except in the Downtown
Commercial District.
4.09.08   Corner Lots within the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts:  On
corner lots, the following criteria apply to setbacks:
   1.   In existing developed areas, the Street Side Yard setback shall conform
to existing setbacks of existing single-family structures, two family
structures and multiple family structures along that street.
   2.   In new developments, the Street Side Yard setback shall be equal to the
Front Yard Setback.
   •   However, if the corner lot is a triple frontage lot, a determination
must be made to identify the Front Yard Street and the Side Yard Street.
Pending such determination, and pending a review of side yard street
conditions, including conformity to other house setbacks and traffic sight
distances, the Street Side Yard setback may be reduced to conform with the
table within the specific district.
4.09.09   Double Frontage Lots: The required front yard shall be provided on
each street.
4.09.10   Building Groupings: For the purpose of the side yard regulation a
group of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall
shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
Section 4.10   Drainage
No building, structure, or use shall be erected on any land and no change shall
be made in the existing contours of any land, including any change in the
course, width, or elevation of any natural or other drainage channel, that will
obstruct, interfere with, or substantially change the drainage from such land
to the detriment of neighboring lands.
Anyone desiring to build or otherwise change the existing drainage situation
shall be responsible for providing to the City or their designated agent that
such changes will not be a detriment to the neighboring lands.
Section 4.11   Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
required yards:
4.11.01   All Yards:
   •   Steps and accessibility ramps used for wheelchair and other assisting
devices which are four feet or less above grade which will not exceed minimum
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act are necessary for access to
a permitted building or for access to a lot from a street or alley;
   •   Chimneys projecting 24 inches or less into the yard;
   •   Approved freestanding signs;
   •   Arbors and trellises;
   •   Flag poles;
   •   Window air conditioners projecting not more than 18 inches into the
required yard; and
   •   Fences or walls subject to applicable height restrictions are permitted
in all yards.
4.11.02   Rear and Side Yards:
   •   Open off-street parking spaces
   •   Playground and other recreational equipment;
   •   Clothes lines;
   •   Outside elements of central air conditioning systems;
   •   Emergency egress systems for basements on an existing structure.
Section 4.12   Accessory Building and Uses
4.12.01   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed upon a lot
for more than six months prior to beginning construction of the principal
building. No accessory building shall be used for more than six months unless
the main building on the lot is also being used or unless the main building is
under construction.
4.12.02   In no event, shall such building be used as a dwelling unless a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use.
4.12.03   In no event, shall a portable storage container be used as permanent
storage/accessory building within any residential district.
4.12.04   No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the maximum
permitted height allowed in the individual district, unless otherwise provided.
4.12.05   No accessory building shall be constructed in the required front
yard.
4.12.06   No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the
required front yard on a corner lot or the front yard of a double frontage lot.
   a.   Where the lot size is ½ acre or more, the accessory building may be
located in front of the front building line if the building maintains a minimum
distance of 20 feet beyond the front setback.
4.12.07   Detached accessory buildings or structures shall be located no closer
to any other accessory or principal building than 10 feet.
4.12.08   Accessory Buildings. No more than two accessory buildings shall be
permitted for residential use whose combined total area shall not exceed the
following size limitations:
Lot Size Maximum Building Size
Lot Size                                      Maximum Building Size
0 to 10,000 square feet                       720 square feet
10,001 to 20,000 square feet                  960 square feet
20,001 to 30,000 square feet                  1,200 square feet
30,001 to 40,000 square feet                  1,440 square feet
40,001 square feet to 2 acres                 1,680 square feet
2.01 acres to 3 acres                         2,500 square feet
Larger than 3.01 acres may need to be rezoned
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-155.png]
 
   The size of the residential lot will determine the maximum size of the
residential accessory building. Buildings exceeding the maximum size indicated
on parcels less than 20 acres are non-residential and would require
consideration for rezoning for the anticipated commercial or industrial use.
4.12.09   When a detached garage or other outbuilding is built within the
required setback for a principal structure, the principal structure and
detached building shall remain as separate structures and maintain the required
separation distances found in Section
4.12.06 above.
4.12.10   When a detached garage has access to an alley, the rear yard setback
shall be increased to 10 feet for garages directly accessing the alley from the
garage and door is parallel to the alley. Otherwise it shall be a minimum of
five feet.
4.12.11   Temporary and portable carports may be allowed in designated zoning
districts provided the following criteria shall be met:
   1.   The carport shall be anchored to the ground with a permanent footing.
   2.   Carport shall not be allowed to have more than two sides covered with a
siding material.
   3.   Siding material shall match the style of the primary structure on the
lot.
   4.   Shall meet all minimum setbacks.
4.12.12   Detached private garages and outbuildings in the Residential
Districts within the corporate limits of Valley for automobiles and/or storage
use and other structures customary and appurtenant to the permitted uses and
detached accessory garages shall be constructed of materials customarily used
in residential construction and meet the following:
   1.   Be constructed of materials that are in good repair,
   2.   The sidewalls of said building shall not exceed 10 feet in height,
   3.   Garages shall have an overhang of at least six inches,
   4.   Garages shall have a maximum width of 36 feet,
    5.   Garages shall be constructed and finished in materials customary to
residential construction.
4.12.13   Regulation of accessory uses shall be as follows:
   1.   Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a
required yard line along any street.
   2.   Service station pumps and pump island may occupy the required yards,
provided, however, that they are not less than 15 feet from street lines.
Section 4.13   Permitted Modifications of Height Regulations
4.13.01   The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
Air-Pollution Prevention Devices Flag Poles
Belfries                         Ornamental Towers and Spires
Chimneys                         Public Monuments
Church Spires                    Radio/Television Towers less than 125 feet
                                 tall
Conveyors                        Silos and grain elevators
Cooling Towers                   Smoke Stacks
Elevator Bulkheads               Stage Towers or Scenery Lots
Commercial Elevator Penthouses   Tanks
Fire Towers                      Water Towers and Standpipes Web cameras and
                                 meteorological equipment
 
   Provided that the appropriate yard setbacks are increased by one foot for
every two feet in excess of the maximum height requirement for the given zoning
district.
4.13.02   When permitted in a district, condominiums (via a Conditional Use
Permit), public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or
schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when each required
yard line is increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional
building height above the height regulations for the district in which the
building is located. In addition, all sides with turf or other landscaping
materials shall be reinforced with reinforcement stable grass.
Section 4.14   Occupancy of Basements and Cellars
No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the
remainder of the building has been substantially completed, and any required
emergency egress requirements of the City of Valley have been installed as
required per state and life-safety codes.
Section 4.15   Nonconforming, General Intent
It is the intent of this ordinance to permit lawful non-conformities to
continue until they are removed, but not encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that non-
conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district except as may be authorized in this title.
Section 4.16   Nonconforming Lots of Record
In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provision of this
ordinance, a primary structure and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
the requirements for area or width, or both that are generally applicable in
the district provided that the yard dimensions and other requirements not
involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements
shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
Section 4.17   Nonconforming Structures
4.17.01   Authority to continue: Any structure which is devoted to a use which
is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, but which is
located on a lot which does not comply with the applicable lot size
requirements and/or the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this section.
4.17.02   Enlargement, Repair, Alterations: Any such structure described in
Section
4.17.01 may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled, provided, however,
that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create
any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity
of all or any part of such structure, except that as to structures located on a
lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements, the side
yard requirements shall be in conformance with this section, and unless
otherwise permitted by conditional use permit unless otherwise approved or as
specified in the Residential District.
4.17.03   Damage or Destruction: In the event that any structure described in
Section
4.17.01 is damaged or destroyed, by any means other than intentional
destruction, to the extent of more than 60 percent of its structural value,
such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located; provided that
structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size
requirements in Section
4.16, shall not have a side yard of less than five feet. When a structure is
damaged to the extent of less than 60 percent of its structural value, no
repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained, and
restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial
destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
   Complete reconstruction of a nonconforming structure may be allowed through
a Conditional Use Permit if the structure is damaged or destroyed by natural
means and not through intentional destruction or actions of the property owner
or tenant. Reconstructed structures shall not be allowed to increase the level
of nonconformity with regard to setbacks or lot coverage.
4.17.04   Moving: No structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any
distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless
the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located after being moved.
Section 4.18   Nonconforming Uses
4.18.01   Nonconforming Uses of Land: Where at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended,
such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment or this ordinance.
   2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
   3.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 12 consecutive months, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district
in which such land is located.
   4.   Any use of land made nonconforming at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance wherein the development on the parcel of the land
was only partially completed, said development may be completed on said land so
long as the original parcel of land is not enlarged so as to encompass more
area than when the development was originally started.
(Ord. 813, passed 6-11-2024)
4.18.02   Nonconforming Uses of Structures: If a lawful use of a structure, or
of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
   1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
   2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
   3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structures and premises may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the board of adjustment either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate
conditions and safeguard in accord with the provisions of this ordinance;
   4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
   5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in
combination is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the
structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used
except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located;
   6.   Where nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
Section 4.19   Repairs and Maintenance
4.19.01   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or
on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage of amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
4.19.02   Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
Section 4.20   Uses under Conditional Use Permit Not Nonconforming Uses
Any use for which a special exception has been issued as provided in previous
ordinances shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further
action be deemed a conforming use in such district.
Section 4.21   Rear Yard Setbacks Reduction
The rear yard setback may be the lesser of the required setback in a district
or 20% of the depth of the lot.
Section 4.22   Side Yard Setbacks Reduction
The required side yard shall be maintained on each side of a dwelling, but may
be reduced to 10 percent of the lot width on lots of less than 60 feet in
width, provided, however, no side yard shall be less than five feet.
Section 4.23   Temporary Uses and Permits
4.23.01   This section provides regulations authorizing temporary uses. These
provisions are intended to permit occasional uses and activities of short
duration, when consistent with the objectives of this chapter and when
compatible with surrounding uses. They are further intended to prevent
temporary uses from taking on the operating character of permanent uses.
   1.   Temporary use types. The following temporary uses are permitted,
subject to the regulations contained within this section:
      a.   Model homes and apartments, contained within the residential
development to which they pertain.
      b.   Development sales offices.
         1)   A development sales or leasing office may only be established on
a platted lot within the subdivision.
         2)   A development sales or leasing office may remain in place until
80 percent of the lots therein in the subdivision are sold or 75 percent of the
units are occupied.
         3)   The sales or leasing office must meet all site development,
parking and sign regulations of the base district.
      c.   Public assemblies, displays and exhibits including community and
cultural events.
         1)   An event shall not be allowed in a residential zoning district,
unless it is located on property owned by an allowed civic organization and
operated by that organization.
         2)   Such uses shall not exceed 14 days in any 90-day period.
      d.   Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs or similar transient amusement
or recreational activities.
         1)   Events shall be no closer than 200 feet to an existing dwelling.
         2)   Events shall be located in a C-1 General Commercial or more
intensive zoning district.
         3)   Such uses shall not exceed ten days in any 90-day period.
      e.   Carnivals, fairs or festivals operated by a nonprofit organization.
         1)   Events shall be located on property owned by the nonprofit
organization, except as provided below.
         2)   Events may be located on property not owned by the nonprofit
organization provided:
            a)   Events shall be no closer than 200 feet to an existing
dwelling.
            b)   Events shall be located in a C-1 General Commercial or more
intensive zoning district.
         3)   Such events shall not exceed ten days in any 90-day period.
      f.   Seasonal merchandise sales such as garden centers, farmer's markets,
Christmas tree lots or other holiday-related products, excluding fireworks,
which are governed by Chapter 7, Article 3 of the Valley Municipal Code.
         1)   Such uses shall not exceed 90 days in a calendar year or 90
continuous days during two calendar years.
         2)   Lots shall not be located in a residential zoning district.
      g.   Construction site offices, if located on the construction site
itself.
         1)   Such uses shall not remain for a period exceeding the date of the
certificate of occupancy.
      h.   Construction batch plants, subject to the provisions of
Article 6.
      i.   Additional temporary uses determined to be similar to the previously
described temporary uses by the Building Inspector.
         1)   Such uses shall be allowed for a period determined by the
Building Inspector, but in no case shall such use be allowed for more than one
calendar year.
         2)   Required conditions of all temporary uses.
            a)   For purposes of this section, when events are allowed to occur
more than once in a year, the time of separation between events on a site shall
be measured from the first day of the event.
            b)   Any use or activity to be established on a temporary basis for
more than a three- day period during a calendar year shall apply for and
receive a temporary use permit.
            c)   A temporary use permit shall only remain in effect for the
time specified on the permit.
4.23.02   Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses
   1.   Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris,
litter or other evidence of the use upon its completion or removal.
   2.   The Building Inspector may establish other conditions determined to be
necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses and to minimize
potential effects on nearby uses. These conditions may include but not be
limited to:
      a.   Time and duration of operation;
      b.   Temporary arrangements for parking and circulation;
      c.   Requirements for visual screening of the activity; and,
      d.   Guarantees of site restoration and cleanup.
      e.   If the temporary use provides portable restrooms, at least five
percent but not less than one unit, must comply with American Disabilities Act
Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities Section 4.22 or 4.23. Accessible units
shall be identified by the international symbol of accessibility.
4.23.03   Permit Application and Issuance
   1.   An application to conduct a temporary use shall be filed with the
building official not less than 14 days before the event, and shall include the
following:
      a.   A site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing existing
parking and buildings, and the location of the proposed use.
      b.   A statement describing the nature of the proposed temporary use.
      c.   The hours of and duration of, the temporary use.
      d.   Other information, as determined by the Building Inspector,
necessary to evaluate the proposed use.
   2.   Issuance of permit.
      a.   Except as set forth in subparagraph 4(c) herein below, the Building
Inspector shall approve a temporary use permit only after making the following
determinations:
         1)   The use will comply with all base district site development
regulations.
         2)   Time and frequency of operation are acceptable.
         3)   The arrangement for parking and circulation allow safe access to
the site.
         4)   The use will not create a nuisance or unreasonably disturb
neighboring properties.
            a)   The hours of operation and duration of the temporary use
permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit.
            b)   The Building Inspector may elect to have the City Council
consider the approval of an application for a Temporary Use Permit, and in such
event the City Council shall make its determination in accordance with this
Section.
Section 4.24:   Prohibited Uses
All uses which are not specifically permitted or are not permissible as a
Conditional Use throughout each district of this Ordinance are prohibited until
such time as the Ordinance is amended accordingly.
Section 4.25:   Fees
The payment of any and all fees for any zoning or subdivision related action or
permit request shall be required prior to the issuance or investigation of any
said action or permit request. Such fees shall be adopted and published by the
City Council by separate Resolution.
Article 5: Zoning Districts
Section 5.01   Districts; Use
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Municipality is hereby divided into 15
districts, designated as follows:
(TA)    Transitional Agricultural District
(RS)    Rural Residential District
(R-1)   Low Density Residential District
(R-2)   Medium/High Density Residential District
(R-3)   Lakefront Residential District
(R-M)   Mobile Home Residential District
(C-1)   General Commercial District
(C-2)   Downtown Commercial District
(C-3)   Highway Commercial District
(I-1)   Light Industrial District
(I-2)   Heavy Industrial District
(I-3)   General Industrial District
(CMD)   Clustered/Mixed Use Development
(HO)    Highway Corridor Protection (overlay)
(FP/FW) Floodplain/Floodway Fringe Overlay District (overlay)
 
Section 5.02   Districts; Boundaries and Official Zoning Map
The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Valley, Nebraska." Said maps and
all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this
Ordinance as if fully written herein. The Official Zoning District Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. No
changes shall be made on the Zoning District Map except as may be required by
amendments to this Ordinance. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the
Zoning District Map with the Ordinance number, nature of change, and date of
change noted on the map.
Section 5.03   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries on the Official
Zoning Map
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
   2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
   3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following such City limits;
   4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks;
   5.   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line;
   6.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines;
   7.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsections (1) to (6) above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map;
   8.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections (1) to (7) above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries;
   9.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, The Board of Zoning
Adjustment may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of
the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining
portion of the lot.
   10.   When a district boundary line splits a lot, tract, or parcel that is
in sole ownership, the zoning district with the most restrictive requirements
may be extended over the entire property without amending the zoning map
through the public hearing process.
   11.   When a lot, tract, or parcel is bisected by the extraterritorial
jurisdiction boundary line, the jurisdiction with the greatest portion of the
property shall have controlling interest.
Section 5.04   Land Use Categories Table Explanation
The Matrix found in Section
5.06 of this Ordinance is a listing of uses that may be allowed within the
variety of Zoning Districts.
   1.   The different uses are grouped into specific “Land Use Categories”.
   2.   The “Land Use Categories” are listed in each of the Zoning Districts in
lieu of specific uses. It is important to note, if a “Land Use Category” is
listed within a specific Zoning District, it DOES NOT indicate every use in the
“Land Use Category” is allowed within the specific District.
The different uses within Section
5.06 are Permitted (P), Allowed upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit (C),
Temporary (T) or not permitted (-).
In order to determine if a specific use is allowed in a Zoning District, the
following steps need to be followed:
   1.   Find the Use Type that matches your application
   2.   Look across the table and determine which of the Zoning Districts it
may be allowed.
   3.   Determine any special criteria for the use(s) by referring to the
specific District.
   4.   Determine where the specific Zoning Districts are by reviewing the
Official Zoning Map.
   5.   Determine the necessary procedures to receive required permits after
the land or property is the control of the applicant.
   6.   When doubt, please confer with Planning staff.
The Table in Section
5.06 also lists Accessory Uses which may be allowed or not allowed in any
specific Zoning District. The Accessory Use listing can be found at the end of
the Table.
Section 5.05   Annexation and Conformance with the Land Use Plan
Areas annexed into the corporate limits of Valley shall be zoned to conform to
the Future Land Use Plan.
Section 5.06   Land Use Categories/Matrix
 
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use
Permit T = Temporary
“-“ = not permitted
*1 = Floodplain
regulations shall be
met
Use      Use Type    TA RS R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 I-3 Additional
Category                                                          Requirements
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“ = not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations
shall be met
Use Category Use Type       TA RS R- R- R- RM C- C- C- I-1 I-2 I-3 Additional
                                  1  2  3     1  2  3              Requirements
             Agricultural
             buildings for  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             general ag.
             use
             Agricultural   P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             operations
             Class I LFO    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Class II LFO   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Community      P  T  T  T  T  T  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Gardens
             Crop           P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
Agricultur e Production
&            Farms for
Horticultur  breeding,
e Uses       raising, and   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             selling wild
             game, fish, or
             livestock
             Greenhouse     P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             Livestock for
             4-H purposes   P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             as a Secondary
             use
             Livestock      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             sales
             Wineries/Vi    P  C  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  -   -   -    
             neyards
             Agricultural
             chemicals,
             fertilizer,
             anhydrous
             ammonia-sto    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             rage &
             distribution
             for commercial
             use.
             Agricultural
             chemicals,
             fertilizer,
             anhydrous
             ammonia-sto    P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             rage &
             distribution
             for personal
             use.
             Agricultural
Agricultur   implement &    P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   C   -    
al Sales &   vehicle sales
Service      and service
             Agricultural   P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             research farm
             Agricultural   P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             processing
             Agriculture
             feed mixing
             and blending,  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   C   -    
             seed sales and
             grain handling
             operations
             Equestrian
             centers and    P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             stables
             Horses and
             other non-
             commer cial    P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             livestock on
             residential
             lots
             Seasonal
             dwelling or    P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             cabins
             Cargo
             Container      P  C  C  C  C  C  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Dwelling
             Condominiu ms
             (max. of 4     -  -  -  P  C  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             units)
             Condominiu ms
             (4 units or    -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             more)
             Grain Bin      C  -  -  -  -    -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Dwelling
             Mobile Home    P  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Dwelling
             Mobile Home
             Dwelling as    P  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             secondary
             dwelling
             Multi-family
             dwelling (max. -  -  -  P  P  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
Residential  of 4 units per
Living       building)
             Multi-family
             dwelling (more -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             than 4 units
             per building)
             Quonset houses P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Shouse         P  -  C  C  C  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Single-family
             attached       -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             dwelling (max.
             of 4 units)
             Single-family
             attached
             dwelling (more -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             than of 4
             units)
             Single-family
             detached       P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             dwellings
             Tiny House     C  C  -  -  -  C  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Two-family/    -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Duplex
             Upper story    -  -  -  -  -  -  C  P  C  -   -   -    
             housing
             Adult care     -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             homes
             Assisted
             Living         -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Facilities
             Bed and        P  P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   See Section
             Breakfast                                             9.15
             Convents       P  P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Emergency
             Residential    P  P  P  -  -  -  -  P  P  -   -   -    
Residential  Services/She
/ Commerci   lters
al           Group Care     P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -    
Institutions Home
             Group Home     P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -    
             Hospice        -  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -    
             Life Care      -  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -    
             Facility
             Monasteries    P  P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Nursing Homes  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Retirement     -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Homes
             Transitional   P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -    
             housing
             Animal         P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  -   -   -    
             shelters
             Cemetery       P  C  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Churches,
             synagogues,    P  P  P  P  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             temples &
             similar
             Church,        -  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
             Storefront-
             Community
             centers &      C  C  C  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             buildings
             Fire and
             Rescue         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P    
Communit y   facilities
Services/    Fraternal      C  C  C  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
Civic Uses   Organization
             Government al
             offices and    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   -    
             uses
             Law
             enforcement    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             centers
             Public
             Libraries and  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             museums
             Philanthropi c C  C  C  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Organization s
             Museums        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             Planetariums   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Senior citizen C  C  C  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             centers
             Community
             correction     C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             centers
             Drug & alcohol
             rehabilitation C  C  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
Treatment,   centers
Rehabilitat  Halfway houses C  C  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
ion,         Public
Incarcerati  Detention      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
on           Center
Facilities   Juvenile
             Detention      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Center
             Private        C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Prisons
             Public Prisons C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Adult day-care P  P  P  P  P  -  P  -  P  -   -   -    
             home
             Child Care     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  C   C   -    
             Center
             Child Care     P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Home
Day-Care,    Colleges and   C  C  C  C  C  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
Public &     Universities
Private      Day care       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  C   C   -    
Schools      centers
             Preschools     C  C  C  C  C  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
             Public &
             private        C  C  C  C  C  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
             schools (K-12)
             Trade, career
             & technical    C  C  C  C  C  -  C  C  C  C   C   -    
             schools
             Arboretums     P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Athletic       C  C  C  C  C  C  -  -  P  -   -   -    
             fields
             Campground     C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
Public Parks Nature centers C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
& Open Space Parks, trails,
             picnic areas,  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             & playgrounds
             Public pools
             and/or water   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             parks
             Natural gas
             exploration    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             and pumping
             Natural gas    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             depots
             Private Wells  P  P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  C   C   -    
             Wind Energy
             Conversion                                            See Section
             Sys. -         C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -   9.07
             Commercial/
             Utility Grade
             Public works
             facilities
             incl. storage/ P  C  C  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   -    
Public/Priv  main tenance
ate          areas
Utilities &  Wireless
Communic     telecommuni
ation        cation         C  C  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   C   C   See Section
Services     facilities                                            9.03
             sys. - new
             tower
             Wireless
             telecommuni
             cation         C  C  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   C   C   See Section
             facilities                                            9.03
             sys. -
             collocated
             Radio and
             tower
             transmitter    P  C  C  C  -  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   See Section
             (Shortwave and                                        9.19
             Ham
             operations)
             Animal Shelter P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  P   P   P    
             Kennel
             boarding or    P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  P   P   -    
             training
             Kennel,        P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  P   P   C    
             commercial
             Kennel,        P  C  C  C  C  C  -  -  -  -   -   -    
Animal Care  private
             Pet cemetery   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Pet            C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             crematorium
             Pet grooming,  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Pet training
             Animal         P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   -    
             hospital
             Building
             maintenance &  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             cleaning
             services
             Copying,
             printing,
             mailing, &     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             packaging
             services
             Lawn, garden &
             yard           P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   P    
Business and maintenance
Household    services
Services     Locksmiths and
             key            P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             duplication
             Pest control   P  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   P   C    
             services
             Small
             appliances &
             household      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   -    
             equipment
             repair
             Well drilling/
             septi c tank   P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  P  P   P   -    
             cleaning
             Banks          -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Automatic
             Teller Machine -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             (ATM)
             Brokerages     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Credit Unions  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
Fina         Insurance      -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Financial
             advisory       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             services
             Specialty loan -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             services
             Banquet/rece   C  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  -   -   -    
             ption facility
             Brew-on        -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Premises Store
             Brewery        C  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   C   -    
             Craft Brewery  C  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   C   -    
             (Commercial )
             Catering       C  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  C   C   -    
             service
             Donut and      -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
Food And     pastry shops
Beverage     Mobile Food    T  -  -  -  -  -  T  T  T  T   T   -   See Section
Services     Units                                                 9.18
             Restaurants    C  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Roadside       T  T  -  -  -  -  T  T  T  T   T   T    
             produce stands
             Sidewalk Café -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Tavern or bar  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Coffee houses, -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             coffee shops
             Brew pub       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Micro-brewe ry -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   -    
             (Commercial )
             Coffee kiosks  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Antiques and
             collectables   P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   - - -    
             shop
             Art galleries  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Artisan
             production     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             shop
             Artist Studio  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Bridal sales & P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             services
             Clothing &     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             accessories
             Computer
             hardware/sof   P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             tware sales
             Dance studios  P  -- -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             & schools
             Electronic/
             a ppliance     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -    
             sales &
             service
             Equipment
             sales/storage  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -    
             /rental
             Equipment
             repair         P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             services
             Fabric and
             sewing supply  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             stores
             Farmer's       P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Market
             Firearms and
             ammunition     C  -  -  -  -  -  C  C  C  C   C   -    
             sales
             Florists       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
General      Food store
Commercial   (specialty)
             including
             bakeries, meat
             lockers,       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             butchers,
             delicatessen,
             not a full-
             service
             grocery
             Funeral homes
             and
             mortuaries,    P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  P   P   P    
             including
             crematorium s
             Garden center  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Gift store     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Grocery        -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Hardware store -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Heating and
             cooling sales  -P -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             and services
             Lawn and
             garden
             equipment      -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P   P   P    
             sales and
             service
             Photographi c
             equipment &    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             supplies
             Pottery store  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Religious
             book, card and -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             articles
             stores
             Secondhand
             store, thrift  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             or consignment
             store
             Self-services
             laundry and    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             Laundromat
             Tanning Studio -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Taxidermy      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             Services
             Billiard halls -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Commercial     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P   P   -    
             greenhouses
             Business       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Center
             Concrete and
             cinder block   P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P   P   P    
             sales
             Convenience    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             store
             Fireworks      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P   P   -    
             stands
Special      Gasoline
Commercial   filling
             stations,      -  -  -  -  C  -  C  -  C  -   -   -    
             including
             Self-Service
             Liquor stores/ -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             sales
             Monument sales -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Motels and     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             hotels
             Nurseries,     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             retail sales
             Piercing       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Studio
             Tattoo Parlor  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Acupuncture    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Chiropractor   -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Dental offices
             incl.          -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             orthodontics
             Massage        -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             therapy
Medical Uses Medical        -- -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Optical sales  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             & services
             Laser          -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Treatment
             Rehabilitatio
             n facilities
             including out- -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             patient
             services
             Accountant and
             investment     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             counseling
             Business       -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Consultant     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Lawyer/Atto    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
Office Uses  rney offices
             Photographi c  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             studios
             Real Estate    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             offices
             Utility and
             telephone      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   P    
             company
             offices
             Bowling alley  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Commercial     P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             stables
             Golf courses,
             public &       P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  P  -   -   -   *1
             private
             Golf driving   P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  P  -   -   -   *1
             ranges
             Gun clubs      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Miniature golf -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -    
             courses
             Paintball      C  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
Recr         Course
             Recreational
             facility,      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             Indoor
             Recreational
             facility,      P  -  -  -  -  -  C  -  C  C   C   C    
             outdoor
             Recreational
             vehicle (RV)   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             Park
             Riding         P  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Academies
             Amusement      -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             arcade
             Auto body      C  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -   See Section
             repair                                                9.12
             Automotive/                                           See Section
             machinery      C  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -   9.12
             repair shop
             Automobile/
             truck sales,   P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -   See Section
             rental &                                              9.12
             leasing
             Automobile/
             truck washes,  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
             self-services                                         9.12
             or automatic
             Motor home     -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
Auto         dealers                                               9.13
Services/    Motorcycle
Commercial   dealers, incl. -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
             moped and                                             9.13
             scooters
             Muffler sales  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
             & services                                            9.12
             Recreational                                          See Section
             vehicle sales  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   9.13
             & rentals
             Transmissio n  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
             repair shops                                          9.12
             Travel trailer -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  -   -   -   See Section
             dealers                                               9.13
             Vehicle
             Storage incl.  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             trailers, RV,
             & boat storage
Adult Uses   Adult          -  -  -  -  -- -  -  -  -  C   C   -   See Section
             Entertainme nt                                        9.21
             Fireworks      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             storage
             Mini-wareho
             uses & self-   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   See Section
             service                                               9.11
             storage
             Motor Freight  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   C    
             Terminals
             Outdoor        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   C    
             Storage
             Outdoor
Warehousing  Storage        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   C   *1
& Storage    Containers
             Portable On-
             demand storage T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   *1
             facilities
             Warehouse and  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  C   C   P    
             distribution
             Warehousing    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  C   C   P    
             (enclosed)
             Warehousing    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   C   *1
             (Open)
             Wholesale
             business and   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   P    
             storage
             Bulk materials
             or machinery   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P   P   P    
             storage (fully
             enclosed)
             Carpenters     P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  -   -   -    
             Carpet & rug
             cleaning       C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             plants
Cont         Construction   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  C   P   -    
             batch plants
             Construction
             yards incl.
             offices &
             equipment      P  -  -  -  -  -  P  C  P  C   P   -    
             storage yards
             excl. heavy
             machinery
             Electricians   P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Heating &
             ventilating    P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             contractors
             Masons &       P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             bricklayers
             Plumbers       P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             Trade shops
             (incl. cabinet P  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   -   -    
             makers)
             Concrete block -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P       
             manufacturin g
             Concrete       C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P       
             products
             Heavy
             construction   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P       
             companies
             Manufacture d
             housing        C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  P   P   -    
             fabrication
             Prefabricate d
             buildings &    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  P   P   -    
             components
             manufacturin g
             Bakery
             Products       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             Manufacturi ng
             Beverage
             Blending and
             Bottling       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             (Except
             Breweries)
Food         Coffee, Tea
Processing   and Spice      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             Processing and
             Packaging
             Creamery and
             Dairy          C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             Operations
             Dairy Products C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             Manufacturi ng
             Egg Processing C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Plants
             Brick,
             firebrick and  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -   See Section
             clay products                                         9.17
             manufacturin g
Mining &     Monument &
Excavation   architectural  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             stone
             manufacturin g
             Quarry/Sand                                           See Section
             and Gravel     C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   9.17
             Extraction
             Culvert        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
Metal        manufacturin g
Processing , Welding        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P   P   P    
Stamping     Wire Rope and
             Cable          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             Manufacturi ng
             Landfill,
             Construction   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Material
             Landfill,      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Solid Waste
Waste        Recycling      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  C   C       
Handling     Center
             Recycling      C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C       
             Processing
             Sanitary
             Transfer       C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C       
             Station
             Basket &
             hamper (wood,
Wood         reed, rattan,  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             etc.)
             manufacturin g
            Millwork       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             manufacturin g
            Electronics    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             manufacturin g
            Machinery      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             manufacturin g
             Musical
            instruments    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             manufacturin g
             Tool, die,
            gauge and      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   P   -    
             machine shops
            Wind turbine   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             manufacturin g
                                                      
General      Bio-Fuels
Manufactu    Manufacturi                                           See Sections
ring (High   ng, including  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   9.09 and
Hazard)      Ethanol                                               9.15
             production
             Grain Elevator
            and Storage    C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             Facilities
            Salvage        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Operations
             Scrap or                                              See Sections
            Salvage Yards  C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   9.08 and
                                                                   9.15
             Waste Recovery
             Facilities -                                          See Sections
            Commercial,    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -   9.08 and
             Industrial &                                          9.15
             Residential
             Wood
            Preserving     C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   C   -    
             Treatment
                                                      
            Barns          P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
            Bins, silos,   P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             grain storage
            Fuel storage   C  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             Fuel tanks and
            dispensing     C  -  -  -  C  -  -  -  C  -   -   -    
             equipment
             Portable on-
            demand storage T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T    
             containers
            Swimming pools P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  P  -   -   -   *1
            Tennis courts  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -   -   -    
             Solar energy
             systems for
            use on         C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   See Section
             individual                                            9.10
             properties or
             buildings
             Wind Energy                                           See Section
            Conversion     C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   9.06
             System
 
(Ord. 802, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 836, passed 5-13-2025)
Section 5.07   TA: Transitional Agricultural District
5.07.01   Intent:
The Transitional Agriculture District is established for the purpose of
preserving agricultural resources that are compatible with adjacent urban
growth. It is not intended for commercial feedlot operations for livestock or
poultry. Because the areas are not in the identified growth areas for the
community, the district is designed to limit urban sprawl.
5.07.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.07.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the TA-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.07.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.07.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and
Article 4 for more detail.
5.07.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
                     Lot    A       B      C      Max.    Max.     Max.
Use         Lot Area Width  Front   Rear   Side   Height  Building Impervious
            (acres)  (feet) Yard    Yard   Yard   (feet)  Coverage Coverage
                            (feet)* (feet) (feet)         (%)**    (%)
Single-
family      3        150    40      40     30     35      40       40
dwelling
Other
Permitted   3        150    40      40     30     35      40       40
Uses
Conditional 3        150    40      40     30     35      40       40
Uses
Accessory   -        -      40      40     30     15      5***     5
Structures
 
*   Front yard setback shall be 73 feet from the centerline of a County Road
with a R.O.W. of 66 feet, shall 40 feet when abutting any other platted street,
road or highway.
**   Percentage applies to the buildable area of the lot.
***   Accessory buildings shall not exceed the smallest of 6,534 square feet or
five percent of the size of the lot. The total coverage for all structures
shall not exceed 40 percent.
5.07.07   Other Applicable Provisions:
   1.   The following uses shall be a minimum of 2,640 feet from any
residential, commercial, industrial, or public use, as measured from the
nearest point on the lot line.
      a.   Commercial auction yards or barns.
      b.   Commercial production and husbandry of poultry, fish, and small
animals.
      c.   Commercial feedlots.
      d.   Feed mills.
      e.   Auto wrecking yards, junk yards, salvage yards, and scrap processing
yards.
      f.   Storage and distribution of anhydrous ammonia, fuel, fertilizer, and
other chemicals.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-157.png]
 
Section 5.08   RS Residential Subdivision District
5.08.01   Intent:
The Residential Subdivision District is established for the purpose of
identifying appropriate land for subdivision-density residential development
while preserving agricultural resources. It is not intended for intensive
agricultural uses. These areas are in the identified growth areas for the
community, and the district is designed to manage future development.
5.08.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.08.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the RS District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.08.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.08.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.08.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
                                             Lot    A      B      C      Max    Max.     Max.
Use                                   Lot    Width  Front  Rear   Side   Height Building Impervious
                                      Area   (feet) Yard   Yard   Yard   (feet) Coverage Coverage
                                                    (feet) (feet) (feet)        (%)      (%)
Single-family dwelling, detached      3      150    35     30 (4) 15     35     25       40
(private well, private septic)        Acres
Single-family   dwelling, detached 1 acre 150    35     30 (4) 15     35     25       40
(public well, private septic)
Single-family   dwelling, detached 20,000 80     35     30 (4) 15     35     25       40
(public well, public septic)          sf*
Other Permitted Uses                  20,000 80     35     30 (4) 15     45     25       40
                                      sf*
Conditional Uses                      20,000 100    75     30 (4) 15     45     25       40
                                      sf*
                                                    35
Accessory Structures                  -      -      (1)    10 (3) 10 (3) 15     5 (2)    5
                                                    (3)
 
   1.   Provided the Accessory Use shall not be located closer to the front lot
line than the closest point on the front wall of the dwelling.
   2.   See Section
4.12.08
   3.   In the case of an accessory building that exceeds 1,200 square feet in
total area, the required front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be doubled
to 70 feet, 20 feet, and 20 feet, respectively.
   4.   See Section
4.09.06 of this Ordinance.
   5.   On Corner Lots the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the Street Side Yard setback may conform to existing setbacks
of existing structures along that street. In new developments, the Street Side
Yard setback shall be equal to the Front Yard setback.
   “*” The minimum lot size for these uses may be as low indicated in the table
above provided the lots are supplied with public water and sanitary sewer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-159.png]
 
Section 5.09   R-1 Low Density Residential
5.09.01   Intent:
The Low Density Residential District is intended to permit low-density
residential developments to accommodate residential and other compatible uses.
5.09.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.09.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the R-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.09.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.09.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.09.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
            Lot Area Lot    A      B      C         Max.   Max.      Max.
Use         (Sq.     Width  Front  Rear   Side Yard Height Building  Impervious
            Ft.)     (feet) Yard   Yard   (feet)    (feet) Coverage  Coverage
                            (feet) (feet) (3)              (%)       (%)
Single-
family      8,000    50     30 (6) 35 (2) 10        35     35        50
dwelling
detached
Single-
family
dwelling    4,250    50     30 (6) 35 (2) 10 (4)    35     35        50
attached
(per unit)
Two family  8,500    50     30 (6) 35 (2) 10        35     35        50
dwelling
Other
Permitted   8,500    50     30 (6) 35 (2) 10        35     35        50
Uses
Conditional 8,500    50     30 (6) 35 (2) 10        35     35        50
Uses
Accessory   -        -      30 (6) 5 (7)  5         17     10 (1)    10
Use (5)
 
   1.   See Section
4.12.08.
   2.   See Section
4.09.06 of this Ordinance.
   3.   On Corner Lots, the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the Street Side Yard setback may conform to existing setbacks
of existing single-family structures or two-family structures along that
street. In new developments, the Street Side Yard setback shall be equal to the
Front Yard setback.
   4.   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
   5.   Accessory uses including but not limited to structures, driveways,
patios and other impervious surfaces highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   6.   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
   7.   See Section
4.12.10 of this Ordinance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-161.png]
 
Section 5.10   R-2 Medium/High Density Residential District
5.10.01   Intent:
The purpose of the Medium /High Density Residential District is to permit
single-family residences at a medium and/or high density with an increase of
density to include duplexes and similar residential development in areas
providing all public facilities and supporting facilities to maintain a sound
and pleasant environment for the inhabitants.
5.10.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.10.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the R-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.10.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.10.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.10.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
                        A      B         C          Max.    Max.     Max.
Use Lot Area  Lot Width Front  Rear Yard Side Yard  Height  Building Impervious
    (Sq. Ft.) (feet)    Yard   (feet)    (feet)     (feet)  Coverage Coverage
                        (feet)                              (%)      (%)
             Lot Area Lot     A      B      C      Max.    Max.     Max.
Use          (Sq.     Width   Front  Rear   Side   Height  Building Impervious
             Ft.)     (feet)  Yard   Yard   Yard   (feet)  Coverage Coverage
                              (feet) (feet) (feet)         (%)      (%)
Single-
family       6,000    50      30     25 (3) 5      35      35       50
dwelling
Single-
family       2,500/   20/unit 30     25 (3) (1)(8) 40      35       50
attached/    unit
Townhouses
Two-family
dwelling/    6,000    60      30     25 (3) 5      40      35       50
duplex
Multi-family 1,500/
dwelling/    unit     50      30     25 (3) 5 (2)  45 (7)  35       50
Apartment
Condominiums 2,500/   20/unit 30     25 (3) 5      35 (7)  35       50
             unit
Other
Permitted    6,500    50      30     25 (3) 5      35      35       50
Uses
Conditional  6,500    50      30     25 (3) 5      35      35       50
Uses
Accessory    -        -       30     5 (9)  5      17      10 (4)   10
Uses (6)
 
   1.   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
   2.   The Side Yard Setback shall be 10 feet if the structure is over 30 feet
in height.
   3.   See Section
4.09.06 of this Ordinance.
   4.   See Section
4.12.08.
   5.   On Corner Lots the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the Street Side Yard setback may conform to existing setbacks
of existing single-family structures, two family structures and multiple family
structures along that street. In new developments, the Street Side Yard setback
shall be equal to the Front Yard setback.
   6.   Accessory uses including but not limited to structures, driveways,
patios and other impervious surfaces highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   7.   The maximum height may be increased through the conditional use permit
process per Section
4.13.02.
   8.   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
   9.   See Section 4.12.10 of this Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-163.png]
 
Section 5.11   R-3 Lakefront Residential District
5.11.01   Intent:
This district is intended to provide living areas on lakefront developments
within the City’s planning jurisdiction. Single and two-family residential
dwellings are allowed in the district to promote and encourage a suitable
environment for family life, minimize congestion, and reduce potential
environmental hazards in relation to land use and the floodplain.
5.11.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.11.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the R-3 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.11.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.11.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.11.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
            Lot                                Lakeside        Max.     Max.
            Area   Lot    Front  Rear   Side   Setback  Max.   Building Impervious
Use         (Sq.   Width  Yard   Yard   Yard   (ft.     Height Coverage Coverage
            Ft.)   (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) from     (feet) (%)      (%)
                                               water)
Single-
family      8,000  50     20     25 (3) 5 (2)  20       35     40       60
dwelling
(7)
Single-
family      2,500/ 25/                  (1)
attached/   unit   unit   20     25 (3) (8)    20       35     40       60
Townhouses         (6)
(7)
Two-family
dwelling/   6,000  60     20     25 (3) 5 (2)  20       35     40       60
duplex (7)
Other
Permitted   8,000  50     20     25 (3) 5 (2)  20       35     50       60
Uses
Conditional 8,000  50     20     25 (3) 5 (2)  20       35     50       60
Uses
Accessory
Structures  -      -      20     5      5      20 (5)   17     15 (4)   15
(8)
 
   1.   The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall
shall be along the adjoining lot line.
   2.   See Section
4.09.06 of this Ordinance.
   3.   See Section
4.12.08.
   4.   Boat slips or docks (unattached to buildings/structures) shall have no
setback required when in water.
   5.   Exterior lots shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width.
   6.   On Corner Lots, the following criteria apply to setbacks. In existing
developed areas, the Street Side Yard setback may conform to existing setbacks
of existing single-family structures and two-family structure structures along
that street. In new developments, the Street Side Yard setback shall be equal
to the Front Yard setback.
   7.   Accessory uses including but not limited to structures, driveways,
patios and other impervious surfaces highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   8.   All interior units may be a minimum of 20 feet wide per unit; while,
all exterior units shall have a minimum of 30 feet of width per unit.
(Ord. 813, passed 6-11-2024)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-165.png]
 
5.11.07   Supplemental Residential Regulations
   1.   Single-family Attached/Townhouses.
      A.   Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on the
property line separating both dwellings.
      B.   Each unit is separated by a two-hour fire rated wall from the lowest
level and continuing through the roof structure.
      C.   Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
      D.   When each unit is in separate ownership. the accompanying lot shall
not be in common ownership with any other unit.
      E.   No more than four units shall be connected in this district.
      F.   Accessory structure setback from lake allowed to be 0' with
engineered seawall.
   2.   Resource extraction operations, pursuant to Section
9.17 shall also meet the following Supplemental Regulations within this
specific district.
      A.   Said operation was the initial method for the lake development;
      B.   Said operation is part of a continuing Lakefront Residential
development plan;
      C.   Said operation and any residential development have separate points
of ingress and egress; and
      D.   Said operation is being established to expand an existing Lakefront
Residential development.
(Ord. 813, passed 6-11-2024)
Section 5.12   RM Mobile Home Residential District
5.12.01   Intent:
This district recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can
provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It provides
opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or subdivisions,
along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential
neighborhoods.
5.12.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.12.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the RM District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.12.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23
5.12.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.12.06   Special Design Criteria for this District
   1.   A mobile home development shall have a lot area of not less than five
acres. No mobile homes or other structures shall be located less than 83 feet
from the road centerline when contiguous to or having frontage to a County Road
or 25 feet when contiguous from a State Highway. The setback on all other court
property lines shall be 25 feet. These areas shall be landscaped. The minimum
lot depth in a mobile home court shall be 200 feet.
   2.   Each lot provided for occupancy of a single mobile home dwelling shall
have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet, excluding road right-of-way,
and a width of not less than 50 feet. Each individual lot shall have:
      a.   Side yard setback shall not be less than eight feet, except that on
corner lots, the setback for all buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet on the
side abutting a street/road.
      b.   Front yard setback shall not be less than 30 feet.
      c.   Rear yard setback of not less than 25 feet.
   3.   There shall be a minimum livable floor area of 500 square feet in each
mobile home.
   4.   Height of buildings shall be:
      a.   Maximum height for principal uses shall be 35 feet.
      b.   Maximum height for accessory uses shall be 10 feet.
   5.   Each lot shall have access to a hard-surfaced drive not less than 22
feet in width, excluding parking.
   6.   Community water and community sewage disposal facilities shall be
provided with connections to each lot, in accordance with design standards for
the City. The water supply shall be sufficient for domestic use and for fire
protection.
   7.   Service buildings including adequate laundry and drying facilities.
Common toilet facilities for mobile homes which do not have these facilities
within each unit may be provided.
   8.   Storm shelters shall be required and shall meet the following criteria:
      a.   Shelter space equivalent to two persons per mobile home lot,
      b.   Designed in conformance with “National Performance Criteria for
Tornado Shelters” by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and any
other referenced material by FEMA,
      c.   Shelters shall be sited in order to provide maximum protection to
park occupants and so that residents may reach a shelter within the maximum
safe time frame as directed by FEMA.
   9.   All trailer pad locations shall be hard surfaced with properly
reinforced Poured in Place Concrete.
   10.   Not less than 10 percent of the total court area shall be designated
and used for park, playground and recreational purposes.
   11.   Each mobile home dwelling shall be provided with a paved patio or
equivalent, other than parking spaces, of not less than 150 square feet.
   12.   All trailers shall have skirting which is in good repair, meets
manufacturer standards, and is in conformance with the color scheme of the
trailer.
5.12.07   Special Requirements
All lots must be platted in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the
City of Valley and shall also contain the following information:
   a.   A complete plan of the mobile home development shall be submitted
showing:
   b.   A development plan and grading plan of the court.
   c.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
   d.   The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces.
   e.   The area and dimensions of the park, playground and recreation areas.
   f.   The location and width of roadways and walkways.
   g.   The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.
   h.   The location of water and sewer lines and sewage disposal facilities.
   i.   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home court.
5.12.08   Supplemental Residential Regulations
   1.   Townhouses
      A.   Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and shall be located
on the property line separating both dwellings.
      B.   Each unit is separated by a two-hour fire rated wall from the lowest
level and continuing through the roof structure.
      C.   Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
      D.   When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot shall
not be in common ownership with any other unit.
      E.   No more than three units shall be connected in this district.
Section 5.13   C-1 General Commercial District
5.13.01   Intent:
The General Commercial District is intended to establish standards that will
foster and maintain an area within the district boundaries that will benefit
the retail trade, business, cultural, and social activities of the entire
community.
5.13.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.13.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the C-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.13.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.13.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.13.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                     Lot    A      B      C      Max.    Max.      Max.
Use         Lot      Width  Front  Rear   Side   Height  Building  Impervious
            Area     (feet) Yard   Yard   Yard   (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                            (feet) (feet) (feet)         (%)       (%)
Permitted   (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
Uses
Conditional (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
Uses
Multi-      1,500
family      sf/unit  -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
dwellings   (3)
Accessory   -        -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        40
Structures
 
   1.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   2.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear
yard setback shall be 25 feet, unless there is an alley between the two, in
which case the rear yard setback shall be five feet.
   3.   Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage,
building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping.
   4.   A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is
present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then front
yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
5.13.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any
traffic on any public street.
   5.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid
casting direct light on any property located in a residential or mobile home
district.
   6.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   7.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   8.   A portion of the side or rear yard of a motor vehicle, boat, and
trailer rental/sales lots and construction laydown yards may be drained and
surfaced with crushed rock, except in those portions of the lot maintained as
landscape area, provided, however, that all such lots shall
be subject to all impervious coverage requirements.
   9.   35% of the required front yard shall be maintained in landscaping.
   10.   Lots along the highways shall be required to gain access through a
paved service road.
(Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025)
Section 5.14   C-2 Central Business District
5.14.01   Intent:
This district is intended to provide appropriate development regulations for
Downtown Valley. Mixed uses are encouraged within the C-2 District, without
allowing activities which would have a negative effect on the town center. The
grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town center’s role as a center
for trade, service, and civic life.
5.14.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.14.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the C-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.14.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.14.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.14.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
 
            Lot Area Lot    Front  Rear     Side    Max.    Max.     Max.
Use         (Sq.     Width  Yard   Yard     Yard    Height  Building Impervious
            Ft.)     (feet) (feet) (feet)** (feet)* (feet)  Coverage Coverage
                                                            (%)      (%)
Permitted   -        -      0      0        0       45      100      100
Uses
Conditional -        -      0      0        0       45      100      100
Uses
Accessory   -        -      0      0        0       45      -        -
Structures
 
   *   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the Side
Yard setback shall be 10 feet, except when separated by an alley.
   **   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the Rear
Yard setback shall be 25 feet, except when separated by an alley.
5.14.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and/or District and so that no glare is
visible to any traffic on any public street.
   5.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   6.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   7.   All new buildings constructed within the C-2 Central Business District
shall meet the design guidelines found in Articles
11 and
12 of this ordinance.
Section 5.15   C-3 Highway Commercial District
5.15.01   Intent:
This district is applied to parcels along US Highway 275 and Nebraska Highway
64. The district permits a mixture of uses. Uses will tend to serve the
traveling public or larger commercial properties needing space for parking and
turning.
5.15.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.15.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the C-3 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.15.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.15.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.16.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                     Lot    A      B      C      Max.    Max.      Max.
Use         Lot Area Width  Front  Rear   Side   Height  Building  Impervious
                     (feet) Yard   Yard   Yard   (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                            (feet) (feet) (feet)         (%)       (%)
Permitted   (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
Uses
Conditional (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
Uses
Multi-
family      (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      40        75
dwellings
Accessory   -        -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45      -         -
Structures
 
   1.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   2.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear
yard setback shall be 25 feet, unless there is an alley between the two, in
which case the rear yard setback shall be five feet.
   3.   Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage,
building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping.
   4.   A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is
present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then front
yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
5.16.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any
traffic on any public street.
   5.   All new buildings constructed within the C-3 Highway Commercial
District shall meet the design guidelines found in Articles 11 and 12 of this
ordinance.
   6.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   7.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   8.   A portion of the side or rear yard of a motor vehicle, boat, and
trailer rental/sales lots and construction laydown yards may be drained and
surfaced with crushed rock, except in those portions of the lot maintained as
landscape area, provided, however, that all such lots shall
be subject to all impervious coverage requirements.
   9.   35% of the required front yard shall be maintained in landscaping.
   10.   Lots along the highways shall be required to gain access through a
paved service road.
(Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025)
Section 5.16   I-1 Light Industrial District
5.16.01   Intent:
It is the intent of the Light Industrial District to provide standards for
areas suitable for some limited industrial, wholesaling and storage activities,
to preserve land for the expansion of the basic economic activities, to free
these areas from intrusion by incompatible land uses, that these areas should
be served with adequate transportation facilities, and that user of this land
conduct activities that create low to moderate hazards to adjacent properties.
5.16.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.16.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the I-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.16.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.16.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.16.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                     Lot    Front  Rear   Side   Max.    Max.      Max.
Use         Lot Area Width  Yard   Yard   Yard   Height  Building  Impervious
                     (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                                                         (%)       (%)
Permitted   (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Conditional (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Accessory   -        -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Structures
 
   1.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   2.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   3.   Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage,
building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping.
   4.   A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is
present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then front
yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
   5.   The minimum height requirement may be exceeded, provided the setback is
increased by one foot for every one-foot increase in building height.
5.16.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 30 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any
traffic on any public street.
   5.   When adjacent to an alley, the width of the alley shall be included in
computing the minimum rear yard setback.
   6.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   7.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   8.   A portion of the side or rear yard of a motor vehicle, boat, and
trailer rental sales lots and construction laydown yards may be drained and
surfaced with crushed rock, except in those portions of the lot maintained as
landscape area, provided, however, that all such lots shall
be subject to all impervious coverage requirements.
(Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025)
5.16.08   Performance Standards:
See Section
9.05 of the Supplemental Regulations.
Section 5.17   I-2 Heavy Industrial District
5.17.01   Intent:
It is the intent of the Heavy Industrial District to provide standards for
areas suitable for some intense industrial, wholesaling and storage activities,
to preserve land for the expansion of the basic economic activities, to free
these areas from intrusion by incompatible land uses, that these areas should
be served with adequate transportation facilities, and that user of this land
conduct activities that create low to moderate hazards to adjacent properties.
5.17.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.17.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the I-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.17.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.17.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.17.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                     Lot    Front  Rear   Side   Max.    Max.      Max.
Use         Lot Area Width  Yard   Yard   Yard   Height  Building  Impervious
                     (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                                                         (%)       (%)
Permitted   (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Conditional (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Accessory   -        -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Structures
 
   6.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   7.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   8.   Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage,
building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping.
   9.   A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is
present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then front
yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
   10.   The minimum height requirement may be exceeded, provided the setback
is increased by one foot for every one-foot increase in building height.
5.17.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 25 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any
traffic on any public street.
   5.   When adjacent to an alley, the width of the alley shall be included in
computing the minimum rear yard setback.
   6.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   7.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   8.   A portion of the side or rear yard of a motor vehicle, boat, and
trailer rental/sales lots and construction laydown yards may be drained and
surfaced with crushed rock, except in those portions of the lot maintained as
landscape area, provided, however, that all such lots shall be subject to all
impervious coverage requirements.
(Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025)
5.17.08   Performance Standards:
See Section
9.05 of the Supplemental Regulations.
Section 5.18   I-3 General Industrial District
5.18.01   Intent:
It is the intent of the I-3 General Industrial District to provide standards
for areas suitable for some very light industrial, wholesaling and related
storage activities, to preserve land for the expansion of the basic economic
activities, to free these areas from intrusion by incompatible land uses, that
these areas should be served with adequate transportation facilities, and that
users of this land conduct activities that create extremely low or no hazards
to adjacent properties. Semitrailer traffic is to be minimal, on an “as
necessary” basis only.
In general, the I-3 district is intended to provide a transitional district
between manufacturing and consumer services*. Included in the District are
consumer services*, and related warehousing, parking, display and trucking as
well as retail services* and wholesale sales and services*. This area is
characterized by being bounded (either adjacent to or across public right-of-
way from) by a residential district on at least two sides.
* Services as provided in this District can be characterized as a business
function, auxiliary to production, whose useful labor does not provide a
tangible commodity, but satisfies a public demand in the form of providing
supplies, maintenance, repair or incidental services.
5.18.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.18.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the I-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.18.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.18.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.18.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                     Lot    Front  Rear   Side   Max.    Max.      Max.
Use         Lot Area Width  Yard   Yard   Yard   Height  Building  Impervious
                     (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                                                         (%)       (%)
Permitted   (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Conditional (3)      -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Uses
Accessory   -        -      25 (4) (2)    (1)    45 (5)  -         100
Structures
 
   1.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   2.   None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear
yard setback shall be 25 feet.
   3.   Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage,
building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping.
   4.   A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is
present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then front
yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
   5.   The minimum height requirement may be exceeded, provided the setback is
increased by one foot for every one-foot increase in building height.
5.18.07   Use Limitations:
   1.   When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs
shall be allowed in the required front yard within 25 feet of such residential
district.
   2.   When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall
provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a
fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant
to Section
9.04.
   3.   No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the
public, shall be permitted.
   4.   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any
traffic on any public street.
   5.   When adjacent to an alley, the width of the alley shall be included in
computing the minimum rear yard setback.
   6.   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise
display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the
residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least
six feet in height.
   7.   Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause
glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
   8.   A portion of the side or rear yard of a motor vehicle, boat, and
trailer rental/sales lots and construction laydown yards may be drained and
surfaced with crushed rock, except in those portions of the lot maintained as
landscape area, provided, however, that all such lots shall be subject to all
impervious coverage requirements.
(Ord. 842, passed 10-14-2025)
5.18.08   Performance Standards:
See Section
9.05 of the Supplemental Regulations.
Section 5.19   CMD Clustered/Mixed Use Development District
5.19.01   Intent
The Clustered/Mixed Use Development District (CMD) is to encourage the creative
design of new living and retail areas, as distinguished from subdivisions of
standard lot sizes, in order to permit such creative design in buildings, open
space, while promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of existing and
future residents of surrounding neighborhoods.
When a CMD District is requested, it will require a change of zone with the CMD
being attached to the underlying district. Once the rezoning is approved, the
allowed uses and standards herein shall modify the minimum requirements of the
underlying district.
5.19.02   Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the
minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.19.03   Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well
as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of
ground in the CMD District as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
5.19.04   Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and
said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section
4.23.
5.19.05   Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table
5.06 and Sections within
Article 4 for more detail.
5.19.06   Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise
noted:
 
                      Lot    Front  Rear   Side   Max.    Max.      Max.
Use          Lot Area Width  Yard   Yard   Yard   Height  Building  Impervious
                      (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)  Coverage  Coverage
                                                          (%)       (%)
Single-
family       4,000    40     (1)    (1)    (1)    35      (1)       (1)
dwellings
Multi-family 1,500
dwellings    per      60     (1)    (1)    (1)    45      (1)       (1)
             unit
Single-
family       2,500
attached/    per      18     (1)    (1)    (1)    35      (1)       (1)
Townhomes/   unit
condominiums
Permitted    (1)      (1)    (1)    (1)    (1)    45      (1)       (1)
Uses
Conditional  (1)      (1)    (1)    (1)    (1)    45      (1)       (1)
Uses
Accessory    -        -      (1)    (1)    (1)    45      (1)       (1)
Structures
 
   1.   Lot and yard requirements are dependent upon the development and may
vary depending upon areas conserved or special amenities being used or
established and will be reviewed upon submittal of the Development Plan.
5.19.07   Supplemental Requirements:
   1.   The Planning Commission, in its minutes, shall set forth its reasons
for recommendation of approval or denial of the application for a CMD plan
approval, along with specific evidence and facts showing that the proposal
meets or does not meet the following conditions.
      A.   Said CMD shall be in general conformity with the provisions of the
Valley Comprehensive Plan.
      B.   Said CMD shall not have a substantially adverse effect on the
development of the neighboring area.
      C.   The minimum size allowed for a CMD District by type of use shall be
as follows:
         Residential (only), three acres;
         Residential - Commercial (combination), five acres.
      D.   Height, bulk, and yard requirements shall be reflected on the
Development Plan and shall promote an efficient and creative use of land.
   2.   Use Limitations:
      In District CMD no building, structure, land, or premises shall be used,
and no building shall be erected, constructed, or altered, except for any use
permitted in this District. All uses must be approved as shown on the
Development Plan as specified in this division.
   3.   Standards and conditions for development:
      A development proposed for land classified as the CMD district shall be
consistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use,
type, bulk, and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open
space, public facilities, and the Development Plan shall, where applicable,
reflect compliance.
      A.   The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Commission and City Council
that there is the ability to carry out the proposed plan, including financial
assurances and the phasing of the project, and shall prepare and submit a
schedule of construction, if necessary. The proposed construction shall begin
within a period of 12 months following the approval of the final application by
the City Council. A minimum of 50% of the total planned construction shown on
the final plan shall be completed within a period of five years following such
approval or the approval shall expire. If the approval expires under this
section, the applicant shall show good cause to the Planning Commission to
extend the plan approval.
      B.   The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants,
shall make such other arrangements, and shall furnish such performance bonds,
escrow deposit, or other financial guarantees for public improvements as may be
determined by the City Council to be reasonably required to assure performance
in accordance with the Development Plan and to protect the public interest in
the event of abandonment of said plan before completion.
      C.   The site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to
carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development.
The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be
adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development.
      D.   The development shall not impose an undue burden on public services
and facilities, such as fire and police protection.
      E.   The entire tract or parcel of land to be occupied by the CMD
development shall be held in single ownership or control, or if there are two
or more owners, the application for such CMD development shall be filed jointly
by all owners. This provision may be waived provided that the land contains
existing improvements.
      F.   The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks,
lighting, and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding
land uses, and any part of a CMD development not used for structures, parking
and loading areas, or access ways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved as
shown on the Development Plan.
      G.   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
the parking and loading regulations of the City of Valley.
      H.   When a commercial use within a CMD District abuts a residential
district, the Development Plan shall reflect screening consisting of
landscaping and/or fencing provided adjacent to any adjoining residential
district; except in the event the adjacent residential use and the commercial
use are separated by a street right-of-way.
      I.   All residential and commercial buildings shall set back not less
than 25 feet from the perimeter of the land zoned CMD. Additional setback from
a heavily traveled thoroughfare may be required, when found reasonable by the
planning commission for protection of health, safety, and general welfare.
      J.   Building coverage area shall not exceed the following percentages of
the net developable area of each individual parcel of the total development:
         Single-family Residential: 60%maximum;
         Strip/Big Box Commercial: 50% maximum;
         Mixed Use Commercial/Residential: 100% maximum.
      NOTE: Building coverage area, is the area covered by building(s) or
structure(s) on each individual lot or parcel (not including such impervious
improvements such as but not limited to walkways, driveways, patios etc.). The
net developable area shall be the area of each parcel and the net of any
required yard required under the Development Plan.
      The Development Plan shall reflect the calculations used to demonstrate
compliance with this requirement.
      K.   A minimum of 20 percent of the net area of that part of a CMD
development reserved for residential use shall be provided for Common Areas as
defined by these regulations under subsection (P) below. The term “net area”
shall be the gross area, measured in square feet, of the Development Plan
devoted to residential use less the area dedicated for public streets. Common
Areas shall be defined as playgrounds, street medians, landscaped green space,
or other similar areas designed to be used by the residents of the development
in common with each other. Common Areas for the leisure and recreation of
development residents shall be owned and maintained in common by them, through
a homeowner's association.
      L.   The CMD District shall include such provisions for the ownership and
maintenance of the Common Areas as are reasonably necessary to insure its
continuity, care, conservation, and maintenance, and to ensure that remedial
measures will be available to the City Council if the common open space is
permitted to deteriorate, or is not maintained in a condition consistent with
the best interests of the planned unit development or of the entire community.
The applicant shall submit any protective covenants and organizational
documents of the homeowner’s association with the Development Plan.
      M.   No residential use shall have direct access onto an arterial street
unless approved by the City Council in the Development Plan.
      N.   Any commercial use must reflect its traffic flow on the Development
Plan. All commercial areas must have indirect access via a collector or
arterial street; however, no individual commercial use may have direct access
onto collector or arterial streets.
      O.   Sidewalks shall be built to City specifications along all public and
private streets; however, an alternative pedestrian and sidewalk plan may be
developed which provides pedestrian access between each use in the CMD
development.
      P.   Common Areas as defined under this zoning district shall mean land
area of the site not covered by buildings, parking, structures, community
buildings, or accessory structures, except recreational structures. Common
Areas shall include open space that is accessible and available to all owners
or residents in common pursuant to an Owner’s Association.
5.19.08   Application for approval of Clustered / Mixed Use Development:
   1.   An application for a CMD shall be handled in the same manner prescribed
for amending this Ordinance. The same requirements for notice, advertisement of
public hearing, protests, and adoption shall be required as zoning changes.
   2.   The applicant shall prepare and submit five hard copies and one digital
copy of the development plan (the “Development Plan”) of the proposed
development in the CMD District for review and approval by the Planning
Commission. The Development Plan shall include:
      A.   A site plan showing:
         1)   Contours at intervals of two feet or spot elevations on a 150-
foot grid shall be required on flat land;
         2)   Location, size, height, and use of all proposed structures and
proposed yards on each lot;
         3)   All points of ingress and egress, driveways, circulation aisles,
parking lots, parking spaces, and service areas;
         4)   All streets adjoining subject property and the width of the
existing right-of-way;
         5)   Areas set aside for Common Areas with the type of use or
recreational facilities planned for each;
         6)   Designation of individual parcels if the proposed development is
to be set up in separate construction phases;
         7)   Designation of individual lots if such lots are proposed to be
sold to individual owners;
         8)   Location of required screening;
         9)   Location of natural features such as ponds, tree clusters, and
rock outcropping;
         10)   Existing development on adjacent properties within 200 feet.
      B.   The above-described site plan shall also include a section
designated as "general provisions," and said section shall include the
following when, said items are applicable:
         1)   Net area in square feet of the development. (Note: Net area shall
be computed as the gross area less the land dedicated or necessary to be
dedicated for public street right-of-way.
      C.   Density of dwelling units per acre of the total dwelling units for
the entire plan.
         1)   Building coverage of the net area of the development by
individual parcel or total development.
         2)   The percentage of the Development Plan provided for common open
space as defined by this regulation. (Note: 20 percent is the minimum).
         3)   If more than one parcel is proposed, a statement relating to the
sequence of development shall be included.
         4)   Required number of parking spaces and location.
         5)   Gross floor area proposed for commercial buildings.
         6)   All proposed land uses shall be listed by parcel.
            a.   A statement or adequate drawings shall be included describing
the manner for the disposition of sanitary waste and storm water.
            b.   The full legal description of the boundaries of the property
or properties to be included in the CMD development.
            c.   A vicinity map showing the general arrangement of streets
within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the proposed CMD
development.
            d.   An elevation drawing of the general characteristics of the
proposed buildings may be submitted if the applicant desires.
            e.   When a CMD development includes provisions for common space
and/or recreational facilities, a statement describing how such open space and/
or facility be owned and maintained when not under the ownership of a
governmental entity. A homeowner association or other controlling entity shall
provide the City of Valley with copies of the proposed articles of
incorporation and bylaws of such entity.
   3.   The Planning Commission shall meet within 45 days of an application
being filed. Plans shall be filed with the City at least four weeks prior to a
scheduled Planning Commission meeting. After the application for a CMD
development is filed, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
said development after giving required notice for hearings in amendments. Said
public hearing may be adjourned from time to time and, within a reasonable
period of time after the conclusion of said public hearing, the planning
commission shall prepare and transmit to the City Council and the applicant
specific findings of fact with respect to the extent which the Development Plan
complies with those regulations, together with its recommendations in respect
to the action to be taken on the Development Plan and CMD requirements. The
planning commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or approval with
amendments, conditions or restrictions.
   4.   The City Council shall or shall not approve the Development Plan and
authorize the submitting of the final Development Plan.
   5.   Substantial or significant changes in the preliminary plat and CMD
design shall only be made after rehearing and approval unless the changes were
otherwise required by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
5.19.09   Final approval:
   1.   After approval of a Development Plan and prior to the issuance of any
building permit or zoning permit, the applicant shall submit an application for
final approval with the CMD development compliance review committee. The CMD
development compliance committee shall consist of members of the Valley
Planning Commission, Valley City Council, the Building Inspector, the Valley
City Attorney, and/ or the Valley City Engineer; this committee will be
assembled only on an as needed basis. Said final application may include the
entire CMD District or may be for a unit or section thereof as set forth in the
approval of the preliminary plan. The application shall include five hard
copies and one digital copy of such drawings, specifications, covenants,
easements, conditions, and any other conditions including but not limited to
performance bonds. As set forth in the approval of the Development Plan
preliminary plan and in accordance with the conditions established in this
chapter for a CMD District. The final plan shall include the same information,
as the preliminary plan except the following shall also be provided:
      A.   A surveyor's certificate certifying to the accuracy of the boundary
surveys shown.
      B.   Location, names, tangent lengths, centerline radius of each curve
and its interior width and angle of all proposed public right-of-way;
      C.   All easements and appropriate building setback lines;
      D.   All lot lines, and lot dimensions including chord distances for
curvilinear lot lines;
      E.   Lot and/or parcel numbers;
      F.   Location, size, height, and use of all proposed or present
buildings;
      G.   Dedication of all streets, public highways, or other land intended
for public use, signed by the owner and by all other parties who have a
mortgage or lien interest in the property, together with any restrictions or
covenants which apply to the property.
      H.   A waiver of claim by the applicant for damages occasioned by the
establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of
streets and alleys to conform to grades established.
   2.   A plan submitted for final approval shall be deemed to be in
substantial compliance with the plan previously given tentative approval,
provided any modification of the Development Plan does not:
      A.   Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by
more than five percent or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common
open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area; nor
      B.   Increase by more than 10 percent the floor area proposed for non-
residential use; nor
      C.   Increase by more than five percent the total ground area covered by
buildings nor involve a substantial change in the height of buildings.
      D.   Substantially change the design of the plan so as to significantly
alter:
         1)   Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow.
         2)   The juxtaposition of different land uses.
         3)   The relation of open space to residential development.
         4)   The proposed phasing of construction.
         5)   Proposed use of one or more buildings to a more intensive use
category as delineated in this chapter.
   3.   A public hearing need not be held for the approval of a final plan if
it is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan. The
planning commission shall, within thirty 30 business days of the time of
filing, review the final plan for compliance with the approved preliminary
plan. Upon review approval, said final plan shall be filed with the City
Council for final approval and acceptance.
   4.   In the event that the final plan submitted contains changes in excess
of those permitted under Subparagraph (2) above, applicant shall resubmit the
original plan. The Development Plan shall be modified in the same manner
prescribed in this division as for original approval.
5.19.10   Enforcement and modification of plan:
   1.   To further the mutual interest of the residents and owners of the CMD
development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the CMD
plan, as finally approved, and to insure that modifications, if any, in the
plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the said residents and owners
upon the provisions of the plan, nor result in changes that would adversely
affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification of the provisions
of the plan as finally approved, whether recorded by plan, covenant, easement
or otherwise, shall be subject to the following provisions:
      A.   The use of land and the use, bulk, and location of buildings and
structures; and
      B.   The quality and location of common space; and
      C.   The intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run
in favor of the City and
   2.   Shall be enforceable in law or in equity, by the City, without
limitation on any powers or regulation otherwise granted by law. The
development of any land pursuant to an approved Development Plan shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section
5.19 and the approved Development Plan.
5.19.11   Amendments:
The CMD District agreement or an approved Development Plan may be amended in
the same manner prescribed in this division for approval of a preliminary or
final plan. Application for amendment maybe made by the homeowner's association
or 51 percent of the owners of the property within the CMD District.
5.19.12   Platting:
For unplatted tracts or tracts being replatted, the approval of the Development
Plan shall be considered as the approval of a preliminary plan. To complete the
platting process, the applicant need only submit a final plat. Said final plat
shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations, except the scale shall
be 100 feet, 50 feet, or 20 feet to the inch.
5.19.13   Fees:
For the following applications, fees shall be paid to the City:
   1.   Development Plan, filing fee shall be set by the City Council by
separate ordinance;
   2.   Final plan, filing fee shall be set by the City Council by separate
ordinance.
These fees are separate and do not include any Preliminary and Final Plat Fees
and/or any Change of Zone Fees required by the City of Valley.
Section 5.20   HO Highway Corridor Protection District (overlay district)
5.20.01   Intent:
The City of Valley has established basic site development criteria to be
implemented within the boundaries of this overlay district. These criteria
include, but are not limited to the following: landscaping, signing, lighting,
and interior street development. The motivation for regulating these issues is
to provide for a cohesive and properly developed entrance into the City of
Valley. Guiding development in this manner promotes the general health, safety
and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of the City, by
providing quality design and construction, which will also aid in the
protection of past and future investment in the corridor.
5.20.02   Purpose:
The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items that
affect the physical and aesthetic aspects of Valley’s community entrances.
Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, planting, signs, street
hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by the public. The
uses allowed are governed by the underlying zoning district classification.
This Section provides additional criteria which shall be adhered to within the
HO overlay areas.
The criteria contained herein are not intended to restrict imagination,
innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles
that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual
appearance of the entrances to the City, preserve taxable values, and promote
the public health, safety and welfare.
5.20.03   Geographic Area:
The Gateway Corridor Protection District extends generally along U.S. Highway
275 and portions of Nebraska Highway 64 within the one-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction of Valley. The width of this district is as indicated on the
Official Zoning Map.
5.20.04   Criteria for Application:
All developments consisting of more than one principal building, mixed-uses,
multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required to rezone the
property as a Clustered/Mixed Use Development (CMD) and meet the requirements
of said district. The CMD process and rezoning shall be in conjunction with
Preliminary and Final Plat review and approval.
5.20.05   Vehicular Circulation:
   1.   All development within the district shall have service roads. Highway
access shall be minimized.
   2.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the
streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and
parking areas.
   3.   Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces
containing trees or tree groupings.
5.20.06   Landscape and Site Treatment:
   1.   Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of
planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water features, and all
visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures.
   2.   Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and
utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification
to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good site design and
development.
   3.   Plant material and Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of
certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent
developments.
   4.   Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall
provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is
provided, for sitting.
   5.   Landscape treatments shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and important axis, and provide shade.
   6.   The use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations thereof shall be
used to screen service yards and other places that tend to detract from the
building features. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer.
   7.   Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the
adjoining building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design
and excessive brightness avoided. Lighting shall be designed to a standard that
does not impact adjoining properties, especially residential areas.
   8.   Developments in the Highway Corridor Protection District shall meet all
other applicable screening regulations pursuant to
Article 7.
(Ord. 804, passed 12-12-2023)
5.20.07   Signs:
   A.   Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in
its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
   B.   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building and site to which it principally relates.
   C.   The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained
and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
   D.   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum
needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be composed in proportion
to the area of the sign face.
   E.   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and
shall not compete for attention.
   F.   Identification signs of prototype design and corporation logos shall
conform to the criteria for all other signs.
   G.   All signage shall comply with the Sign Regulations found in the
Supplemental Regulations, pursuant to
Article 8.
5.20.05   Conflicts:
All conflicts between this Section and the landscaping and sign sections shall
be governed by the most restrictive regulation.
Section 5.21   Floodplain Regulations
5.21.01   Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare. The Legislature of the State of
Nebraska has in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S. 1943 assigned the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
5.21.02   Findings of Fact
   1.   Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation
      The flood hazard areas of Valley, Nebraska, are subject to inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   2.   General Causes of the Flood Losses
      These flood losses are caused by: (1) The cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
(2) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages.
   3.   Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards
      This ordinance uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which
consists of a series of interrelated steps.
      a.   Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected
frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The
base flood is selected for this ordinance. It is representative of large floods
which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is in the general order of a
flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence
in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood
Insurance Study 31055CV001E, 31055CV002E, 31055CV003E, and 31055CV004E dated
03/25/2025, as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
      b.   Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic
engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas
to convey the base flood.
      c.   Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
      d.   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the
floodway profile.
      e.   Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
(Ord. 835, passed 3-24-2025)
5.21.03   Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section
5.21.02 (1) by applying the provisions of this ordinance to:
   1.   Restrict or prohibit uses, which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or
velocities.
   2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities,
which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction.
   3.   Protect individuals from buying lands, which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
   4.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
5.21.04   General Provisions
   1.   Lands to which ordinance applies
      This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the
City of Valley, Nebraska identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
31055C0135H, 31055C0145H, 31055C0153H, 31055C0161H, 31055C0165H dated December
2, 2005; 31055C0154J, 31055C0155J, 31055C0160J, 31055C0162J dated May 19, 2014;
31055C0170L dated March 25, 2025, and any revisions thereto, as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within the Zoning
Districts FW and FF established in Sections 5.21.05 of this ordinance. In all
areas covered by this ordinance no development shall be permitted except upon
the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop, granted by the governing body
or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as
the governing body or the designated representative may reasonably impose for
the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants
of the community and where specifically noted in Sections 5.21.06 through
5.21.08.
   2.   Enforcement Officer
      The Building Inspector of the community is hereby designated as the
community's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this Ordinance.
   3.   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
      The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall
be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact
location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning
map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the
necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested,
the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood
elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating
the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case
to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so
desires.
   4.   Compliance
      Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community, no
development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable
regulations.
   5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
      It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this ordinance shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   6.   Interpretation
      In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
   7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
      The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside
floodway and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within
such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall
not create liability on the part of Building Inspector of the City of Valley,
Nebraska or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may
result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
   8.   Severability
      If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
   9.   Appeal
      Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the
Building Inspector the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly
to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 835, passed 3-24-2025)
5.21.05   Development Permit
   1.   Permit Required
      No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain development
or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining
a separate permit for development as defined in Section
5.21.14.
   2.   Administration
      The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this ordinance.
   3.   Duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not be limited to:
      A.   Review all development permit applications to assure that sites are
reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this
ordinance have been satisfied.
      B.   Review applications for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
      C.   Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Natural Resources
Commission prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      D.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
      E.   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures in special flood hazard areas.
      F.   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially improved structures
have been floodproofed.
      G.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the
Building Inspector shall be presented certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
   4.   Application for Permit
      To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such
application shall:
   A.   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain
development permit.
   B.   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by
lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or
development.
   C.   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended.
   D.   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.
   E.   Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required
to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
   F.   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Inspector.
5.21.06   Establishment of Zoning Districts
Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped floodplain
areas are hereby divided into the two following districts:
   1.   A floodway overlay district (FW) and
   2.   A flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in the Flood
Insurance Study.
Within these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this ordinance and
those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited. These
zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered “A” zones as
identified on the official “FIRM” when identified in the Flood Insurance Study
provided by the Federal Insurance Administration.
5.21.07   Standards for Floodplain Development
   1.   No permit for development shall be granted for new construction,
substantial improvements and other development(s) including the placement of
manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE,
AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied.
   2.   All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to
inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface Section 5.21.08. If
Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall utilize any
base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State
or other sources.
   3.   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the
applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial
improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated
developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any location as shown on
the Flood Insurance Study.
   4.   New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements,
prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments
shall require:
      A.   Design and anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      B.   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site
waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.
      C.   Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing
methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
      D.   All utility and sanitary facilities to be elevated or floodproofed
up to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   5.   Storage of Material and Equipment.
      A.   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited.
      B.   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      C.   Lots designated for outdoor storage shall be elevated to one foot
above BFE.
   6.   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that all such
proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, all public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are
located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and
Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivision) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include
within such proposals the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 813, passed 6-11-2024; Ord. 835, passed 3-24-2025)
5.21.08   Flood Fringe Overlay District – Including AO and AH Zones)
   1.   Permitted Uses
      Any use permitted in Section 5.18.0 9 shall be permitted in the Flood
Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the
standards of Section
5.18.07 are met.
   2.   Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District
      A.   Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
      B.   Require new construction or substantial improvements of non-
residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below
that level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards
of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
Building Inspector as set forth in Section
5.21.05(3)(G).
      C.   Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher
than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
      D.   Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      E.   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in
accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that
over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific
requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
         1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations
and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per
side;
         2)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
         3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
         4)   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
      F.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:
         1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
         2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
         3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
         4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood,
         5)   be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home is at or above one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
in accordance with the provisions of Section
5.21.08(2)(E).
      G.   Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
pro visions of Section
5.21.08(2) (F) be elevated so that either:
         1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one (1)
foot above the base flood elevation, or
         2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of 5.21.08 (2)(E).
      H.   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood
hazard areas on the community's official map shall either
         1)   be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         2)   be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         3)   meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" of this ordinance.
      A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
      I.   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Section
5.21.04 (1) are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO Zones:
         1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM or, if no depth number is specified
on the FIRM, at least as high as three (3) feet.
         2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
            a.   Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM or, if no depth number is specified on the FIRM, at
least as high as three (3) feet.
            b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification
shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 5.21.05(3)(G).
Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 835, passed 3-24-2025)
5.21.09 Floodway Overlay District
   1.   Permitted Uses
      Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood
flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they
are not prohibited by any other ordinance. The following are recommended uses
for the Floodway District:
      A.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries,
forestry.
      B.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
      C.   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport
landing strips.
      D.   Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
New structures for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the
development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along
the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses
are subject to the standards of Section
5.21.07 and
5.21.08. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood
elevation and floodway data available through Federal, State, or other sources
or Section
5.21.07 (6)(D) of this Ordinance in meeting the standards of this Section.
5.21.10   Variance Procedures
   1.   The Board of Adjustment as established by City of Valley, Nebraska
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this ordinance.
   2.   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement or administration of this
ordinance.
   3.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Section
19-912, R.R.S. 1943.
   4.   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this ordinance, and:
      A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      E.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      F.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and,
      K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   5.   Conditions for Variances
      A.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items (5.21.10 (5)(B)-(F) below) have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      B.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      C.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood
discharge would result.
      D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      E.   Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      F.   The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of
a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premiums rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions
as required by this ordinance.
5.21.11   Non-Conforming Uses
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Utility
Department shall notify the Building Inspector in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period
of 12 consecutive months.
      2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      3.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except
that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes
or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
5.21.12   Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$100.00 and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues it shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Valley, Nebraska or other
appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
5.21.13   Amendments
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any
and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973,
provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public
hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Valley.
At least 15 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the
public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulations of this ordinance are in
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published
in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood
Plain Management Act.
5.21.14   Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this ordinance it’s most reasonable application:
"Appeal"  means a request for a review of the Building Inspector’s
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
"Area of Shallow Flooding"  means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Base Flood"  means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
"Base Flood Elevation" means the elevation to which floodwaters are expected to
rise during the base flood.
"Basement"  means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
"Development"  means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
"Existing Construction"  means (for the purposes of determining rates)
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that
date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision"  means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
"Flood" or "Flooding"    means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   2.   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
and structures and their contents.
"Flood Fringe"  is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that
on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a
one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)"  means an official map of a community, on
which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and
the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
"Flood Insurance Study"  is the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
"Floodplain"  means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see definition of "flooding").
"Floodway" or "Regulatory Floodway"  means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
"Freeboard"  means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
"Highest Adjacent Grade"  means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic Structure"  means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in
the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state
inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually
listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state
program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Lowest floor"  means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision"  means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"New Construction"  For floodplain management purposes, "new construction"
means structures for which the "start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
"Obstruction" means any wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation (including the alteration or relocation of a watercourse
or drain way), channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building,
stored equipment or material, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, or other
analogous structure or matter which may impede, retard, or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water
would carry such structure or matter downstream to the damage or detriment of
either life or property. Dams designed to store or divert water are not
obstructions if permission for the construction thereof is obtained from the
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Safety of Dams and Reservoirs
Act (Nebraska Revised Statutes 46-1601 to 46-1670 as amended).
"Overlay District"  is a district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning
district designation does not change.
"Post-FIRM Structure" means a building that was constructed or substantially
improved after December 31, 1974 or on or after the community's initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated March 18th, 1980, whichever is later.
"Pre-FIRM Structure" means a building that was constructed or substantially
improved on or before December 31, 1974 or before the community's initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated March 18th, 1980, whichever is later.
"Principally Above Ground"  means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.
"Recreational Vehicle"  means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis;
(ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
"Regulatory Flood Elevation" means the base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard factor as specified in this ordinance.
"Special Flood Hazard Area"   is the land in the floodplain within a community
subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
"Start of Construction"  [for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure"  means a walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that
is principally above ground.
"Substantial Damage"  means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement"  means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
"Variances"  is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
"Violation" means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the Elevation Certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
"Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal and
riverine areas.
(Ord. 835, passed 3-24-2025)
Article 6: Conditional Use Permits
Section 6.01   General Provisions
The City Council may authorize and permit a conditional use as designated in
the use regulations of each district, after the following:
   1.   Planning Commission Public Hearing,
   2.   Referral by the Planning Commission; and
   3.   City Council Public Hearing
Approval or denial shall be based on findings that the location and
characteristics of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the area.
Allowable uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a
conditional use permit in accordance with the rules and procedures of this
ordinance. The City Council may grant or deny a conditional use permit in
accordance with the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council may:
   1.   Authorize the use and
   2.   Shall prescribe and impose appropriate conditions, safeguards, and a
specified time limit for the implementation of the identified conditional use
permit.
Section 6.02   Application for Conditional Use Permit
A request for a conditional use permit or modification of a conditional use
permit may be initiated by a property owner or his or her authorized agent by
filing an application with the City upon forms prescribed for the purpose.
The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or site plan and other such
plans and data showing the dimensions, arrangements, descriptions data, and
other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the
proposed use and proposed modifications in relation to the provisions set forth
herein. A plan as to the operation and maintenance of the proposed use shall
also be submitted.
The application shall be accompanied with a non-refundable fee as established
by the City Council.
Section 6.03   Public Hearing
Before issuance of any conditional use permit, both the Planning Commission and
City Council shall hold a Public Hearing after proper and legal notice of the
time, place, and purpose of the hearing has been given by publication in a
legal paper of general circulation in the City of Valley, one time at least 10
days prior to such hearing.
The City Council will consider the application for the Conditional Use Permit
together with the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
Section 6.04   Decisions
A majority vote of the City Council shall be necessary to grant a Conditional
Use Permit.
The applicant shall have 12 months from the approval of the Conditional Use
Permit to commence the use, unless the City Council specifically grants a
longer period of time upon the recommendation of the City Planning Commission.
If the use stated within the Conditional Use Permit has not been commenced
within 12 months, or approved time period, said Permit shall become invalid and
any activity shall be required to apply for a new Conditional Use Permit.
All decisions by the City Council and the recommendations of the Planning
Commission shall be required to provide findings of fact for their decision for
either approval or denial.
Section 6.05   Transferability
Any approved Conditional Use Permit is automatically transferable upon sale of
the property from the original applicant to another party. However, the new
owner shall assume the responsibility for complying with:
   1.   the conditions of the granted permit,
   2.   The use shall not change or be expanded unless a new Conditional Use
Permit is approved,
   3.   Failure to comply with the conditions of the permit shall subject the
new owner to the revocation process of this Article.
Section 6.06   Revocation
Any approved Conditional Use Permit may be revoked for failure to comply with
the conditions approved by the City Council. Revocation shall require that the
City notify the applicant of any noncompliance, in writing, and provide the
applicant 30 days to correct the issue(s).
Failure to comply with the notice shall cause a Public Hearing to be scheduled
by the City Council, to review the permit and the approved conditions and the
failure to act by the applicant. If the applicant is found to be noncompliant
with the issued permit and conditions, the City Council shall revoke the permit
and order the use to cease and desist.
Failure to follow a Cease and Desist order shall cause action to be filed by
the City Attorney in District Court.
Revocation may also occur, if the City documents that the use has ceased
operations for 12 consecutive months. The City shall notify the applicant of
the revocation in writing. The permit shall become invalid within 30 days.
Section 6.07   Standards
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the Planning Commission or
City Council has found:
   1.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, moral,
comfort, or general welfare of the community.
   2.   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
   3.   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and
orderly development of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the
district.
   4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or necessary facilities
have been or are being provided.
   5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   6.   The use shall not include noise, which is objectionable due to volume,
frequency, or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled.
   7.   The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust,
vapors or other substance which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or
other property or which can cause soiling, discomfort, or irritation.
   8.   The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter, which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
   9.   The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare, which is
visible from any adjoining property or from any Public Street, road, or
highway.
   10.   The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit
traffic hazards and congestion.
   11.   The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
burden on any public utilities or facilities unless provisions are made for any
necessary adjustments.
Article 7: Parking Requirements
Section 7.01   Purpose
The Off-Street Parking Regulations require developments provide parking in
proportion to the need created by each use. The regulations further establish
standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These regulations
are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and
to minimize external effects on neighboring properties.
Section 7.02   Off-Street Automobile Storage
7.02.01   Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on
any lot on which any of the uses or similar uses found in Section
7.03.
7.02.02   Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided
with vehicular access to a street or an alley.
7.02.03   For purposes of computing the number of parking spaces available in a
given area, the ratio of 250 square feet per parking space shall be used.
7.02.04   Where calculations in accordance with the foregoing list results in
requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be
disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space.
7.02.05   All parking spaces for single-family, two-family, and multi-family
dwellings, rooming and boarding houses, convalescent homes, and mobile homes
shall be either paved with asphalt or concrete.
7.02.06   In Districts R-1, R-2, and R-3 required off-street parking for
residential uses shall be provided on the lot on which the use is located.
7.02.07   In all other Districts, if the vehicle storage space or standing
space required in section
7.03 cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use
is conducted in the opinion of the Planning Commission and City Council, the
City Council may permit such space to be provided on another off-street
property, provided such space lies within 300 feet of an entrance to such
principal use. Such vehicle standing space shall be deemed to be required open
space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner.
7.02.08   Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot
occupied by the use, which requires it, site plan approval for both lots is
required.
7.02.09   All parking lots shall be hard-surfaced as defined herein.
7.02.10   Some uses may require two different use types to be calculated
together in order to determine the total parking requirement, i.e. primary
schools may require one a calculation for classrooms and another for assembly
areas.
7.02.11   The parking requirements herein do not apply to the C-2 Central
Business District.
7.02.12   All off-street parking conditions shall meet the ADA requirements in
Section
7.05 of this Ordinance.
7.02.13   Parking lot edges and planting islands may be defined by concrete
curb and gutter and/or incorporate approved bio-filtration methods. Parking
spaces shall be defined with painted striping or other approved methods.
7.02.14   Off-street parking shall be located to the rear and/or side of
buildings, when practical. When parking or parking access must be located in
the front yard, a landscaped buffer shall be provided.
7.02.15   Parking bays in excess of 11 spaces in length shall provide
landscaping at the ends of each aisle in accordance with Section
12.04.05.
7.02.16   Parking bays in excess of 20 spaces in length shall be divided by
intermediate landscaped islands, and provide landscaping at the ends of each
aisle.
7.02.17   Where perpendicular parking spaces are used, the space adjacent to
the closed end of an aisle shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide.
7.02.18   An adequate driveway throat length shall be provided to minimize
traffic conflicts; the driveway throat length shall be the distance between the
street and the parking lot served by a driveway. Parking spaces shall not be
permitted within the driveway throat. Driveway throat lengths for commercial
and industrial uses shall be determined by the City Engineer.
7.02.19   Parking lots which will be developed in phases require a phasing plan
to identify all current and future parking lot requirements. Parking areas
should be constructed incrementally to match land use build- out schedules.
7.02.20   Driveway design shall be as followed:
   1.   Driveways shall have a maximum grade of 10 percent.
   2.   Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three feet from
the side lot lines.
   3.   Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be
three feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.
   4.   Driveways shall be constructed with widths of 32 feet or less. Widths
greater than 32 feet must have approval from City Council to assure compliance
with acceptable engineering and traffic design principals and standards.
   5.   Driveways constructed henceforth and connecting to a paved street or
avenue shall be paved with asphaltic concrete or Portland concrete from the
edge of the pavement to the property line, with allowances for public
sidewalks.
   6.   Driveway approaches shall be at a depth of not less than six inches
from street or avenue to the sidewalk edge. Driveways shall have half by six-
inch expansion at the sidewalk edge.
7.02.21   Storage of any boat, boat trailer, camp trailer, recreational
vehicle, utility trailer, enclosed trailer, or other vehicle shall not be
permitted in any required yard; except that a boat, boat trailer, camp trailer,
recreational vehicle, utility trailer, enclosed trailer or other vehicle may be
placed on concrete, asphaltic concrete surfacing, or on a maintained crushed
rock surfacing pad in a side or rear yard. This section applies only to
personal storage. When used as personal storage, enclosed trailers are limited
to two axles. For purposes of this Section 7.02.21, "maintained" shall mean
covered in not less than one hundred percent (100%) crushed rock, and any such
maintained crushed rock surfacing pad shall be counted against any impervious
coverage requirements. Any maintained crushed rock surfacing pad must be larger
than the footprint of the vehicle or trailer being stored thereon.
(Ord. 806, passed 3-12-2024; Ord. 832, passed 1-15-2025)
Section 7.03   Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Uses Parking Requirements Loading Requirements
Uses                                   Parking Requirements                                                        Loading
                                                                                                                   Requirements
Commercial and Office including but not limited to:
 Adult entertainment establishments    1 space/2 persons of licensed capacity                                      None required
 Agricultural Sales/Service            1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Auditoriums/Stadiums/Arenas           1 space/4 seats in main assembly area                                       None required
 Automotive Car Wash                   5 spaces/car wash bay                                                       1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Automotive Rental/Sales               1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Automotive Servicing                  4 spaces/repair stall                                                       None required
 Banks and Business offices            1 space/200 sf of gross floor area up to 1000 sf; then 1 /400 sf of add.    1 space/
                                       Gross floor space                                                           establishment
 Boarding Houses/Bed and Breakfasts    1 space/rental unit                                                         None required
 Body Repair                           5 spaces/repair stall                                                       None required
 Bowling Alleys                        4 spaces/alley plus 1 space per 2 employees                                 1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Campground                            1 space/camping unit                                                        None required
 Child Care Centers                    1 space/employee + 1 space or loading stall/5 persons of licensed capacity  None required
 Churches, Synagogues, and Temples     1 space/3 seats in main worship area                                        None required
 Clubs, including fraternal            1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        None required
 organizations
 Commercial Recreation                 1 space/2 persons of licensed capacity                                      1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Communication Services                1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Construction Sales/Service            1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Dance Hall, skating rink              1 space/100 square feet of floor area + 1 space/2 employees                 None required
 Educational Uses, Primary facilities  2 spaces/classroom                                                          2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Educational Uses, Secondary           8 spaces/classroom + 1 space/employee on largest shift                      2 spaces/
 facilities                                                                                                        structure
 Equipment Rental/Sales                1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 Space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Food sales                            1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area                                        2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Funeral homes, Mortuaries and Chapels 8 spaces/reposing room                                                      2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Furniture and Appliance Stores        1 space/800 sf of floor area                                                1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 General retail sales establishments   1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Guidance Services                     1 space/300 s.f. of gross floor area                                        None required
 Hospitals                             1 space/2 licensed beds                                                     3 spaces/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Hotels and Motels                     1 space/rental unit + 1 space/each 200 s.f. of public meeting area          1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Libraries                             1 space/400 s.f. of gross floor area + 1 space/ 2 employees                 1 space/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Medical Clinics                       5 spaces/staff doctor, dentist, chiropractor                                None required
 Offices not providing customer        1 space/400 s.f. of gross floor area                                        None required
 services or sales on the premises
 Personal Service Establishments in
 Commercial Districts, including:                                                                                  1 space/
 (a)   Barber and Beauty Shops.     1 space/200 sf of gross floor area.                                         structure
 (b)   Tailor and Shoe Shops.
 (c)   Apparel and Accessory Shops.
 Professional Offices of Attorneys     3 spaces/1000 sf of gross floor area.
 C.P.A.'s, Architects, Engineers, etc. For offices less than 1000 gross s.f., the minimum requirement shall be 4   None required
                                       spaces.
 Public buildings                      1 space/ 3 employee, + 1 space/100 sf used for public assembly.             1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
                                       Greater of the two:                                                         1 space/
 Restaurants w/ drive-thru             1 space/40 s.f. of dining area, or                                          establishment
                                       1 space/150 s.f. of gross floor area
 Restaurants (General)                 Parking equal to 30% of licensed capacity                                   2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Roadside stands                       4 spaces/establishment                                                      None required
 Service Oriented Establishments       1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area                                        1 space/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Taverns, Poll and Billiard Halls      1 space/3 seats, or 3 spaces/50 s.f. of gross floor area used for assembly, None required
                                       whichever is greater.
 Veterinary Establishments             1 spaces/500 square feet/staff doctor                                       None required
Residential/Housing including but not limited to:
 Assisted-living facilities            .5 space/dwelling unit                                                      1 space/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Convalescent & Nursing Home Services  1 space/4 beds + 1/employee on the largest shift                            2 space/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Duplex                                2 spaces per dwelling unit                                                  None required
 Group Care Facility                   1 space/4 persons of licensed capacity                                      2 space/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Group Home                            1 space/4 persons of licensed capacity                                      2 space/
                                                                                                                   structure
 Multi-family / Apartments             1.25 space/sleeping unit – spaces to be sited in the general proximity of None required
                                       where the sleeping units are located
 Mobile Home Park                      2/dwelling unit                                                             None required
 Residential (Single-family, attached  2 spaces/dwelling unit (1 may be enclosed or semi-enclosed)                 None required
 and detached)
Industrial Uses including but not limited to:
 General Manufacturing                 .75 times the maximum number of employees during the largest shift          2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 Manufacturing Uses, Research and
 Testing Laboratories, Creameries,                                                                                 2 spaces/
 Bottling Establishments, Bakeries,    1 space/2 employee on maximum shift + 1 space/company vehicle.              establishment
 Canneries, Printing and Engraving
 Shops, Etc.
 Wholesaling / Distribution Operations 1 space/2 employee on the largest shift                                     2 spaces/
                                                                                                                   establishment
 
Section 7.04   Off-Street Parking: Shared Parking Requirements
7.04.01   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
7.03, in cases where parking and building patterns are such that overlapping
uses of a majority of the total number of parking spaces in a common parking
lot is likely to occur, compliance with the standard parking ratios may be
decreased by the Planning Commission and City Council.
Section 7.05   Off-Street Parking: Parking for Individuals with Disabilities
7.05.01   In conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the
Nebraska Accessibility Guidelines, if parking spaces are provided for self-
parking by employees or visitors, or both, then accessible spaces shall be
provided in each parking area in conformance with the table in this section.
Spaces required by the table need not be provided in the particular lot. They
may be provided in a different, if equivalent or greater accessibility, in
terms of distance from an accessible entrance, cost and convenience, is
ensured.
Total Parking Spaces Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
Total Parking Spaces Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25              1
26 to 50             2
51 to 75             3
76 to 100            4
101 to 150           5
151 to 200           6
201 to 300           7
301 to 400           8
401 to 500           9
501 to 1,000         2 percent of the total
1,001 and over       20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
 
7.05.02   Access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be 60 inches wide
at a minimum.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-167.png]
 
Source: http://www.ada.gov/adastd94.pdf
   1.   One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be
served by an access aisle 96 inches wide minimum and shall be designated “van
accessible” as required by Section
7.05.04 of this Ordinance. The vertical clearance at such spaces shall comply
with
7.05.05 of this Ordinance. All such spaces may be grouped on one level of a
parking structure.
   2.   Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the
building or facility entrance. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common
access aisle.
   3.   Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an
accessible route.
   4.   Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with slopes not
exceeding two percent in all directions.
   5.   If passenger-loading zones are provided, then at least one passenger
loading zone shall comply with
7.05.06 of this Ordinance.
   6.   At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons
with mobility impairments, parking spaces complying with
7.05 of this Ordinance shall be provided in accordance with
7.05.01 of this Ordinance; except as follows:
      a   Outpatient units and facilities: 10 percent of the total number of
parking spaces provided serving each such outpatient unit or facility;
      b   Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services for
persons with mobility impairments: 20 percent of the total number of parking
spaces provided serving each such unit or facility.
   7.   Valet parking: valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger
loading zone complying with
7.05.06 of this Ordinance located on an accessible route to the entrance of the
facility. Sections
7.05.01,
7.05.02 (1), and
7.05.02 (3) of this Ordinance do not apply to valet parking.
7.05.03   Location of accessible parking spaces serving a particular building
shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent
parking to an accessible entrance.
   1.   In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building,
accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel
to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
   2.   In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking,
accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the
accessible entrances.
7.05.04   Signage of accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved
by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Spaces complying with Section
7.05.02 (1) shall have an additional sign stating the stall is “Van Accessible”
mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they
cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
7.05.05   Minimum vertical clearance of 114 inches at accessible passenger
loading zones and along at least one vehicle access route to such areas from
site entrance(s) and exit(s). At parking spaces complying with
7.05.02 (1), provide minimum vertical clearance of 98 inches at the parking
space and along at least one vehicle access route to such spaces from site
entrance(s) and exit(s).
7.05.06   Passenger Loading Zones shall provide an access aisle at least 60
inches wide and 240 inches long adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull-up
space. If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up
space, then a curb ramp complying with accessibility standards shall be
provided. Vehicle standing spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface
slopes not exceeding two percent in all directions.
Section 7.06   Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
7.06.01   Standard parking stall dimensions shall not be less than 10 feet by
18 feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and out of the space.
Where the end of the parking space abuts a curbed area at least five feet in
width (with landscaping or sidewalk), an overhang may be permitted which would
reduce the length of the parking space by two feet. Such overhang shall be
measured from the face of the curb. For standard parking lots, minimum
dimensions shall be as follows:
Parking Configuration 90-degree 60-degree 45-degree
Parking Configuration        90-degree 60-degree 45-degree
Aisle Width (A)
   One-way traffic        -----     18 feet   14 feet
   Two-way traffic        24 feet   20 feet   20 feet
End Parking Bay Width (B)
   Without overhang       18 feet   20 feet   19 feet
   With overhang          16 feet   18 feet   17 feet
Center Parking Bay Width (C) 18 feet   18 feet   16 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-169.png]
 
7.06.02   Minimum dimensions for a parallel parking space shall be nine feet by
23 feet.
7.06.03   Minimum parking dimensions for other configurations or for parking
lots with compact car spaces shall be determined by the Planning Commission and
City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
7.06.04   Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and
between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or entering or leaving
the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or hazardous areas.
7.06.05   Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted
standards of traffic engineering and safety.
7.06.06   All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued
usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes
keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and litter; maintaining parking
surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas.
Section 7.07   Parking Lot Lighting
The location and design of parking lot lighting shall conform to the following:
   1.   All surface parking lot lighting shall be designed, installed and
maintained so that no light sources shall provide illumination onto adjacent
lots, buildings or streets in excess of one-foot candle;
   2.   All exterior lighting luminaries shall be designed and installed to
shield light from the luminaire at angles above 72 degrees from vertical;
   3.   Fixtures mounted on a building shall not be positioned higher than the
roofline of the building;
   4.   Wooden utility type poles are acceptable only for temporary use during
construction; and
   5.   All electrical service lines to posts and fixtures shall be installed
underground and concealed inside the posts.
   6.   Lighting standards shall not exceed 22 feet in height.
   7.   The average maintained lighting levels for multi-family units shall not
exceed 10 foot-candles at buildings/parking lots/other areas within a
residential district. The maximum to average ratio shall not exceed 2.5 to 1.
Article 8: Sign Regulations
Section 8.01   Compliance with Sign Regulations
   All signs constructed, erected, modified, or moved after the effective date
of this Ordinance shall comply with the regulations herein, unless expressly
exempted.
(Ord. 803, passed 12-12-2023)
Section 8.02   Sign Definitions
   The following are the definitions relating to signs within the Valley zoning
jurisdiction.
   ADVERTISING SIGN shall mean a sign which directs attention to any product,
activity, or service; provided, however, that such sign shall not be related or
make reference to the primary use, business activity, or service conducted on
the premises.
   ARCHITECTURAL CANOPY SIGN shall mean an enclosed, illuminated, or non-
illuminated structure that is attached to the wall of a building with the face
of the sign approximately parallel to the wall and with the sign's area
integrated into its surface.
   AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN shall mean any sign that is a part of or attached to
an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover
over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a
canopy.
   BANNER SIGN shall mean any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
that is permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
   BILLBOARD SIGN shall mean a sign that identifies or communicates a
commercial or noncommercial message related to an activity conducted, a service
rendered, or a commodity sold. BILLBOARD SIGNS ARE PROHIBITED IN VALLEY.
   BUILDING MARKER SIGN shall mean any sign indicating the name of a building
and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut
into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
   BUILDING SIGN shall mean any sign supported by, painted on, or otherwise
attached to any building or structure.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN shall mean a sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more
than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only
copy changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature
shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance.
   CLOSED SIGN shall mean a sign in which more than 50 percent of the entire
area is solid or tightly closed or covered.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN shall mean any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
   DESTINATION SIGN shall mean a sign used to inform and direct the public to
important public places and buildings, landmarks, and historical sites in the
simplest, direct, and concise manner possible.
   DIGITAL DISPLAY SIGN shall mean any sign that uses movement or change of
lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD SIGN shall mean a sign that uses changing lights to
form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate
of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic
processes.
   FLASHING SIGN shall mean a sign, which, by method or manner of illumination,
flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion,
or creates the illusion of being on or off. FLASHING SIGNS ARE PROHIBITED IN
VALLEY.
   FREESTANDING SIGN shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces placed
on or in the ground, which is used principally for advertising or
identification purposes and is not supported by any building.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN shall mean a sign illuminated in any manner by an
artificial light source.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN shall mean a sign, generally informational, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as
"no parking," "entrance," “loading only,” and other similar directives. No sign
with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the
sign is located shall be considered incidental.
   MARQUEE SIGN shall mean any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond
a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
   MONUMENT SIGN (GROUND) shall mean a sign mounted directly to the ground with
a maximum height not to exceed six feet.
   NAMEPLATE SIGN shall mean a sign not exceeding two square feet for each
dwelling.
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN shall mean any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance.
   OBSOLETE SIGN shall mean a sign that advertises a business no longer in
existence or a product no longer offered for sale and has advertised such
business or product for a period of six months after the termination of the
existence of such business or the termination of sale of the product
advertised.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN shall mean a sign including the supporting sign structure
which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service, or
activity not usually conducted, or a product not offered or sold, upon the
premises where such sign is located.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN shall mean a sign, display, or device-advertising
activities conducted on the property on which such sign is located.
   OPEN SIGN shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy, or
other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and
extending beyond the building wall, building line, or street lot line.
   PENNANT SIGN shall mean any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire,
or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   POLE SIGN shall mean a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole. POLE
SIGNS ARE
PROHIBITED IN VALLEY.
   PORTABLE SIGN shall mean a sign, usually of a temporary nature, not securely
anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and which obtains some or
all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally applied
forces by means of its geometry or character. Examples are: menu and sandwich
board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising, and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-
way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the
business.
   PROJECTING SIGN shall mean a projecting sign attached to a building in such
a manner that its leading edge extends more than eight inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
   ROOF SIGN shall mean a sign erected on and over the roof of a building and
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. ROOF SIGNS
(FREESTANDING) ARE PROHIBITED IN VALLEY.
   ROOF (INTEGRAL) SIGN shall mean any sign erected or constructed as an
integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design,
such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of
the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the
roof by a space of more than six inches.
   SIGN SETBACK shall mean the horizontal distance from the property line to
the nearest projection of the existing or proposed sign.
   SIGN SURFACE shall mean the entire area of a sign.
   SUBDIVISION SIGN identification shall mean a sign erected on a subdivision
identification lot that identifies the platted subdivision where the sign is
located.
   SUSPENDED SIGN shall mean a sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. SUSPENDED SIGNS ARE
PROHIBITED IN VALLEY.
   TEMPORARY SIGN shall mean a sign constructed of cloth, fabric, or other
material with or without a structural frame intended for a limited period of
display, including displays for holidays or public demonstrations. Temporary
signs shall include portable signs as defined in this section.
   WALL SIGN shall mean any sign attached parallel to, but within eight inches
of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by
such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
   WINDOW SIGN shall mean any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
that is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible
from the exterior of the window.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1587.jpg]
(Ord. 803, passed 12-12-2023)
Section 8.03   Sign Area Computation
8.03.01   Computation of Area of Individual Signs
   The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background
of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning regulations and is clearly identical to the display itself.
8.03.02   Computation of Height
   The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the
sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height
shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at
the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the
crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to
the principal structure on the lot, parcel, or tract of land, whichever is
lower. When a sign is placed on a berm, the height of the sign shall include
the height of the berm above grade level at the base of the berm.
(Ord. 803, passed 12-12-2023)
Section 8.04   Sign Schedules
8.04.01   Signs shall be permitted in the various districts according to the
following schedule:
 TA RS R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 I-3
                   TA RS R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 I-3
Animated           -  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Architectural      +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   -3
Banner             +  -  -   -   -   -  -   +   +   +   +   +
Changeable Copy    +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Electronic Message +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Freestanding       T  T  T   T   T   T  T   T   T   T   T   T
Monument (Ground)  +  +  +   +   +   +  +   +   +   +   +   +
Illuminated        +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Incidental         +  +  +   +   +   +  +   +   +   +   +   +
Marquee            -  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Nameplate          +  +  +   +   +   +  +   +   +   +   +   +
Pennant            +  -  -   -   -   -  -   +   -   +   +   +
Projecting         +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Portable           T  T  T   T   T   T  T   T   T   T   T   T
Roof-Integrated    +  -  -   -   -   -  -   +   -   +   +   +
Subdivision        +  +  +   +   +   +  +   +   +   +   +   +
Temporary          T  T  T   T   T   T  T   T   T   T   T   T
Wall               +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
Window             +  -  -   -   -   -  +   +   +   +   +   +
 
+: permitted    -: not permitted   T: Temporary
8.04.02   Signs shall be permitted in the various districts at the listed
square footage and heights according to the following schedule:
 TA RS R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 I-3
              TA    RS    R-1   R-2   R-3   RM    C-1  C-2   C-3   I-1   I-2   I-3
Animated
Max. Square   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    200   200   200   200   200
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Architectural
Canopy
Max. Square   250   -     -     -     -     -     -    250   250   250   250   250
Ft.
Max. Height   45    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   17    -     -     -     -     -     -    14    14    14    14    14
Banner
Max. Square   32    -     -     -     -     -     -    32    32    32    32    32
Ft.
Max. Height   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Ft.
Max. Number   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Changeable
Copy
Max. Square   32    -     -     -     -     -     -    32    32    32    32    32
Ft.
Max. Height   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Ft.
Max. Number   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Electronic
Message Board
Max. Square   100   -     -     -     -     -     -    100   100   100   100   100
Ft.
Max. Height   20    -     -     -     -     -     -    20    20    20    20    20
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Flashing
Max. Square   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Number   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Freestanding
Max. Square   32    32    32    32    32    32    32   32    32    32    32    32
Ft.
Max. Height   4     4     4     4     4     4     4    4     4     4     4     4
Ft.
Max. Number   1     1     1     1     1     1     1    1     1     1     1     1
Monument
(Ground)
Max. Square   50    -     -     -     -     -     -    -     322   322   322   322
Ft.
Max. Height   10    -     -     -     -     -     -    10    10    10    10    10
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Incidental
Max. Square   25    -     -     -     -     -     -    25    25    25    25    25
Ft.           each                                     each  each  each  each  each
Max. Height   45    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   1/40* -     -     -     -     -     -    1/403 1/403 1/403 1/403 1/403
Marquee
Max. Square   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    250   250   250   250   250
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Nameplate
Max. Square   2     2     2     2     2     2     2    2     2     2     2     2
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Number   1     1     1     1     1     1     1    1     1     1     1     1
Off-Premises
Max. Square   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Number   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
On-Premises
Max. Square   640   -     -     -     -     -     -    320   320   320   320   320
Ft.
Max. Height   30    -     -     -     -     -     -    30    30    30    30    30
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Pennant
Max. Square   32    -     -     -     -     -     -    32    32    32    32    32
Ft.
Max. Height   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Ft.
Max. Number   NA    -     -     -     -     -     -    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Pole
Max. Square   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Height   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Ft.
Max. Number   -     -     -     -     -     -     -    -     -     -     -     -
Projecting
Max. Square   16    -     -     -     -     -     -    16    16    16    16    16
Ft.
Max. Height   45    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Portable
Max. Square   32    32    32    32    32    32    32   32    32    32    32    32
Ft.
Max. Height   4     4     4     4     4     4     4    4     4     4     4     4
Ft.
Max. Number   1     1     1     1     1     1     1    1     1     1     1     1
Roof
Max. Square   250   -     -     -     -     -     -    250   250   250   250   250
Ft.45
Max. Height   45    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Roof-
Integrated
Max. Square   250   -     -     -     -     -     -    250   250   250   250   250
Ft.
Max. Height   45    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Subdivision
Max. Square   500   500   500   500   500   500   500  500   500   500   500   500
Ft.
Max. Height   35    35    35    35    35    35    35   35    35    35    35    35
Ft.
Max. Number   1     1     1     1     1     1     1    1     1     1     1     1
Max. Lot area 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
s.f.
Suspended
Max. Square   20    -     -     -     -     -     -    20    20    20    20    20
Ft.
Max. Height   10    -     -     -     -     -     -    10    10    10    10    10
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Temporary
Max. Square   NA    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA    NA   NA    NA    NA    NA    NA
Ft.
Max. Height
Ft.
Max. Number
Wall
Max. Square   200 1 -     -     -     -     -     -    200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1
Ft.
Max. Height   15    -     -     -     -     -     -    45    45    45    45    45
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
Window
Max. Square   200 1 -     -     -     -     -     -    200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1
Ft.
Max. Height   15    -     -     -     -     -     -    15    15    15    15    15
Ft.
Max. Number   1     -     -     -     -     -     -    1     1     1     1     1
 
1   Wall/Window signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the total wall area, or
the number indicated whichever is greater.
2   Monument (Ground) signs may be increased from 32 square feet in area to 50
square feet in area when all uses/storefronts within a development are included
on one sign as opposed to each having on individual ground sign for every use/
storefront.
3   One Incidental sign per 40 lineal feet of storefront.
4   One Canopy per window - canopy shall meet all minimum height requirements
for accessibility.
NA = Not Applicable - Refer to specific structural sign types
8.04.03   building or use having frontage on an additional street may install a
sign on the additional street side.
(Ord. 803, passed 12-12-2023)
Section 8.05   Signs, Special Conditions
8.05.02   Stand-alone ATMs may have the following:
   1.   One wall sign on each exterior wall provided each wall sign does not
exceed ten percent of the applicable exterior wall and the total shall not
exceed 40 square feet in size.
   2.   Where a canopy is integrated into the ATM, a canopy sign may be placed
on each face of the ATM, provided the overall height of the canopy and sign do
not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the overall size of all canopy signs shall
not exceed 40 square feet.
   3.   Directional signage shall be contained on the ATM, painted within a
drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane.
   4.   All signs are subject to the required permitting process of these
Regulations.
   5.   Said signage may be incorporated with lighting plan and backlit in
order to provide for greater security on the premises.
8.05.03   Stand-alone ATM’s may have the following:
   1.   One wall sign on each exterior wall not used for drive-up service,
provided each wall sign does not exceed ten percent of the applicable exterior
wall and the total shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.
   2.   Where a canopy is integrated into the Coffee Kiosks/Kiosks, a canopy
sign may be placed on each face of the Coffee Kiosk/Kiosks, provided the
overall height of the canopy and sign do not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the
overall size of all canopy signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
   3.   Directional signage shall be contained on the Coffee Kiosk/Kiosk,
painted within a drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane.
   4.   Window signs limited to menu boards and daily specials shall not
require a sign permit.
   5.   All signs are subject to the required permitting process of these
Regulations, unless otherwise noted.
8.05.04   Signs protruding from the facade, into the right-of-way shall be
limited to the dimensions shown on the adjacent graphic. Awnings shall maintain
80 inches of vertical clear space, as measured from the bottom edge of the sign
to the grade below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-221.png]
8.05.05   Temporary Signs
   Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued shall be issued only for
signs meeting the following criteria:
   1.   Temporary signs may be for a continual period. Said temporary signs
shall not be in place for more than four days prior to the event and shall be
removed within 36 hours of the conclusion of said event.
   2.   Temporary signs may be allowed in a manner where they are put in place
during certain periods of time (set up in the morning and taken down in the
evening) without a specific end date to the permit and these signs may
advertise an off-premises business and/or organization.
8.05.06   Emergency Signs (Permitted)
   Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public utility
company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public
right-of-way.
8.05.07   Other Signs Forfeited
   Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with
the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject
to confiscation. In addition, to other remedies hereunder, the City shall have
the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full
costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
8.05.08   Signs Exempt from Regulation Under this Ordinance
   The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this ordinance,
except no sign in this provision shall create an obstruction to vision, as per
Section 4.08 of this Ordinance and/or a collision hazard to the public:
   1.   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance;
   2.   Temporary construction signs when equal to six square feet or less;
   3.   Any sign identifying a public facility or public/civic event;
   4.   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located;
   5.   Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message;
   6.   Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and
similar signs, the face of which meets the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices standards and which contain no commercial message.
8.05.09   Signs Prohibited Under These Regulations
   All signs not expressly permitted in these regulations or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in
the City. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
   1.   Beacons;
   2.   Roof signs;
   3.   Suspended signs;
   4.   Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except
those exempt under the previous section;
   5.   Audible Signs;
   6.   Pole Signs; and
   7.   Off-Premises and On-Premises Billboards.
8.05.10    Electronic Sign Brightness Limitations
   1.   No electronic sign may be illuminated to a degree of brightness that is
greater than necessary for adequate visibility. In no case may the brightness
exceed eight thousand (8,000) nits or equivalent candelas during daylight
hours, or one thousand (1,000) nits or equivalent candelas between dusk and
dawn.
   2.   Electronic sign permit applications must also include a certification
from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all times
be operated in accordance with City codes and that the owner or operator shall
provide proof of such conformance upon request of the City.
(Ord. 803, passed 12-12-2023)
Article 9: Supplemental Regulations
Section 9.01   Home Occupations and Home-Based Businesses in Residential
Districts
9.01.01   Intent:
A home occupation or home-based business shall be permitted when said
occupation or business is conducted on residentially used and/or zoned property
and is considered customary, traditional, and incidental to the primary use of
the premises as a residence, and shall not be construed as a business.
9.01.02   Permitted home occupations:
   1.   Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring,
ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work.
   2.   Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys,
architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public,
manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers,
dentists, doctors, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors,
publishers, psychologists, contract management, graphic design, construction
contractors, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and
travel agents.
   3.   Child Nurseries or Child Care
   4.   Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one
chair), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring
services.
   5.   Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes
and tutoring.
   6.   Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances,
computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines (limited to garage
areas).
   7.   Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care
products, mail order, and other similar uses.
   8.   Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow
removal, and other similar uses.
   9.   Kennels, stables, veterinarian clinics/hospitals.
9.01.03   Prohibited home occupations:
   1.   Medical and dental clinics, hospitals.
   2.   Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
   3.   Motor vehicle / small engine repair.
9.01.04   Performance Standards for Home Occupations:
   1.   The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain
residential and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in
the dwelling unit.
   2.   The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole
entrepreneur, and the operator shall not employ any other person other than a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
   3.   No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations changing
the residential appearance to a business appearance shall be permitted.
   4.   No more than 50 percent of the floor area of any one story of the
dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupation.
   5.   Such home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the primary
building or dwelling unit used as a residence.
   6.   Additional and/or separate entrance(s) that do not match the
residential structural design shall not be constructed for the purpose of
conducting the home occupation or home based business.
   7.   Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, including
additional driveway construction, other than the requirements for the permitted
residence, shall be permitted.
   8.   The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home occupation
shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-
flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of
the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the
residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
   9.   No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental sales
related to services provided.
   10.   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
   11.   No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio
communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage
off the premises.
   12.   All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers
shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.01.05   Permitted home based businesses:
   1.   Workrooms for custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and
furniture repair.
   2.   Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys,
architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public,
manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers,
draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors, publishers,
psychologists, contract management, graphic design, construction contractors,
landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and travel
agents.
   3.   Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to two
chairs), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring
services.
   4.   Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances,
computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines (limited to garage
areas).
   5.   Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care
products, mail order, and other similar uses.
   6.   Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow
removal, and other similar uses.
   7.   Child Nurseries or Child Care
9.01.06   Prohibited home based businesses:
   1.   Medical and dental clinics, hospitals.
   2.   Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
   3.   Motor vehicle / small engine repair.
9.01.07   Performance Standards for Home Based Businesses:
   1.   The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain
residential and the operator of the home-based business shall remain a resident
in the dwelling unit.
   2.   The operator conducting the home-based business shall be the sole
entrepreneur. However, the operator may employ immediate family members
residing on the premises, as well as, an additional two unrelated individuals
for purposes of conducting business.
   3.   Structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations may be
completed in order to provide space for the home-based business. Any
alterations and additions are limited to a one-time expansion and shall be
limited to 50 percent of the floor area of the main floor at the time of
application. All alterations and additions shall meet all building and zoning
criteria of Valley.
   4.   No more than 50 percent of the floor area of any one story of the
dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home based business.
   5.   Such home based business shall be conducted entirely within the primary
building or dwelling unit used as a residence. Home based businesses may also
be located with an existing Accessory Building.
   6.   Home based businesses conducted within an Accessory Building shall be
confined to the structure of the said Accessory Building. In addition, the
applicant must prove that the Accessory Building meets all Life Safety Codes
including electrical compliance for a commercial business.
   7.   All alterations and additions shall be completed in a manner that
matches the existing structure and shall have a residential appearance to the
exterior. All separate entrance(s) shall be discrete and match the residential
design.
   8.   Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, beyond the parking
provided for the residence, shall be provided and shall meet the following
standards:
      a.   Two additional spaces for the unrelated employees;
      b.   Two additional spaces to be used for client/visitor parking;
      c.   The additional parking required in items (a) and (b) shall not be
provided in any required Front, Side or Rear Yard setback;
      d.   All additional parking and loading spaces shall be screened using
landscaping materials and opaque privacy fencing not more than six feet in
height;
      e.   Applicant shall not relocate parking for the residence into any
Front, Side or Rear Yard Setback in order to provide the additional parking.
      f.   All new off-street parking is encouraged to be toward the rear yard
portion of the property and screened from view from the street.
   9.   The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home based
business shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated,
non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address
of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the
residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
   10.   No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental
sales related to services provided.
   11.   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
   12.   No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio
communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage
off the premises.
   13.   All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers
shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.01.08   Revocation:
   1.   Conditions. A home occupation and home-based business permit granted in
accordance with the provisions of this section may be terminated if the
Building Inspector makes any of the following findings:
      a.   That any condition of the home occupation or home-based business
permit has been violated;
      b.   That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety
or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
      c.   That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
      d.   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been
suspended for six consecutive months or more; and
      e.   That the condition of the premises, or the district of which it is a
part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the purpose
and intent of this section.
   2.   Appeal. Within five working days of a revocation, an appeal may be made
to the Valley Board of Adjustment. The Building Inspector within ten working
days of the receipt of an appeal of his or her revocation shall report his or
her findings of fact and decision to the Valley Board of Adjustment. The Valley
Board of Adjustment shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify or allow
to remain unchanged the home occupation or home-based business permit in
accordance with the Board’s final determination.
   3.   Nontransferable. A home occupation or home-based business permit
granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be
transferred, assigned, nor used by any person other than the permittee, nor
shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the
one for which the permit is granted.
Section 9.02   Home Occupations and Home-Based Businesses within the TA-
1 Districts
9.02.01   Intent:
A home occupation or home-based business shall be permitted when said
occupation or business is conducted on agriculturally used and/or zoned
property and is considered customary, traditional, and incidental to the
primary use of the premises as a residence, and shall not be construed as a
business.
9.02.02   Permitted home occupations:
   1.   Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring,
ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work,
and furniture repair.
   2.   Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys,
architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public,
manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers,
dentists, doctors, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors,
publishers, psychologists, contract management, graphic design, construction
contractor services, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services,
salespersons, and travel agents.
   3.   Child Nurseries or Child Care.
   4.   Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one
chair), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring
services.
   5.   Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes
and tutoring.
   6.   Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances,
computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines, and motor vehicles
(limited to no more than two at one time).
   7.   Offices and shops in association to one another, including motorized
and non-motorized racing vehicles, construction services with equipment storage
and maintenance, monument sales and engraving, freight hauling with equipment
storage and maintenance (not including warehousing of freight), aerial spraying
with equipment storage and maintenance, welding, and excavating services with
equipment storage and maintenance.
   8.   Warehousing and storage of products associated with agri-businesses,
including seed sales, fertilizer sales (as allowed by state and federal
regulations), and herbicide and pesticide sales (as allowed by state and
federal regulations).
   9.   Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care
products, mail order, and other similar uses.
   10.   Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow
removal, and other similar uses.
9.02.03   Prohibited home occupations:
   1.   Medical clinics and hospitals.
   2.   Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
   3.   Undertaking and funeral parlors.
9.02.04   Performance Standards for Home Occupations:
   1.   The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain
residential and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in
the dwelling unit.
   2.   The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole
entrepreneur, and the operator shall not employ any other person other than a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
   3.   No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations changing
the residential appearance to a business appearance shall be permitted.
   4.   No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the
dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupation when contained within
the principal structure.
   5.   Home occupations may be located within an accessory structure including
machine sheds, barns, and garages. Said accessory structure shall be required
to meet all pertinent State codes for Life Safety including electrical wiring
depending upon the nature of the business.
   6.   When a home occupation is located in an accessory structure there shall
not be any additional storage allowed in the open. All storage shall be
contained within appropriate facilities and out of site.
   7.   Home occupations focused on repairs and maintenance of vehicles and
motors shall not be allowed to storage damaged, unlicensed, salvaged, vehicles
or parts on site and outside the structure where said home occupations are
taking place.
   8.   When storage of chemicals associated with agricultural businesses are
stored on site, the storage shall comply with all state and Federal regulations
and shall be kept in a place that is secured, dry and locked from general
access.
   9.   Additional and/or separate entrance(s) that do not match the
residential structural design shall not be constructed for the purpose of
conducting the home occupation or home based business.
   10.   Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, including
additional driveway construction, other than the requirements for the permitted
residence, shall be permitted.
   11.   The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home occupation
shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-
flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of
the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the
residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
   12.   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
   13.   No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio
communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage
off the premises.
   14.   All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers
shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.02.05   Permitted home based businesses:
   1.   Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring,
ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work,
and furniture repair.
   2.   Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys,
architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public,
manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers,
dentists, doctors, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors,
publishers, psychologists, contract management, graphic design, construction
contractor services, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services,
salespersons, and travel agents.
   3.   Child Nurseries or Child Care.
   4.   Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one
chair), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring
services.
   5.   Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes
and tutoring.
   6.   Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances,
computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines, and motor vehicles
(limited to no more than two at one time).
   7.   Offices and shops in association to one another, including motorized
and non-motorized racing vehicles, construction services with equipment storage
and maintenance, monument sales and engraving, freight hauling with equipment
storage and maintenance (not including warehousing of freight), aerial spraying
with equipment storage and maintenance, welding, and excavating services with
equipment storage and maintenance.
   8.   Warehousing and storage of products associated with agri-businesses,
including seed sales, fertilizer sales (as allowed by state and federal
regulations), and herbicide and pesticide sales (as allowed by state and
federal regulations).
   9.   Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care
products, mail order, and other similar uses.
   10.   Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow
removal, and other similar uses.
   11.   Kennels, stables, veterinarian clinics/hospitals.
9.02.06   Prohibited home based businesses:
   1.   Medical clinics and hospitals.
   2.   Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
   3.   Undertaking and funeral parlors.
9.02.07   Performance Standards for Home Based Businesses:
   1.   The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain
residential and the operator of the home-based business shall remain a resident
in the dwelling unit.
   2.   The operator conducting the home-based business shall be the sole
entrepreneur. However, the operator may employ immediate family members
residing on the premises, as well as, an additional two unrelated individuals
for purposes of conducting business.
   3.   Structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations may be
completed in order to provide space for the home-based business. Any
alterations and additions are limited to a one-time expansion and shall be
limited to 25 percent of the floor area of the main floor at the time of
application. All alterations and additions shall meet all building and zoning
criteria of Valley.
   4.   No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the
dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home based business when contained
within the principal structure.
   5.   Home based businesses may be located within an accessory structure
including machine sheds, barns, and garages. Said accessory structure shall be
required to meet all pertinent State codes for Life Safety including electrical
wiring depending upon the nature of the business.
   6.   When a home-based business is located in an accessory structure there
shall not be any additional storage allowed in the open. All storage shall be
contained within appropriate facilities and out of site.
   7.   Home based businesses focused on repairs and maintenance of vehicles
and motors shall not be allowed to store damaged, unlicensed, salvaged,
vehicles or parts on site and outside the structure where said home based
business is taking place.
   8.   When storage of chemicals associated with agricultural businesses are
stored on site, the storage shall comply with all state and Federal regulations
and shall be kept in a place that is secured, dry and locked from general
access.
   9.   All alterations and additions shall be completed in a manner that
matches the existing structure and shall have a residential appearance to the
exterior. All separate entrance(s) shall be discrete and match the residential
design.
   10.   Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, beyond the
parking provided for the residence, shall be provided and shall meet the
following standards:
      a.   Two additional spaces for the unrelated employees;
      b.   Two additional spaces to be used for client/visitor parking;
      c.   The additional parking required in items (a) and (b) shall not be
provided in any required Front, Side or Rear Yard setback;
      d.   All additional parking and loading spaces shall be screened using
landscaping materials and opaque privacy fencing not more than six feet in
height;
      e.   Applicant shall not relocate parking for the residence into any
Front, Side or Rear Yard Setback in order to provide the additional parking.
      f.   All new off-street parking is encouraged to be toward the rear yard
portion of the property and screened from view from the street.
   11.   The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home-based
business shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated,
non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address
of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the
residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
   12.   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
   13.   No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio
communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage
off the premises.
   14.   All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers
shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.02.08   Revocation:
   1.   Conditions. A home occupation and home-based business permit granted in
accordance with the provisions of this section may be terminated if the
Building Inspector makes any of the following findings:
      a.   That any condition of the home occupation or home-based business
permit has been violated;
      b.   That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety
or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
      c.   That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
      d.   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been
suspended for six consecutive months or more; and
      e.   That the condition of the premises, or the district of which it is a
part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the purpose
and intent of this section.
   2.   Appeal. Within five working days of a revocation, an appeal may be made
to the Valley Board of Adjustment. The Building Inspector within ten working
days of the receipt of an appeal of his or her revocation actions, shall report
his or her findings of fact and decision to the Valley Board of Adjustment. The
Valley Board of Adjustment shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify or
allow to remain unchanged the home occupation or home-based business permit in
accordance with the Board’s final determination.
   3.   Nontransferable. A home occupation or home-based business permit
granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be
transferred, assigned, nor used by any person other than the permittee, nor
shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the
one for which the permit is granted.
Section 9.03   Radio, Television and Wireless Communication Towers
8.03.01   Intent:
Based upon the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and the Spectrum Act of 2012 (the Act) grants the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over certain aspects of
telecommunication services. This section is intended to regulate towers,
telecommunications facilities and antennas in the City in conformance with the
Act without prohibiting or tending to prohibit any person from providing
wireless telecommunication service. Telecommunication facilities, towers and
antennas in the City, to protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impact of installation of towers and antennas through careful design,
siting, and camouflaging, to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of
towers and other antenna support structures rather than the construction of
additional single use towers, to avoid potential damage to property caused by
towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas by ensuring such structures
are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, repaired
and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound
and to ensure that towers and antennas are compatible with surrounding land
uses.
9.03.02   Definitions:
All terms in this Section which are not specifically defined herein shall be
construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Spectrum Act of 2012 and the Rules and
Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). As used in this
Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Base Station shall mean a structure that supports or houses an antenna,
transceiver, or other associated equipment that constitutes part of a base
station at the time of the application is filed.
Broadcasting Tower shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of
radio, television, radar, microwaves or other electromagnetic frequencies which
exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located;
provided, however, that noncommercial towers not exceeding 50 feet in height
shall not be considered broadcast towers.
Collocation shall mean the mounting or installation of transmission equipment
on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
Conforming commercial earth station shall mean a satellite dish which is two
meters or less in diameter and is located in an area where commercial or
industrial uses are generally permitted under this regulation.
Eligible facilities request is defined as any request for modification of an
existing wireless tower or base station that involves (a) collocation of new
transmission equipment; (b) removal of transmission equipment; or (c)
replacement of transmission equipment.
In Writing  refers to the means in which an applicant for a telecommunications
tower is notified. The “in writing” clause has been defined to include the
minutes of the governing body’s proceedings including findings of fact.
Owner  shall mean any person with a fee simple title or a leasehold exceeding
ten years in duration to any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of
the County who desires to develop, construct, modify, or operate a tower upon
such tract of land.
Replacement  shall mean the removal and upgrade of transmission equipment and
not the structure on which it is located.
Specific and absolute timeframe this refers to the timeframe allowed for
processing a telecommunication application under Section 6409 (a) of the
Spectrum Act of 2012.
Stealth: Any telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which is designed
to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than a tower, such as
light poles, power poles and trees.
Telecommunications Facilities shall mean any cables, wires, lines, waive
guides, antennas, or any other equipment or facilities associated with the
transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or
has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However,
telecommunications facilities shall not include: a. Any Conforming Commercial
Earth Station antenna two meters or less in diameter; b. Any earth station
antenna or satellite dish antenna of one meter or less in diameter.
Tower shall mean any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting any Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated
facilities.
Tower owner shall mean any person with an ownership interest of any nature in a
proposed or existing tower.
Transmission Equipment: any equipment that facilitates transmission for any
Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including,
but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment
associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-
optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
9.03.03   Tower Construction Standards:
Listed below are tower construction standards.
   1.   Towers shall be permitted conditional uses of land in only those zoning
districts where specifically listed and authorized in this regulation.
   2.   No person shall develop, construct, modify or operate a tower upon any
tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City prior to approval of
its application for a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council and issuance
of the permit by the City.
   3.   All towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas on which
construction has commenced within the zoning jurisdiction of the City after the
effective date of this regulation shall conform to the Building Codes and all
other construction standards set forth by the City, County, federal, and state
law and applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Upon
completion of construction of a tower and prior to the commencement of use, an
engineer’s certification that the tower is structurally sound and in
conformance with all the aforementioned applicable regulatory standards shall
be filed with the Building Inspector.
9.03.04   Application to Develop a Tower:
   1.   Prior to commencement of development or construction of a tower, an
application shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for a Conditional Use
Permit and shall include the following:
      A.   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner and if applicable,
the lessee of the tract of land upon which the tower is to be located.
Applicants shall include the owner of the tract of land and all persons having
an ownership interest in the proposed tower. The application shall be executed
by all applicants.
      B.   The legal description and address of the tract of land on which the
tower is to be located.
      C.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other
towers or useable antenna support structures within a one-mile radius of the
proposed tower, including publicly and privately owned towers and structures.
      D.   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has made
diligent but unsuccessful efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate
the applicants’ telecommunications facilities on a tower or useable antenna
support or written technical evidence from an engineer that the applicants’
telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another
tower or useable antenna support structure.
      E.   Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower
will meet the established Building Code, and all other applicable construction
standards set forth by the City Council and federal and state and ANSI
standards.
      F.   Color photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower
with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear
viewed from the nearest residentially used and / or zoned property and nearest
roadway, street or highway.
      G.   Descriptions and diagrams of the proposed tower, telecommunications
facilities and/or antenna, manufacturers literature, appurtenances such as
buildings, driveways, parking areas, and fences or other security enclosures
with significant detail to allow persons reviewing the application to
understand the kind and nature of the proposed facility.
      H.   The application, based upon the specific and absolute timeframe
established by the FCC, shall be processed and decided within 60 days of the
application becoming completed. However, the 60 day application processing
period may be extended only:
         i.   By mutual agreement between the City of Valley and the applicant,
or
         ii.   By Valley’s determination that the application is incomplete.
            1.   If the City of Valley deems the application to be incomplete,
the City shall notify the applicant of the incompleteness within 30 days of the
initial filing.
            2.   The City shall clearly and specifically delineate in writing
the missing information
            3.   The clock shall resume when the information is provided, but
may be stopped again if the City of Valley notifies the applicant within 10
days that the application remains incomplete.
            4.   The City shall not request new information beyond what is
already required.
         iii.   If the application is not acted upon within 60 days, the
application shall be deemed to be approved by the governing body.
9.03.05   Setbacks and Separation or Buffer Requirements
Listed below are setbacks and separation requirements for towers and exception
to height restrictions of towers.
   1.   All towers up to 50 feet in height shall be setback on all sides a
distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning
district. Towers in excess of 50 feet in height shall be set back one
additional foot for each foot of tower height in excess of 50 feet. The height
of the tower shall be measured from the grade at the foot of the base pad to
the top of any telecommunications facilities or antennas attached thereto.
Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the
property line of the tract of land on which it is located.
   2.   Freestanding and guyed towers shall be located so that the distance
from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line or the supporting
structure of a separate neighboring tower is a minimum of 100 percent of the
tower height. The Planning Commission and City Council may reduce the setback
with a conditional use permit if it determines that such reduction does not
constitute a hazard to safety or property on adjacent properties or rights-of-
way.
   3.   Towers exceeding 100 feet in height may not be located in any
residentially zoned district and must be separated from all residentially zoned
districts and occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner,
by a minimum of 200 feet or 100 percent of the height of the proposed tower,
whichever is greater.
   4.   Towers of 100 feet or less in height may be located in residentially
zoned districts provided said tower is separated from any residential
structure, school, church, and/or occupied structures other than those utilized
by the tower owner, by a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of the height of
the tower.
   5.   Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from
other towers:
      A.   Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers,
whether monopole, self- supporting lattice, or guyed by a minimum of 750 feet.
      B.   Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all
other self-supporting lattice or guyed towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet.
   6.   As part of its conditional use approval process, the Planning
Commission and City Council may, after public notice and hearing, permit the
tower to exceed the height restrictions otherwise allowable in the district.
9.03.06   Structural Standards for Towers Adopted:
The Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, 1991 Edition (ANSI/EIA/TIA 222-E-1991) is hereby adopted, together
with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by regulation and set
forth in this Article of the Zoning Regulation.
9.03.07   Illumination and Security Fences:
   1.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the FAA.
Any tower subject to this Section that is required to be lit under FAA
requirements and using a strobe light shall be equipped with dual mode
lighting. In no case, shall said tower be allowed to operate a strobe lighting
system after sunset and before dawn.
   2.   All self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be enclosed within a
security fence or other structure designed to preclude unauthorized access.
Monopole towers shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will
preclude to the extent practical, unauthorized climbing of said structure.
9.03.08   Exterior Finish:
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish
which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission and City Council as part of the application
approval process. All towers that must be approved as a conditional use shall
be stealth design unless stealth features are impractical or the cost of such
features represents an undue burden on the applicant.
9.03.09   Landscaping:
All tracts of land on which towers, antenna support structures,
telecommunications facilities and/or antennas are located shall be subject to
the landscaping requirements of the City.
9.03.10   Prohibitions
According to the FCC, “[A] state or local government may not deny, and shall
approve, any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing
wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station.”
9.03.11   Substantial Change
The City of Valley may only require an amended conditional use permit for
changes/modifications on a telecommunication tower/system that are defined by
the FCC as substantial.
   1.   Substantial Change shall mean any of the following:
      A.   Towers outside the public right-of-way, a “substantial change”
         •   increases the height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the
height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, or
         •   Protrudes from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more
than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater.
      B.   Towers in the right-of-way, and all base stations, a “substantial
change”
         •   increases the height of the tower or base station by more than 10%
or 10 feet, whichever is greater, or
         •   protrudes from the edge of the structure more than 6 feet
      C.   All Towers and base stations, a substantial change:
         •   involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;
         •   entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of
the tower or base station;
         •   defeats the existing concealment elements of the tower or base
station; or
         •   does not comply with conditions associated with the prior approval
of construction or modification of the tower or base station unless the non-
compliance is due to any of the “substantial change” thresholds identified
above.
   2.   Changes in Height
      A.   Changes in height are to be measured from the original support
structure in cases where the deployments are or will be separated horizontally.
      B.   In other circumstances, changes in height are to be measured from
the dimensions of the original tower or base station and all originally
approved appurtenances, and any modifications approved prior to the passage of
the Spectrum Act.
      C.   Note, the changes are measured cumulatively; otherwise a series of
small changes could add up to a cumulative change that exceeds the “substantial
change” threshold.
9.03.12   Inspections
The City reserves the right to conduct inspection of towers, antenna support
structures, telecommunications facilities and antenna upon reasonable notice to
the tower owner or operator to determine compliance with this Section and to
prevent structural and equipment failures and accidents which may cause damage,
injuries or nuisances to the public. Inspections may be made to determine
compliance with the City’s Building Codes and any other construction standards
set forth by the City, federal, and state law or applicable ANSI standards.
Inspections shall be made by either an employee of Valley’s Zoning Office, or a
duly appointed independent representative of the City.
9.03.13   Maintenance
The towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and
antennas shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair so that the same does not constitute a nuisance to or a danger to the
life or property of any person or the public.
9.03.14   Abandonment
If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of one year, the Building
Inspector shall notify the tower owner that the site will be subject to
determination by the Building Inspector that the site has been abandoned. Upon
issuance of written notice to show cause by the Building Inspector, the tower
owner shall have 30 days to show preponderance of evidence that the tower has
been in use or under repair during the period of apparent abandonment. In the
event the tower owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under
repair during the relevant period, the Building Inspector shall issue a final
determination of abandonment of the site and the tower owner shall have 75 days
thereafter to dismantle and move the tower. In the event the tower is not
dismantled and removed, the tower shall be declared a public nuisance by the
Building Inspector, or his/her designee and a written request shall be directed
to the City Attorney to proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to
authority of the Revised Nebraska State Statutes and City of Valley codes, and
charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the tower is located
or the owner of record of the said real estate.
9.03.15   Approval Denial Procedures for Tower Development Permit
   1.   Any decision to deny an application to place, construct or modify a
wireless facility must be “in writing” and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record.
   2.   The regulation of placement, construction, and modification of personal
wireless services facilities by the City of Valley shall not unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;
   3.   The regulation of the placement, construction, and modification of
personal wireless service facilities by the City of Valley shall not prohibit
or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;
   4.   The City of Valley shall not regulate the placement, construction, or
modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such
emissions comply with FCC regulations;
Section 9.04   Fences
9.04.01   No fence shall be constructed within the zoning jurisdiction of the
City of Valley unless a permit is approved and issued by the Building Inspector
and is constructed in conformance with the following requirements:
   1.   Unless otherwise provided, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract
outside the surveyed lot lines, or adjacent to any municipal property,
excluding public streets.
   2.   No solid fence permitted or required by this regulation shall be built
within a triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two intersecting streets
and a line connecting points 40 feet on each leg from their point of
intersection; or otherwise in any manner create a traffic hazard or obstruction
to visibility.
   3.   The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent
properties and street frontage.
   4.   Fences constructed within residential districts or on land used for
residential purposes are subject to the following provisions.
      a.   The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard setback
shall be 42 inches not exceeding 50 percent closed construction, or 48 inches
not exceeding 25 percent closed construction, unless otherwise permitted.
      b.   The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard
shall be six feet four inches.
      c.   On corner lots, a fence built parallel to the street side yard line
but set back in conformance with the required street yard setback may have a
maximum height of six feet.
      d.   On a corner lot, the fence on the non-address side may be setback
five feet from property line but shall not extend in front of rear of the
primary structure.
      e.   Fences shall be constructed of wood, metal chain-link, PVC/ resin,
stone or masonry materials only. Wood fences shall utilize standard pre-treated
building lumber only or be finished.
      f.   Privacy fences located in the rear of the property (behind principal
structure) may be constructed in a closed manner.
   5.   Where it is demonstrated that for security purposes the perimeter
fencing around a plant or building located in an area zoned as an Industrial
District must be higher than six feet in height may be approved by a
Conditional Use Permit.
   6.   Fences constructed along and parallel to a lot lines separating a
residential lot from property located in a Commercial or Industrial District
shall not exceed eight feet in height.
   7.   Fences constructed along and parallel to rear and side lot lines
adjoining arterial streets, as designated by the Nebraska Department of Roads,
shall not exceed eight feet in height.
9.04.02   No fence or vegetation shall be situated or constructed in such a way
as to obstruct the vehicular traffic or otherwise create a traffic safety
hazard.
9.04.03   The use of barbed wire in the construction of any fence is prohibited
except:
   1.   Perimeter security fencing of buildings constructed in an Industrial
District. The plans and specifications for any such fencing must be approved by
the City before commencement of construction.
   2.   Farm fencing constructed for agricultural purposes on parcels of land
10 acres or more in size, located in the TA District.
9.04.04   All fences shall be maintained in good repair.
9.04.05   Electric Fences. No electric fence, except for underground invisible
fence for animal control, shall be constructed or maintained within the City of
Valley or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction except in TA District
as hereinafter provided. An owner or lessee of such property may, upon
application to the City and approval by the Building Inspector, maintain
electrified fencing provided same shall not be energized to the extent that it
is capable of causing bodily harm to persons, be they children or adults, or to
animals. Before the Building Inspector shall approve any electrified fencing,
it shall be determined that non-electrified fencing will not adequately protect
the owner’s property and the owner’s application for approval of electrified
fencing shall set forth in detail the reasons why non-electrified fencing will
not adequately protect his property.
Section 9.05   Performance Standards for Industrial Uses
9.05.01   Physical Appearance:  All operations shall be carried on within an
enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition
may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be
stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily
visible from a street. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed
to prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the storage of
vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, mobile homes, or similar equipment
when in operable condition.
9.05.02   Fire hazard:  No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable
gasses, acid, liquids, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels,
motor fuels and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other
regulations of the City of Valley.
9.05.03   Noise:  No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in
excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the
daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line
and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the
natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used, and measurement may include
breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges.
9.05.04   Sewage and Liquid Wastes:  No operation shall be carried on which
involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground, liquid waste
of any radioactive or poisonous nature or chemical waste which are detrimental
to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and
installations.
9.05.05   Air Contaminants:
   1.   Air Contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number
One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for
one four-minute period in each one-half hour. Light colored contaminants of
such a capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or
greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
   2.   Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any
generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two tenths (0.2)
grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit,
except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it may
equal but not exceed six tenths (0.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a
temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
   3.   Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot
reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied
the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever
such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to
cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of
persons or to the public in general; or to endanger the comfort, repose,
health, or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public
in general, or to cause, or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage
to business, vegetation, or property.
   4.   Odor: The emission of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious
to any considerable numbers of persons, shall be prohibited. Observations of
odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor.
As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of
putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as
associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be
considered obnoxious within the meaning of this Regulations.
   5.   Gasses: The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not
exceed five parts per million (5ppm), carbon monoxide shall not exceed five
parts per million (5ppm). All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot
line.
   6.   Vibration: All machines including punch presses and stamping machines
shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case, shall such
vibration exceed a displacement of three thousandths of an inch (0.003”)
measured at the zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be
permitted in this zone.
   7.   Glare and heat: All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces shall
be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line. No heat
from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot line to
the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five
degrees Fahrenheit.
9.05.06   Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning
Districts
The Table below displays the maximum permitted sound levels that may be
generated by uses in the I-1, I-2 or I-3 zoning districts where adjacent to
residential zoning districts. All measurements shall be taken at or within the
boundary between the originating district and the adjacent residential zoning
district with a sound level meter meeting ANSI specification for a Type II or
better general purpose sound level meter. The A-weighted response shall be
used.
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels at Residential Boundaries
Originating Zoning District Time Maximum One Hour Leq* (dbA)
Originating Zoning District Time                   Maximum One Hour Leq* (dbA)
I-1                         7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 65+
                            10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
I-2                         7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 65
                            10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
I-3                         7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 65
                            10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
* Leq is the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period,
conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. It
is the average sound level and accurately portrays the sound the human ear
actually hears.
 
Section 9.06   Small Wind Energy Systems
9.06.01   Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and
efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site
consumption of utility supplied electricity.
9.06.02   Definitions
The following are defined for the specific use of this section.
Small Wind Energy System shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics,
which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to
primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Tower Height shall mean the height above grade of the first fixed portion of
the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
9.06.03   Requirements
Small wind energy systems shall be permitted as an Accessory Use within any
district where the use is listed and allowed. Certain requirements as set forth
below shall be met:
   1.   Tower Height
      A.   For property sizes between ½ acre and one acre the tower height
shall be limited to 80 feet.
      B.   For property sizes of one acre or more, there is no limitation on
tower height, except as imposed by FAA regulations.
   2.   Setbacks
      A.   No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors,
may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site.
   3.   Noise
      A.   Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at
the closet neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.
      B.   The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as
utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
   4.   Approved Wind Turbines
      A.   Small wind turbines must have been approved under the Emerging
Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any other small
wind certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.
   5.   Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes
      A.   Applications for small wind energy systems shall be accomplished by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and
footings.
      B.   An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with
official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and
certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
      C.   The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
      D.   Wet stamps shall not be required.
   6.   Compliance with FAA Regulations
      A.   Small wind energy systems must comply with applicable FAA
regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to
airports.
   7.   Compliance with National Electrical Code
      A.   Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code.
      B.   The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
   8.   Utility Notification
      A.   No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer- owned generator.
      B.   Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
   9.   Setbacks
All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table:
 Wind Turbine –
 Non Commercial WECS
                                                   Wind Turbine –
                                                   Non Commercial WECS
Property Lines                                     One times the total height
Neighboring Dwelling Units                         One times the total height
Road Rights-of-Way*                                One times the tower height.
Other Rights-of-Way                                One times the tower height.
Wildlife Management Areas and State Recreational   NA
Areas
Wetlands, USFW Types III, IV, and V                NA
Other structures adjacent to the applicant’s siteNA
Other existing WECS not owned by the applicant.    NA
River Bluffs
*   The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned
change or expanded right-of-Way is known.
 
Section 9.07   Commercial/Utility Grade Wind Energy Systems
9.07.01   Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and
efficient use of commercial/utility grade wind energy systems within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of Valley.
9.07.02   Definitions
The following are defined for the specific use of this section.
Aggregate Project shall mean projects that are developed and operated in a
coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or
more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated
infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility
may be owned by a separate entity but are also part of the aggregated project.
Commercial WECS shall mean a wind energy conversion system of equal to or
greater than 100 kW in total name plate generating capacity.
Fall Zone shall mean the area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower
base, in which a guyed tower will collapse in the event of a structural
failure. This area is less than the total height of the structure.
Feeder Line shall mean any power line that carries electrical power from one or
more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind
turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid, in the
case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems the point of
interconnection shall be the substation serving the wind energy conversion
system.
Meteorological Tower shall mean, for purposes of this regulation, a tower which
is erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data
relevant to siting a Wind Energy Conversion System. Meteorological towers do
not include towers and equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of
Roads, or other applications to monitor weather conditions.
Micro-Wind Energy Conversion System  shall mean a Wind Energy Conversion System
of 1 kW nameplate generating capacity or less and utilizing supporting towers
of 40 feet or less.
Public Conservation lands shall mean land owned in fee title by State or
Federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including
but not limited to State Wildlife Management Areas, State Parks, federal
Wildlife Refuges and Waterfowl Production Areas. For purposes of this
regulation, public conservation lands will also include lands owned in fee
title by non- profit conservation organizations, Public conservation lands will
also include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to
public agencies or non-profit conservation organizations.
Rotor Diameter shall mean the diameter of the circle described by the moving
rotor blades.
Small Wind Energy System shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics,
which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to
primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Substations shall mean any electrical facility to convert electricity produced
by wind turbines to a voltage greater than 35,000 (35,000 KV) for
interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.
Total Height shall mean the highest point, above ground level, reached by a
rotor tip or any other part of the Wind Energy Conversion System.
Tower shall mean the vertical structures that support the electrical, rotor
blades, or meteorological equipment.
Tower Height shall mean the total height of the Wind Energy Conversion System
exclusive of the rotor blades.
Transmission Line shall mean the electrical power lines that carry voltages of
at least 69,000 volts (69 KV) and are primarily used to carry electric energy
over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and
supplying electric energy to retail customers.
Wind Energy Conservation System shall mean an electrical generating facility
comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but
not limited to: power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological
towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid.
Wind Turbines shall mean any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy using
airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
9.07.03   Requirements
Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy systems shall be permitted as a
Conditional Use within any district where the use is listed and allowed. The
following requirements and information shall be met and supplied:
   1.   The name(s) of project applicant.
   2.   The name of the project owner.
   3.   The legal description and address of the project.
   4.   A description of the project of the project including: Number, type,
name plate generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height
of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
   5.   Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind turbines,
electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. This site layout shall
include distances and be drawn to scale.
   6.   Engineer’s certification.
   7.   Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
   8.   The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines.
   9.   A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property and
surrounding area, including any other Wind Energy Conversion System, within 10
rotor distances of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
   10.   Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas (including bluffs)
within 1,320 feet of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
   11.   An Acoustical Analysis
   12.   FAA permit
   13.   Location of all known Communication Towers within two miles of the
proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
   14.   Decommissioning Plan
   15.   Description of potential impacts on nearby Wind Energy Conversion
Systems and wind resources on adjacent properties.
9.07.04   Aggregated Projects
   1.   Aggregated projects may jointly submit a single application and be
reviewed under joint proceedings, including notices, public hearings, reviews
and as appropriate approvals.
   2.   Permits may be issued and recorded separately.
   3.   Joint projects will be assessed fees as one project.
9.07.05   Setbacks
All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table:
 Wind Turbine –        Meteorological Towers
 Commercial/Utility WECS
             Wind Turbine –                                                 Meteorological
             Commercial/Utility WECS                                          Towers
                                                                              The greater
                                                                              of:
                                                                              The fall zone,
                                                                              as certified
Property     1.1 times the total height.                                      by a
Lines                                                                         professional
                                                                              engineer, + 10
                                                                              foot or 1.1
                                                                              times the
                                                                              total height.
                                                                              The greater
                                                                              of:
                                                                              The fall zone,
Neighboring                                                                   as certified
Dwelling     2,000 feet                                                       by a
Units*                                                                        professional
                                                                              engineer, + 10
                                                                              foot or 1.1
                                                                              times the
                                                                              total height.
                                                                              The greater
                                                                              of:
                                                                              The fall zone,
Road                                                                          as certified
Rights-of-   1.1 times the height.                                            by a
Way**                                                                         professional
                                                                              engineer, + 10
                                                                              foot or one
                                                                              times the
                                                                              total height.
                                                                              The greater
                                                                              of:
                                                                              The fall zone,
Other        The greater of:                                                  as certified
Rights-of-   The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10     by a
Way          foot or 1.1 times the total height.                              professional
                                                                              engineer, + 10
                                                                              foot or one
                                                                              times the
                                                                              total height.
Public
conservation 1,000 feet                                                       600 feet
lands
Wetlands,
USFW Types   600 feet                                                         600 feet
III, IV, and
V
                                                                              The greater
                                                                              of:
                                                                              The fall zone,
             The greater of:                                                  as certified
Other        The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10     by a
structures   foot or 1.1 times the total height.                              professional
                                                                              engineer, + 10
                                                                              foot or one
                                                                              times the
                                                                              total height.
             To be considered based on:
             •   Relative size of the existing and proposed WECS
             •   Alignment of the WECS relative to the predominant winds
Other        •   Topography
existing     •   Extent of wake interference impacts on existing WECS
WECS         •   Property line setback of existing WECS
             •   Other setbacks required
             Waived for internal setbacks in multiple turbine projects
             including aggregated projects
*   The setback for dwelling units shall be reciprocal in that no dwelling unit shall be
constructed within the same distance required for a commercial/utility Wind Energy
Conversion System.
** The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned change or
expanded right-of-Way is known.
 
9.07.06   Special Safety and Design Standards
All towers shall adhere to the following safety and design standards:
   1.   No WECS shall be allowed to be constructed within any Airport Approach
Hazard or Turning Area.
   2.   Clearance of rotor blades or airfoils must maintain a minimum of 12
feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
   3.   All Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a sign or signs posted on the
tower, transformer and substation, warning of high voltage. Other signs shall
be posted on the turbine with emergency contact information.
   4.   All wind turbines, which are a part of a commercial/utility WECS, shall
be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.
   5.   Consideration shall be given to painted aviation warnings on all towers
less than 200 feet.
   6.   Color and finish:
      All wind turbines and towers that are part of a commercial/utility WECS
shall be white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color. Blades may be black in
order to facilitate deicing. Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.
   7.   Lighting:
      Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe, shall
adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA permits and
regulations. Red strobe lights shall be used during nighttime illumination to
reduce impacts on neighboring uses and migratory birds. Red pulsating
incandescent lights should be avoided.
   8.   Other signage:
      All other signage shall comply with the sign regulations found in these
regulations.
   9.   Feeder Lines:
      All communications and feeder lines, equal to or less than 34.5 kV in
capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried, where feasible. Feeder
lines installed as part of a WECS shall not be considered an essential service.
   10.   Waste Disposal:
      Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates,
packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and
lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
   11.   Discontinuation and Decommissioning:
      A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use after one year without
energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the Building
Inspector outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service.
All WECS and accessory facilities shall be removed to ground level within 90
days of the discontinuation of use.
      Each Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining
the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable
life or upon being discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a
competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of
decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with
decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will
be available to pay for decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory
facilities.
   12.   Noise:
      No Commercial/Utility WECS shall exceed 50 dBA at the nearest structure
or use.
   13.   Interference:
      The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or
television signals caused by any WECS. The applicant shall notify all
communication tower operators within five miles of the proposed WECS location
upon application to the city/county for permits.
   14.   Roads:
      Applicants shall:
         a.   Identify all county, municipal or township roads to be used for
the purpose of transporting WECS, substation parts, cement, and/or equipment
for construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS and obtain applicable
weight and size permits from the impacted jurisdictions prior to construction.
         b.   Conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the
appropriate jurisdictions to determine existing road conditions. The survey
shall include photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of
the public facility.
         c.   Be responsible for restoring or paying damages as agreed to by
the applicable jurisdiction sufficient to restore the road(s) and bridges to
preconstruction conditions.
   15.   Drainage System:
      The applicant shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to
public drainage systems stemming from construction, operation or maintenance of
the WECS.
Section 9.08   Junk Yards or Salvage Yards
Junk Yards and salvage of materials may be allowed in identified districts;
provided the following minimum conditions are met (additional conditions may be
required depending upon the operation and the proposed location:
   1.   Construction and operation shall comply with the Valley Municipal Code
and any other applicable codes or requirements.
   2.   Receiving areas for junk or salvage material shall be designed to avoid
the depositing of junk or salvage material outside a building or outside
screened (solid fence) storage areas.
   3.   Junk yards and salvage of materials shall contain a minimum of two
acres and shall not be located within a designated 100-year floodplain area as
identified by the Corps of Engineers.
   4.   Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall not
be located closer than 500 feet from any designated State or Federal highway.
Or locally designated Expressway, Major Arterial, and Other Arterial as per the
State of Nebraska Department of Roads or subsequent successor agency.
   5.   Junk material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be located
in the required front yard.
   6.   Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall be
at least 100 feet from the boundaries of the I-1. I-2, or I-3 zoning district
and shall be at least 500 feet from the any residential district or use.
   7.   All motor vehicles shall have all fluids drained prior to placement
within the facility.
   8.   The fence or wall shall be uniform in height, texture, and color, and
shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to ensure maximum safety to the
public, obscure the junk from normal view of the neighborhood.
   9.   The fence or wall shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all
scrap, junk or other material within the yard. No scrap, junk or other salvaged
materials may be piled or stacked so to exceed the height of the enclosing
fence or wall.
Section 9.09   Biofuels and Distillation Facilities
The following conditions shall be met when locating a biofuels facility within
the zoning jurisdiction of Valley. The standards are intended to protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of Valley and the
surrounding region.
   1.   Access to the facility shall be paved and connect to a hard-surfaced
street/road classified as an arterial.
   2.   If access is onto a county road or City street, the applicant must
provide evidence that the paving of such highway, road or street is sufficient
to carry, without damage to the roadway, the weight and size of the loads of
grain and liquid and any by-product entering or leaving the facility by truck.
   3.   If the road or street is not capable of carrying the weight and size of
the loads, then the applicant shall be required to make any necessary upgrades
to the paving in order for the pavement to handle the size and weight of the
loads.
   4.   The applicant shall be required to construct and acquire right-of-way
for all turning lanes and signals necessary to handle the increase in truck
traffic.
   5.   The facility if located adjacent to a railroad line shall have
sufficient area to provide for sidings for loading and unloading raw or
finished product. The sidings shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense.
   6.   The facility shall not be located in an area where winds and other
climatic events disperse odor, steam, smoke and other discharges into the
corporate limits of the City of Valley.
   7.   The facility shall not be located in an area where topography impairs
the dispersal of steam, smoke, or other discharges from the facility.
   8.   Water supply wells for the facility shall not be located within the 20-
year time of travel of any municipal well.
   9.   The facility shall be designed to recycle, in a manner compliant with
all City and state rules and regulations, a minimum of 75 percent of the water
used by the facility including water used for distillation.
   10.   All fuel storage tanks shall be located in a manner that will not
allow for contamination of any groundwater or surface water.
   11.   Total equipment height limited to the requirements of the zoning
district.
   12.   All fuel storage tanks shall be within an impermeable containment levy
system.
   13.   Site plan review required.
   14.   Lighting must be compliant with all applicable regulations.
   15.   Noise produced by facility must comply with noise ordinance
regulations.
Section 9.10   Solar Panels
No solar panel shall be constructed within the residential zoning jurisdiction
of the City of Valley unless a Building Permit is approved and issued by the
Building Inspector and is constructed in conformance with the state building
codes and the following requirements. For those devices that include
electrical, plumbing and heating constructions, the applicable permits shall
also be obtained. Solar panels shall meet the following requirements.
9.10.01   Lot and Height Requirements:
Solar panels shall conform to the required front, side and rear lot setback
requirements except as provided herein:
   1.   A solar panel which is attached to an integral part of the principal
building may project two feet into the front yard; six feet into the rear yard;
and two feet into the side yard.
   2.   A solar panel which is freestanding may be located only in the required
rear yard provided it does not exceed six feet in height and is located not
less than five feet from the rear lot line and not closer than one foot to any
existing easement as measured from the closest point of the structure including
its foundation and anchorage’s, nor shall the solar panel be located in the
required side yard or front yard.
9.10.02   Structural Requirements:
The physical structure and connections to existing structures shall conform to
the applicable state building codes.
9.10.03   Plot Plan:
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale
showing property lines, existing structures on the lot, proposed solar panel
location with respect to property lines, and dimensions of the proposed solar
panel.
9.10.04   Preexisting Solar Panels:
Notwithstanding noncompliance with the requirements of this section, a solar
panel erected prior to the adoption of these Regulations, pursuant to a valid
building permit issued by the City, may continue to be utilized so long as it
is maintained in operational condition.
Section 9.11   Self-Storage Units (Mini-Warehouses)
   1.   Minimum lot size of the Self-Storage facility shall be two acres.
   2.   Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of
storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility.
   3.   All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be
surfaced with concrete or asphalt, asphaltic concrete. All driveways within the
facility shall provide a hard surface with a minimum width of 25 feet.
   4.   All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the
storage of hazardous materials.
   5.   No storage may open into the front yards.
   6.   The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of the
site.
   7.   The storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances, including,
but not limited to, hazardous waste, industrial solid waste, medical waste,
municipal solid waste, septage, or used oil.
   8.   Facilities must maintain landscape buffer yards of 50 feet adjacent to
any public Right-of-Way and 20 feet adjacent to other property lines, unless
greater setbacks are required, a total of 35 percent of all yards shall be
landscaped.
   9.   Site development shall include provisions for stormwater management in
accordance with the Regulations of the City of Valley
   10.   Height limitations shall require a maximum height of 20 feet for any
structure in the facility.
   11.   The perimeter of each facility shall be fully enclosed by fencing or
screen walls. Perimeter fencing shall be provided at a minimum of six feet and
maximum of eight feet in height, of material approved by the Building
Inspector. Fencing shall be constructed behind required buffer yards.
Section 9.12   Auto Repair, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair
   1.   Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities must
take place within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted
only where incidental to Auto Repair and Body Repair, provided that such
storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential areas
or public rights-of-ways.
   2.   Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that
purpose and approved by the Building Inspector.
Section 9.13   Automobile and Equipment Rental and Sales
   1.   All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be hard
surfaced.
   2.   Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to automobile
rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair services shall not
exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building.
Section 9.14   Bed and Breakfasts
9.14.01   Bed and Breakfasts shall meet the following requirements:
   1.   Maintain a residential exterior appearance
   2.   Rooms may not be rented for more than seven consecutive days and no
more than 14 days per person in any 30-day period.
   3.   Breakfast must be served on premises and included within the room
charge for guest of the facility and shall be the only meal provided.
Section 9.15   Salvage Services
   1.   Screening:
      A.   The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by
opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls. Minimum height of this enclosure
shall be eight feet. Any such enclosure shall be constructed behind required
landscaped bufferyards.
      B.   Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened from
public right-of-way as provided above within one year of the effective date of
this Ordinance.
   2.   Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be
higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall.
   3.   No Salvage Services use may be established within 500 feet of the
nearest property line of a residential zoning district or of any pre-
established civic use, or within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of an
R- 1, R-2, or R-M District.
Section 9.16   Outdoor Storage Containers
   1.   Outdoor Storage Containers are subject to the regulations outlined for
Accessory Buildings in
Article 4, except as provided below:
      A.   Outdoor storage containers within each district shall be limited to
two containers per business.
      B.   Containers shall be located to the rear 50 percent of the site.
         1)   Containers shall not be located in any required setback or yard
area, required landscape area, required drive aisle, driveway, or parking area.
         2)   Containers shall not encroach upon spaces necessary to satisfy
the minimum parking requirement, nor shall they block, impede, or divert
traffic in or access to emergency, snow removal, and circulation and fire
lanes.
         3)   Containers shall not be stacked upon one another and shall be
located an appropriate distance from all structures, in accordance with the
Fire Code.
   2.   Storage containers should not be visible from an adjoining property or
from a public or private street. Storage containers not so located may be
placed on a site if the containers are adequately screened and buffered.
      A.   Screening shall be provided so that the outdoor storage container is
not visible or is buffered from surrounding properties or public or private
streets or the container shall be architecturally compatible with the primary
buildings and the nature of the business.
      B.   Enhanced fencing, landscaping, buffering and/or architectural
treatments shall be required for visible containers.
      C.   Buffering may include the use of decorative design features
including painting, murals, etc.
   3.   The exterior of the storage containers shall be kept free of rust,
holes, dents, or other corrosion and shall be painted or otherwise maintains
such that they are consistent with the character of adjacent buildings, and
secured at all times.
   4.   At no time, shall an outdoor storage container be used as a place of
business or residence, nor shall a container house, store, or contain goods,
products, or materials other than those that are accessory and essential to
daily on-site use and operation of the principal building or business
requesting the special use permit.
   5.   Exemptions The temporary use of construction trailers or containers at
a building site is exempt from this requirement.
Section 9.17   Sand and Gravel, Mineral, Stone, Rock, and Soil Extraction and
Quarries
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners or property to extract, mine,
quarry, or remove soil for commercial purposes without the proper permits
except soil donated for use by a municipality, county, or state for public
roadway purposes.
   1.   When soil is sold, removed, and transported to be used for public
roadway purposes, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to meet
the following conditions:
      A.   The application shall include a grading map showing contours,
proposed extraction contours, and proposed final grade contours;
      B.   The applicant shall identify the effect of the extraction on the
groundwater table of the adjoining properties;
      C.   Erosion controls, including retention and sediment basins shall be
provided during extraction to prevent a change in the character of runoff onto
adjacent land;
      D.   The application shall identify proposed vehicle and equipment
storage areas;
      E.   The surface shall be maintained in such a manner that surface waters
do not collect or pond, unless specifically approved. Underground drainage may
be supplied if it connects to an existing facility;
      F.   Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution on the site
at termination of the operation;
      G.   Excavation shall be conducted in such a way as not to constitute a
hazard to any persons, nor to the adjoining property. All cuts shall be
returned to a slope of less than 3:1 as soon as possible. Safety screening
shall be required at the outer boundary of the site; visual screening will also
be required where said boundary is adjacent to residential or recreational
land;
      H.   Within one year after completion of the excavation on any portion of
the site, the topography and soils shall be stabilized, and the land shall be
graded, seeded, and sodded so as to prevent erosion and siltation, and to
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public;
      I.   The owner of the property shall obtain adequate insurance to cover
any of the damages, which may occur as a result of this operation and shall
assume all liability for any damages. A copy of such insurance or other proof
of such insurance shall be submitted to the Building Inspector’s office prior
to issuing a Conditional Use Permit;
      J.   To assure that all of these conditions are met by the owner, a bond
contingent on the size of the operation, removal, or extraction may be required
to be posted with the City and County.
   2.   Exceptions
      A.   Sections
9.17 (1) (A-J) do not apply to removals, extractions, and operations that
remove less than 100 cubic yards from a given location.
      B.   Sections
9.17 (1) (A-J) do not apply to owners who donate soil to a municipality,
county, or state. Further, this section does not apply to sand and gravel
quarries, or the commercial removal of soil not used for road purposes.
Section 9.18   Mobile Food Units
Mobile Food Units are allowed in specific zoning districts; however, these uses
shall be required to abide by the following requirements:
   1.   All units shall be located on vacant lots except in the C-1 Downtown
Commercial District where on-street parking may be permitted. On-street parking
shall only be allowed during times of operation.
   2.   All units shall only operate during hours identified on the temporary
permit. In no case shall a unit be open for more than one hour after the legal
closing time of local bars.
   3.   All refuse shall be transported off-site unless an agreement with the
property owner is submitted to the City identifying an alternate.
   4.   All units shall not be allowed to use intense lights in order to
attract customers.
   5.   During non-operation hours, these units shall be stored on a vacant lot
or in an enclosed structure.
Section 9.19   Amateur Radio Towers and FCC Pronouncements
   1.   Radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licensed
amateur radio operators, where permitted and when, may not exceed 75 feet in
height. This height has been determined by the City to reasonably accommodate
amateur service communications, and further represents the minimum practicable
regulation to accomplish legitimate municipal land use regulation purpose, as
recognized under published guidelines of the Federal Communications Commission.
   2.   Special instances may require that amateur radio tower heights exceed
75 feet to achieve effective and reliable communications. In such cases, the
City Council may grant a Conditional Use Permit to a licensed amateur radio
operator for a specific tower height that exceeds 75 feet. In determining
whether to grant such permission, the City Council shall consider the federal
guidelines contained in PRB-1 (Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2d (1985);
codified at C.F.R. Section 97.15(e).
   3.   Such radio towers shall not be located within any front yard of the
primary use.
Section 9.20   Roadside Stands
   1.   A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal basis
for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding
agricultural lands.
   2.   A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no
closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled roadway.
   3.   A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in any one year.
Section 9.21   Adult Entertainment Establishments
9.21.01   Purpose; Findings and Rationale
   1.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this resolution to regulate adult
establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult establishments within the
City. The provisions of this resolution have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is neither the intent nor effect of this resolution to restrict or deny access
by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or
to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this resolution to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
   2.   Findings and Rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions
incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541
U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425
(2002); City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres,
427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v.
Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS,
Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490
U.S. 19 (1989); and
Farkas v. Miller, 151 F.3d 900 (8th Cir. 1998); Jakes, Ltd. v. City of Coates,
284 F.3d 884 (8th Cir. 2002); BZAPS, Inc. v. City of Mankato, 268 F.3d 603 (8th
Cir. 2001); SOB, Inc. v. County of Benton, 317 F.3d 856 (8th Cir. 2003); Scope
Pictures v. City of Kansas City, 140 F.3d 1201 (8th Cir. 1998); ILQ Invs. v.
City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); City of Lincoln v. ABC Books,
Inc., 470 N.W.2d 760 (Neb. 1991); Xiong v. City of Moorhead, 2009 WL 322217 (D.
Minn. Feb. 2, 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th
Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary
Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita
County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo.
2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7,
2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877
N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan’s Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596
F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d
360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th
Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir.
2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186
(9th Cir. 2004); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir.
2003); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011);
Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007);
Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Williams v.
Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass’n,
Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); H&A Land Corp. v.
City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of
Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St.
Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County,
555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v.
Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc.
v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of
Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380
(Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999);
Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002);
Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007);
Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4,
L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision
and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion’s Den,
Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth
Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc.
v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Major Liquors, Inc. v. City of Omaha , 188 Neb.
628 (1972); DLH Inc.v Nebraska Liquor Control Commission , 266 Neb. 361(2003);
Village of Winslow v Sheets , 261 Neb.203 (2001),
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around
adult establishments, including, but not limited to, “Correlates of Current
Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD,”
Journal of Urban Health (2011); “Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented
Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime? An Examination Using Spatial
Analysis,” Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois –
2011-12; Manatee County, Florida – 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida – 2006;
Clarksville, Indiana – 2009; El Paso, Texas – 2008; Memphis, Tennessee – 2006;
New Albany, Indiana – 2009; Louisville, Kentucky – 2004; Fulton County, GA –
2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee – 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri – 2008; Ft.
Worth, Texas – 2004; Kennedale, Texas – 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina –
2003; Dallas, Texas – 1997; Houston, Texas – 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona –
1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona – 1990; Spokane, Washington – 2001; St. Cloud,
Minnesota – 1994; Austin, Texas – 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana – 1984; Garden
Grove, California – 1991; Los Angeles, California – 1977; Whittier, California
– 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma – 1986; New York, New York Times Square – 1994;
the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Adult
establishments, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas – 2007;
“Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses,” 19 Criminal Justice Policy
Review 153 (2008); “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace
Sexual Violence,” by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice
Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; “Adult
establishments: An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan
House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store
Statistics and Articles; and Law Enforcement and Private Investigator
Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA), McLeary
and Weinstein; Do “Off-Site Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal
Doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence, Law and Policy, Vol. 31, No. 2
(April 2009), Adult Business Study: Town and Village of Ellicottville,
Cattaraugus County, New York (January 1998),
   the City Council finds:
      a.   Adult establishments, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not
limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of
disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter,
and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and
lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects.
      b.   Adult establishments should be separated from sensitive land uses to
minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be
separated from other adult establishments, to minimize the secondary effects
associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of adult
establishments in one area.
   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which
the City has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating.
Additionally, the City’s interest in regulating adult establishments extends to
preventing future secondary effects of either current or future adult
establishments that may locate in the City. The City finds that the cases and
documentation relied on in this resolution are reasonably believed to be
relevant to said secondary effects.
   The City Council hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings
and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of adult
establishments, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such
secondary effects.
9.21.02   Definitions
Adult Bookstore Or Adult Video Store shall mean a commercial establishment
which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other
visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” A
“principal business activity” exists where the commercial establishment meets
any one or more of the following criteria:
   1.   At least 35% of the establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of
said items, or
   2.   At least 35% of the retail value (defined as the price charged to
customers) of the establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of said items,
or
   3.   At least 35% of the establishment’s revenues derive from the sale or
rental, for any form of consideration, of said items, or
   4.   The establishment maintains at least 35% of its floor area for the
display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access
said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or sold,
shall be included in “floor area” maintained for the display, sale, or rental
of said items); or
   5.   The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its floor area
for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to
access said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or
sold, shall be included in “floor area” maintained for the display, sale, or
rental of said items); or
   6.   The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 2,000 of
said items; or
   7.   The establishment maintains an “adult arcade,” which means any place to
which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
Adult Cabaret shall mean a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club,
lounge, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features live
conduct characterized by semi-nudity. No establishment shall avoid
classification as an adult cabaret by offering or featuring nudity.
Adult Establishment shall mean an “adult bookstore or adult video store,” an
“adult cabaret,” an “adult motion picture theater,” or an “adult paraphernalia
store.”
Adult Motion Picture Theater shall mean a commercial establishment to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein an image-producing device is regularly
maintained to show images to more than five persons at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult Paraphernalia Store shall mean a commercial establishment that regularly
offers 100 or more sexual devices for sale. This definition shall not be
construed to include any establishment located within an enclosed regional
shopping mall. For purposes of this definition, “sexual device” means any three
dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human
genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of
oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos,
vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and
physical representations of the human genital organs. “Sexual device” shall not
be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against
sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
Employee of an Adult Establishment shall mean any person who performs any
service on the premises of an adult establishment, on a full time, part time,
or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include
a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Enclosed Regional Shopping Mall means a group of retail and other commercial
establishments that is planned, developed, and managed as a single property,
with on-site parking provided around the perimeter of the shopping center, and
that is generally at least forty acres in size and flanked by two or more large
anchor stores, such as department stores. The common walkway or mall is
enclosed, climate controlled and lighted, usually with an inward orientation of
the stores facing the walkway.
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area,
vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple
and areola.
Operator of Adult Establishment means any person on the premises of an adult
establishment who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion
thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity means the showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of
the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Specified Anatomical Areas shall mean less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and/or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified Sexual Activities shall mean intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy.
9.21.03   Performance Standards
   1.   No person shall establish, operate, or cause to be operated an adult
establishment in City of Valley within:
      A.   1,000 feet of another adult establishment;
      B.   500 feet of a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises; or
      C.   500 feet of a residential district, residential use, residence,
church, educational institution, park, or recreational facility.
      D.   For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a
straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the adult
establishment to the closest point on a property boundary of another adult
establishment, a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises, a
residential district, a residential use, a residence, a church, an educational
institution, park, or a recreational facility.
   2.   No adult establishment shall be or remain open for business between 12:
00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
   3.   No patron, employee of an adult establishment, or any other person
shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a state
of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity.
   4.   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment,
appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee of an adult
establishment who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from all patrons
and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600
square feet.
   5.   No employee of an adult establishment who appears semi-nude in an adult
establishment shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing
of a customer on the premises of an adult establishment. No customer shall
knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee of an adult establishment or
the clothing of such an employee of an adult establishment on the premises of
an adult establishment.
   6.   No person shall possess alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult
establishment.
   7.   No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of
18 years to be or remain on the premises of an adult establishment.
   8.   No operator of an adult establishment shall knowingly or recklessly
allow a room in the adult establishment to be simultaneously occupied by any
patron and any employee of an adult establishment who is semi-nude or who
appears semi-nude on the premises of the adult establishment, unless an
operator of the adult establishment is present in the same room.
   9.   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult establishment
which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any
mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette,
digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on
the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall
comply with the following requirements.
      A.   The operator of the adult establishment shall, within one week of
opening the adult establishment for business, submit to the Building Inspector
a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator’s stations,
booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall
designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes,
digital video discs, or other video reproductions. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
      B.   It shall be the duty of the operator of the adult establishment, and
of any employees of the adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure
that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      C.   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult
establishment, and of any employees of an adult establishment present on the
premises, to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the
premises is occupied by patrons or open for business.
      D.   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and
of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure
that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises.
      E.   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to
post conspicuous signs in well- lighted entry areas of the business stating all
of the following:
         i.   That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is
limited to one person.
         ii.   That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
         iii.   That the making of openings between viewing rooms is
prohibited.
         iv.   That violators will be required to leave the premises.
         v.   That violations of these regulations are unlawful.
      F.   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to
enforce the regulations articulated in
9.21.03 (9)(E)(i). though
9.21.03 (9)(E)(v) above.
      G.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from an operator of the adult
establishment’s station of every area of the premises, including the interior
of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose. An operator’s station shall not exceed 32 square feet
of floor area. If the premises have two or more operator’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of
the operator’s stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct
line of sight from the operator’s station. It is the duty of the operator of an
adult establishment to ensure that at least one employee of an adult
establishment is on duty and situated in each operator’s station at all times
that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator of an
adult establishment, and it shall also be the duty of any employees of an adult
establishment present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified
in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.
      H.   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to
ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any
booth or viewing room.
      I.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections
9.21.03 (9)(A) through
9.21.03 (9)(H) above to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
      J.   No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in viewing
room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron.
      K.   No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot
of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger
in area.
      L.   No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening
between viewing rooms.
   10.   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to
ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five-foot candles as measured at the
floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any
customer is present in or on the premises.
   11.   Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a
showing of a reckless mental state shall be sufficient to establish a violation
of a provision of this section
9.21.03.
Section 9.22   Dwelling Unit, Special Types
This section is intended to establish special conditions by which Special types
of dwelling units may be established within the jurisdiction of Valley.
9.22.01   Tiny Houses
Tiny houses fall under two separate categories, Site Built and RV/Park Model/
Camper.
Site Built Tiny Houses
   1.   Tiny homes shall have at least one habitable room with not less than
120 sf of gross floor area;
   2.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   3.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   4.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   5.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms, and toilet rooms;
   6.   Every dwelling shall have toilet facilities-water closet, lavatory, and
a bathtub or shower;
   7.   Tiny homes shall have a kitchen area and sink;
   8.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   9.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   10.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state,
and/or federal codes;
   11.   All foundations shall meet local, state, and/or federal building
codes;
   12.   All structures shall meet the maximum coverage on a lot as any
ordinary single-family dwelling.
RV/Park Model/Camper
   1.   The unit shall be constructed upon a single chassis;
   2.   The unit shall have 400 sf or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   3.   The unit shall be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck;
   4.   The unit shall not be considered to be designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as a temporary living quarter;
   5.   All electrical, including temporary hook-ups, shall be in compliance
with all local, state and/or federal electrical codes;
   6.   All plumbing and other mechanical systems shall not be permanently
connected to a supply or discharge source;
   7.   The wheels and axles shall remain on the unit at all times;
   8.   Accessory structures shall not be supported by these units;
Tiny House Villages/Communities
Tiny house villages/communities may be allowed in identified areas and shall be
designed using the CMD- Clustered/Mixed Use District process within this
Regulation.
9.22.02   Grain Bin Homes
Any residential structure meeting the definition of a grain bin home shall meet
the following criteria:
   1.   Grain bin homes shall be structurally anchored to a permanent
foundation and said foundation shall meet local, state, and/or federal building
codes;
   2.   Grain bin homes shall have at least one habitable room with not less
than 120 sf of gross floor area;
   3.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   4.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   5.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   6.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms, and toilet rooms;
   7.   Every dwelling shall have toilet facilities-water closet, lavatory, and
a bathtub or shower;
   8.   Grain bin homes shall have a kitchen area and sink;
   9.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   10.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   11.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state,
and/or federal codes;
   12.   Any and all extensions off the grain bin home shall be structurally
designed regarding all attachments and cantilevers’;
   13.   All modifications needed to convert the grain bin(s) into a dwelling
unit shall be required to have all modifications designed and engineered by a
licensed architect and/or engineering;
   14.   All items requiring the structure to be structurally designed/modified
shall be sealed by a structural engineer;
   15.   All structures shall meet the maximum coverage on a lot as any
ordinary single-family dwelling.
9.22.03   Cargo Container Homes
Any residential structure meeting the definition of a cargo container home
shall meet the following criteria:
   1.   Cargo container homes shall be structurally anchored to a permanent
foundation and said foundation shall meet local, state, and/or federal building
codes;
   2.   Multiple containers shall be structurally and permanently attached to
each other;
   3.   Cargo container homes shall have at least one habitable room with not
less than 120 sf of gross floor area;
   4.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   5.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   6.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   7.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms, and toilet rooms;
   8.   Every dwelling shall have toilet facilities-water closet, lavatory, and
a bathtub or shower;
   9.   Cargo container homes shall have a kitchen area and sink;
   10.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   11.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   12.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state,
and/or federal codes;
   13.   Any and all extensions off the cargo container home shall be
structurally designed regarding all attachments and cantilevers’;
   14.   All modifications needed to convert the cargo container(s) into a
dwelling unit shall be required to have all modifications designed and
engineered by a licensed architect and/or engineering;
   15.   All items requiring the structure to be structurally designed/modified
shall be sealed by a structural engineer;
   16.   All structures shall meet the maximum coverage on a lot as any
ordinary single-family dwelling.
9.22.04   Tree house Homes
Any residential structure meeting the definition of a tree house home shall
meet the following criteria:
   1.   Tree house homes shall only be permitted as an accessory use to a
primary structure;
   2.   Tree house homes shall have at least one habitable room with not less
than 120 sf of gross floor area;
   3.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   4.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   5.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   6.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
and hallways;
   7.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   8.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   9.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state, and/
or federal codes;
   10.   All tree house homes designed as recreational structures and/or
sleeping quarters shall be structurally designed prior to construction and
sealed by a structural engineer.
9.22.05   Quonset Homes
Any residential structure meeting the definition of a Quonset home shall meet
the following criteria:
   1.   Quonset homes shall be structurally anchored to a permanent foundation
and said foundation shall meet local, state, and/or federal building codes;
   2.   Quonset homes shall have at least one habitable room with not less than
120 sf of gross floor area;
   3.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   4.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   5.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   6.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms, and toilet rooms;
   7.   Every dwelling shall have toilet facilities-water closet, lavatory, and
a bathtub or shower;
   8.   Quonset homes shall have a kitchen area and sink;
   9.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   10.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   11.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state,
and/or federal codes;
   12.   Any and all extensions off the Quonset home shall be structurally
designed regarding all attachments and cantilevers’;
   13.   All modifications needed to convert the Quonset into a dwelling unit
shall be required to have all modifications designed and engineered by a
licensed architect and/or engineering;
   14.   All items requiring the structure to be structurally designed/modified
shall be sealed by a structural engineer;
   15.   All structures shall meet the maximum coverage on a lot as any
ordinary single-family dwelling.
9.22.06   Shouses
Any residential structure meeting the definition of a Shouse shall meet the
following criteria:
   1.   Shouses shall be structurally anchored to a permanent continuous
foundation and said foundation shall meet local, state, and/or federal building
codes.
   2.   Once a Shouse has been established, the overall structure, including
the shop area, will no longer be considered an agricultural structure/building;
   3.   Shouses homes shall have at least one habitable room with not less than
120 sf of gross floor area;
   4.   Other habitable rooms shall have not less than 70 sf of floor area,
except for kitchens;
   5.   Habitable rooms shall not less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension;
   6.   Ceiling height effect on room area:
      A.   Portions of a sloped ceiling measuring less than five feet or a
furred ceiling measuring less than seven feet from the finished floor;
      B.   The finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the
minimum required habitable area for the room;
   7.   Ceiling heights shall be a minimum of seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms, and toilet rooms;
   8.   Every dwelling shall have toilet facilities-water closet, lavatory, and
a bathtub or shower;
   9.   Shouses shall have a kitchen area and sink;
   10.   The unit shall provide heating and cooling systems as required by
local, state and/or federal codes;
   11.   All electrical shall be in compliance with all local, state and/or
federal electrical codes;
   12.   The unit shall meet all egress requirements found in local, state,
and/or federal codes;
   13.   Any and all extensions off the Shouse shall be structurally designed
regarding all attachments and cantilevers;
   14.   All modifications needed to convert the machine shed into a dwelling
unit shall be required to have all modifications designed and engineered by a
licensed architect and/or engineering;
   15.   All items requiring the structure to be structurally designed/modified
shall be sealed by a structural engineer;
   16.   All structures shall meet the maximum coverage on a lot like any
ordinary single-family dwelling.
   17.   When building a Shouse in an area zoned residential, all building
materials shall be consistent with residential construction materials.
   18.   No garage side walls shall exceed 16 feet in height.
   19.   The garage space square footage shall be limited to one and one-half
times the dwelling space square footage, provided, however, that the garage
space square footage for a Shouse in an area zoned Transitional Agriculture
(TA) shall be limited to five times the dwelling space square footage. Any use
other than a garage shall require a commercial permit.
   20.   A minimum of one-hour firewall shall be constructed between any
dwelling spaces abutting garage space.
(Ord. 836, passed 5-13-2025)
Section 9.23   Solar Farms:
9.23.01 Applicability
The purpose of this subsection is to provide standards tor fixed-panel
photovoltaic solar farms consisting of ground-mounted solar panels that capture
energy from the sun and convert it to electricity. The provisions of this
section are based on a ground-mounted photovoltaic facility using a rammed post
construction technique and panels that support the flow of rainwater between
each module and the growth of vegetation beneath the arrays and limiting the
impacts of stormwater runoff. The rammed post construction technique allows for
minimal disturbance to the existing ground and grading of the site. Based on
the assumed solar farm design, Valley finds the use to be low intensity with
minimal trip generation, low amounts of impervious cover, and low emission thus
the use is compatible in non-urbanized, low-density areas with other
agricultural and scattered industrial uses.
9.23.01 Definitions
The following definitions pertain specifically to this section of the
Resolution.
Solar Access: A property owner's right to have sunlight shine on his land.
Solar Collector : An assembly, structure, or design, including passive
elements, used for gathering, concentrating or absorbing direct or indirect
solar energy, specifically designed for holding a substantial amount of useful
thermal energy and to transfer that energy to a gas, solid or liquid or to use
that energy directly; this may include, but is not limited to, a mechanism or
process used for gathering solar energy through thermal gradients, or a
component used to transfer thermal energy to a gas, solid or liquid or to
convert into electricity.
Solar Energy : Radiant energy received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for
heat transfer, photosynthetic use, or photovoltaic use.
Solar Energy System: A system that uses the power of the sun to capture and
store energy and reduce on site consumption of utility power.
Solar Energy System, Freestanding: A solar energy system that is not attached
to another structure and is ground mounted.
Solar Energy System, Joint: A solar energy collector or storage mechanism that
supplies energy for structures or processes on more than one lot or in more
than one dwelling unit or leasehold, but not to the general public and involves
at least two owners or users.
Solar Skyspace: The maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar
collector to all positions of the sun necessary for efficient use of the
collector.
   (A)   Where a solar energy system is used for heating purposes only, solar
skyspace shall mean the maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar
energy collector to all positions of the sun between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. local apparent time from September 22 through
March 22 of each year.
   (B)   Where a solar energy system is used for cooling purposes only, solar
skyspace shall mean the maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar
collector to all positions of the sun between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. local apparent time from March 23 through September 21
of each year.
Solar Skyspace Easement: A right, expressed as an easement, covenant,
condition, restriction or other property interest in any deed, will or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of any landowner or in any order of taking,
appropriate to protect the solar skyspace of a solar collector at a
particularly described location to forbid or limit any or all of the following
where detrimental to access to solar energy: structures on or above ground;
vegetation on or above ground; or other activities. Such right shall
specifically describe a solar skyspace in three-dimensional terms in which the
activity, structures or vegetation are forbidden or limited or in which such an
easement shall set performance criteria for adequate collections of solar
energy at a particular location.
Solar Storage Mechanism: Equipment or elements such as piping and transfer
mechanisms, containers, heat exchangers or controls thereof and gases, solids,
liquids or combinations thereof that are utilized for storing solar energy,
gathered by a solar collector, for subsequent use.
9.23.03   Site Development Standards:
   1.   Lot coverage: No more than one percent of the gross site area shall be
occupied by enclosed buildings and structures.
   2.   Setbacks: A thirty-foot side and rear setback shall apply only to the
setback area measured from a lot line that abuts a residential use or
residential zoning district. The side or rear setback shall be eliminated where
the use does not abut a residential use or residential zoning district or the
two districts are separated by a public right-of-way.
   3.   Height: The average height of the solar panel arrays shall not exceed
12 feet.
   4.   Landscaping Buffer: The primary use of the property shall determine the
buffer requirement. Where a ground-mounted photovoltaic solar farm is the
primary use the property shall be considered agricultural for the purposes of
buffer requirements. There is no requirement for screening from public streets.
   5.   Stormwater Management: Fixed panel solar arrays shall be considered
pervious and any fee in lieu of detention shall be considered based on
impervious cover. The impervious cover calculation shall include the support
posts of the panels, any roads or impervious driveway surfaces, parking areas
and buildings on the site.
   6.   Subdivision: A property developed pursuant to this subsection shall be
required to plat however water and sewer connections shall not be required.
Suitable fire department access shall be required.
   7.   Signage: Signage shall conform to
Article 7 of this Resolution as well as any sign limitations of the zoning
district.
   8.   Customer owned on-site power lines shall be buried except where
connecting to existing overhead utility lines. This requirement shall not apply
to fiber optic connections.
   9.   Fencing: Due the unique security requirements of this land use, and to
facilitate the educational value of seeing this land use, fencing up to eight
(8) feet in height is permitted provided the fencing material is predominantly
open as defined in Appendix A.
   10.   All State and Federal codes and provisions not specified in this
subsection are required including but not limited to tree preservation, traffic
impact analysis and historic preservation.
9.23.04   Districts
Ground-mounted fixed-panel photovoltaic solar farms may be allowed upon the
approval of a Conditional Use Permit as established in
Article 5 of this Resolution.
9.23.05   Submittal Requirements:
Conditional Use Permits are required for solar farms. Plans shall contain the
following:
   1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, of the property indicating the total site
acreage, landscape and buffer areas, tree preservation, location of all
structures, the proposed location of the solar panels, the distances of the
solar panels to structures on the property as well as distances to the property
lines;
   2.   The plot plan shall include any roads, electric lines and/ or overhead
utility lines;
   3.   A description of the electrical generating capacity and means of
interconnecting with the electrical grid as coordinated and pre-approved with
the appurtenant Power District;
   4.   A copy of the interconnection agreement with the local electric utility
or a written explanation outlining why an interconnection agreement is not
necessary;
   5.   Drawings or blueprints of solar panels and arrays in conjunction with
the application for a building permit for a solar farm/solar power plant;
   6.   Structural engineering analysis for a solar panel, array and its
foundation, as applicable.
   7.   Manufacturer's recommended installations, if any; and
   8.   Documentation of land ownership and/or legal authority to construct on
the property.
   9.   A decommissioning plan shall be required to ensure that facilities are
properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning of solar panels must
occur in the event they are not in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan
shall include provisions for removal of all structures and foundations,
restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan ensuring financial resources will
be available to fully decommission the site. The Board may require the posting
of a bond, letter of credit or the establishment of an escrow account to ensure
proper decommissioning.
9.23.06   Compliance with Other Regulations:
   1.   Zoning permit applications for solar farms shall be accompanied by a
line drawing of electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the State’s adopted
electrical code and that has been pre-approved by the associated power district
meeting their Distribution Generation Requirements and Guidelines; and
   2.   This subsection does not waive any requirements of any state or Federal
codes, electrical codes or other technical codes as applicable.
9.23.07   Discontinuation.
A solar farm shall be considered abandoned after one year without energy
production. The property owner shall remove all solar farm equipment and
appurtenances within 90 days of abandonment.
Article 10: Gated Communities
The City of Valley recognizes that there is a market demand for subdivision
communities having limited access through the utilization of entryway gates.
The City of Valley recognizes that Gated Communities may be appropriate in
certain locations and in certain limited circumstances. The City of Valley
Zoning Regulations provided that Gated Communities are permitted uses in R-1,
R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts.
This Article applies to all subdivisions for which a Gated Community was
requested by a Subdivider, not by an existing Homeowners Association, and
approved by the Valley Planning Board and Valley City Council prior to
platting.
Section 10.01   Definitions
The following definitions are for the purpose of
Article 10 only:
DECLARATION:  Simultaneous with the recording of the Gated Community plat, the
subdivider must record in the public records of the City of Valley, Nebraska, a
document or documents (herein referred to as the “Declaration”), which shall
govern all platted lots with the Gated Community, shall impose requirements and
restrictions that run with the land, and shall address the responsibilities for
the ongoing maintenance and repair of the Gated Community infrastructure. The
terms of the Declaration shall be, to the City of Valley’s satisfaction,
legally sufficient and enforceable to accomplish its stated requirements and
restrictions.
GATED COMMUNITY:  A residential area containing more than four (4) lots in
which access to the subdivision streets is restricted by the use of a
guardhouse, gate, or electronic arm, to which residents may gain entry by using
electronic cards, identification stickers, codes, or remote-control devices.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION (“HOA”):  A mandatory community association in which the
owners of all lots, blocks, and tracts in the Gated Community are required by
the terms of the Declaration to be members.
INFRASTRUCTURE:  Those roadways and other items which should otherwise be
dedicated to the use of the public and/or the City of Valley in a typical
subdivision but which are retained for private use by the HOA or owners of lots
in the Gated Community; however, infrastructure as used herein specifically
excludes private amenities including, but not limited to, entrance and exit
gates, walls, swimming pools, clubhouses, parks and other recreation areas.
PRIVATE STREET:  A street created within a Gated Community which is not
dedicated for public use and which is located on a lot or outlot owned by a
Homeowners Association.
SUBDIVIDER :  (i) any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other entity,
or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute
a Gated Community or (ii) the person or entity that is the original Declarant
which records the Declaration and/or plat for a Gated Community or (iii) the
person or entity that succeeds to the rights and liabilities of the person or
entity which is the original Declarant, or (iv) in the absence of a written
assignment of subdivider rights recorded in the public records of the City of
Valley, Nebraska, the person or entity that materially or substantially
exercises the rights and liabilities of the original Declarant including, but
not limited to controlling the Board of Directors of the Homeowners
Association.
Section 10.02   General Provisions
The use of gates as a means of limiting access by the public necessitates that
streets and drainage systems for a Gated Community be privately owned and
maintained. However, the public’s interest is served only if the Gated
Communities and the accompanying private streets and drainage systems are
allowed as a privilege, not a right, of the subdivider and subsequent property
owners, and only if the improvements within a Gated Community comply with the
minimum standards of the subdivision regulations and are maintained in a manner
consistent with the existing standards established for similar facilities
maintained by the City of Valley.
This article acts as a contract among the Subdivider, the HOA, and the City of
Valley, by which the City of Valley allows a Subdivider to create a Gated
Community and allows the Subdivider and the HOA to keep the subdivision as a
community with gates that restrict access, so long as the Subdivider and the
HOA substantially comply with the requirements of this article.
Section 10.03   Gates
   1.   Gate Design Standards
      a.   Gate design may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the
required minimum gate width of 28 feet. If the entrance will incorporate a
median, guard shack or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate
arrangement, the gate widths shall be consistent with each street opening
width, but in no case, shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear
opening of less than 18 feet.
      b.   Approach and departures areas on both sides of a gated entrance must
provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded
passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. All entry gates must
be setback a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent public street right-of-way
to allow for vehicle stacking out of the public travel lanes. Any exception
must be approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission.
      c.   If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, said
obstruction must be a minimum of 14 feet above the finished road surface.
      d.   The design and plans for any gate must meet all design and other
standards and requirements set forth in the City of Valley ordinances and
standards as determined by the City Engineer.
   2.   Gate Construction, Operation, Maintenance, Testing and Inspection
      a.   All gate installations will be monitored and inspected by the City
Engineer. The installation must be completed and tested prior to the City’s
acceptance of the subdivision.
      b.   All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved
operating condition, with all components serviced and maintained on a biannual
basis as needed to insure proper gate operation.
         1)   A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and
electronic components at all times.
         2)   Back-up power with a manual over-ride or a manual open function
is mandatory.
         3)   Each gate shall have a remote control, or other device acceptable
to the City, to open and close the gate.
         4)   The City shall be provided with enough remote control or other
devices, the exact number to be determined by the City in its sole discretion,
to allow first responder emergency vehicles to open the gate at any time.
         5)   All gates will be equipped with a feature that allows first
responder emergency personnel to lock and maintain the gate in an open
position, in their discretion.
      c.   All streets, gates, and other fire protection features, signage, and
equipment are subject to periodic inspection and performance testing by the
City and must be repaired immediately if found to be in condition of disrepair.
The City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and disable, open, or
remove any gate, device, or other feature that impedes or controls vehicle
access at the sole expense of the Subdivider, Homeowners Association or their
successors. A gate which has been disabled, opened, or removed because of a
condition of disrepair or nonperformance shall not be placed back in service
until tested and authorized by the City Engineer. Emergency repairs shall be
assessed against the Subdivider, Homeowners Association, or their successors.
   3.   Access
      a.   Except where the entrance road culminates in a cul-de-sac or where
the entrance and exit road is a boulevard a gated community shall have at least
two but no more than four ingress/egress roads so that one may enter one gate
and exit the other without turning around.
      b.   Where the entrance road to a gated community culminates in a cul-de-
sac the cul-de-sac must meet all design and other standards and requirements
set forth in the City of Valley ordinances and standards, as determined by the
City Engineer.
      c.   Where the entrance and exit road to a gated community is a boulevard
the boulevard must meet all design and other standards and requirements set
forth in the City of Valley ordinances and standards, as determined by the City
Engineer.
      d.   The entryway gates must include a box, labeled “City of Valley,”
with a master-keyed padlock, and the box must contain a key, a card-key, a
code, a remote-controlled device, or some other means by which animal control,
City of Valley Public Works Department, City of Valley Engineer, City of Valley
Building Inspector, and utility workers may gain access to the subdivision.
      e.   The means of access must be approved by the entity providing utility
service to the Gated Community, and the box must be installed prior to the City
of Valley’s issuance of the certificate of completion for the Gated Community
infrastructure.
      f.   Any other utilities serving the Gated Community must have similar
access, and the names of such utilities must be on the outside of the box
containing the means of access.
Section 10.04   Private Streets, Sidewalks
   1.   Private Street Design Standards
      a.   Design and Construction Standards for Private streets shall conform
to the same standards regulating the design and construction as specified in
the City of Valley ordinances and standards, as determined by the City
Engineer. Street naming and addressing policy which shall conform to the 911
emergency response.
      b.   The design, layout and size of a public street shall conform to the
aforementioned standards and shall be accepted by the City Engineer.
      c.   Sidewalks may be required in the discretion of the City, as approved
by the City Engineer.
Section 10.05   Private Street Approval, Construction and Maintenance
   1.   Private streets must be constructed within a separate outlot owned by
the homeowner’s association.
      a.   This outlot must conform to the City’s standards for a public
street, including the requirement of a minimum 60 foot right of way.
      b.   An easement covering the outlot shall be granted to the City
providing unrestricted use of the outlot for utilities and storm drainage
systems and the maintenance, repair, reconstruction, administration and
operation of same.
      c.   This right shall extend to all utility providers and servicers
operating within the City and shall include the City’s subcontractors and
employees.
      d.   The easement shall also provide the City with the right of access
for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function,
including but not limited to first responders, emergency services, inspection,
including street inspections by the City Engineer, and code enforcement.
      e.   The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle
within the street lot that impairs emergency access.
   2.   Developments proposed with private streets must submit to the City the
same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and
utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and acceptance of improvements
prior to issuance of building permits shall apply.
   3.   The City may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs
necessary to insure emergency access.
   4.   Construction, Maintenance and Repairs:
      a.   The Subdivider or the HOA shall be responsible for the cost of the
construction, maintenance, repairs and reconstruction of all private streets.
      b.   The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of construction
or maintaining a private street, including snow and ice removal. The City may
require proof of funds as a part of the approval process.
      c.   The Homeowners’ Association shall maintain an escrow account, with
adequate resources within the account to cover two times the average annual
maintenance costs. A yearly audit of the escrow account shall be provided to
the city.
      d.   An inspection report is to be completed by May 1 of each year and
submitted to the Valley City Engineer.
      e.   The Valley City Engineer will review the report, inspect the private
streets and advise the HOA of the necessary repairs and maintenance.
      f.   HOA will perform such maintenance within three months, weather
permitting.
      g.   If HOA fails to perform such maintenance within three months, then
the City can perform such repairs and the HOA will pay the City of the work
within 60 days of receipt of a billing invoice.
      h.   If HOA fails to pay the City then the City may elect to dissolve the
Gated Community and require that the private streets become dedicated public
streets, pursuant to Section 10.05.02, herein.
Section 10.06   Public Utilities
   1.   Public Utilities Design Standards
      a.   Design and Construction Standards for public utilities shall conform
to the same standards regulating the design and construction of such utilities
as specified in the City of Valley ordinances and standards, as determined by
the City Engineer. These standards shall include, but are not limited to the
design standards for paving, drainage, water and sanitary sewer and Standards
Specifications for Public Works Construction.
      b.   The design and plans for any gate must meet all design and other
standards and requirements set forth in the City of Valley City standards and
Ordinances, as determined by the City Engineer.
   2.   Public Utilities: Approval, Construction, Maintenance and Cost
      a.   Water, sewer, and drainage facilities and other necessary utilities
placed within the outlot shall be installed and constructed in accordance with
City standards and Ordinances, and dedicated to the City as part of the
acceptance of the final plat. After the City’s acceptance of the utilities and
the dedication thereof the City shall be responsible for the maintenance of any
such utilities.
      b.   The Subdivider or the HOA shall be responsible for the cost of the
construction, of all utilities. The City may require proof of funds as a part
of the approval process.
   3.   Street Lights, Signs:
      Street lights and signs shall be installed and maintained by the
homeowner’s association in accordance with city standards and Ordinances.
Section 10.07   Homeowners Association
   1.   A Gated Community is required to have a mandatory Homeowners
Association in which the owners of all lots, blocks, and tracts in the Gated
Community are required by the terms of the Declaration to be members.
   2.   The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of
private streets, parks and other HOA appurtenances.
   3.   The Declaration shall be reviewed by the City Attorney and subject to
approval by the City to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable
City ordinances.
   4.   The Declaration shall be filed of record in the office of the Register
of Deeds of Douglas County, Nebraska prior to the approval of the final plat.
   5.   No portion of the Declaration pertaining to the private streets or
gates, and any assessments therefore, may be amended without the written
consent of the City.
   6.   The legal instruments establishing the HOA and the Declaration shall
require that each property owner in the subdivision acknowledge the potential
for delays in emergency responses due to limited access to the subdivision.
   7.   Such legal instruments and the Declaration shall further provide that
the HOA shall hold harmless and indemnify the City and any other entities
providing emergency services to the Gated Community against all costs,
including defense costs, resulting from claims based on delays in emergency
responses due solely to limited access to the subdivision and properties
therein, or from claims related to first responder emergency personnel
maintaining a gate in an open position pursuant to Article
10.03.
Section 10.08   City Issue Building Permits
A Gated Community proposed with private streets must submit to the City the
same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and
utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements
prior to issuance of building permits shall apply.
Section 10.09   Procedures for Dissolving a Gated Community
   1.   HOA Vote
      a.   The Declaration shall allow the HOA to request the City to accept
the Private Streets and the associated property as public streets and right-of-
way upon written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of 75
percent of the membership.
      b.   However, in no event shall the City be obligated to grant this
request and to convert the Private Streets to public streets.
      c.   The HOA shall address any such request to the Valley City Council
which shall, after investigation and consultation with City professionals and
staff, vote on such request.
      d.   Should the City elect to accept the streets as public, the City
shall inspect the private streets and assess the HOA, or the lot owners within
the Gated Community, for the cost of needed repairs concurrent with the City’s
acceptance of the streets.
      e.   The City shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed.
      f.   The City shall also require, at the HOA’s expense, the removal of
guard houses, gates, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic
amenities located within the outlot, provided that if the HOA is unable to pay
for any such removal the City may assess the cost of removal against the lots
within the Gated Community.
      g.   The Declaration shall provide for the City’s right to levy
assessment, if required, against all properties within the association for the
costs to repair streets and remove improvements.
      h.   Those portions of the Declaration pertaining to the subject matter
contained in this paragraph shall not be amended without the written consent of
the City.
   2.   Agreement
      a.   The Declaration shall provide that the City of Valley and the HOA
shall enter into an Agreement setting forth the HOA’s responsibilities in
connection with the maintenance of the private streets.
      b.   In the event of the HOA’s failure to perform street repairs, the
subsequent repairs of the private streets by the City of Valley, and the HOA’s
failure to pay the City of Valley for the cost of such repairs, the Agreement
shall provide that the City of Valley, at its option, may elect to convert the
Private Streets to public streets, and in such event the City shall have the
same powers with respect to making street repairs and levying assessments
therefore as are set forth in Article 10.09.01.
Section 10.10   Gated Community Indemnifications
The terms of the Declaration shall be, to the City of Valley’s satisfaction,
legally sufficient and enforceable to accomplish or otherwise ensure, at a
minimum, that the subdivider, so long as the subdivider retains control of the
Board of Directors of the HOA, and the HOA, expressly indemnify and hold the
City of Valley, its officers and employees, and any governmental entity or
public utility harmless from any cost of maintenance, repair, and
reconstruction of, or tort liability or award of damages related to or arising
out of or in connection with, the streets, sidewalks, drainage system
(including storm water system), gates and/or any other Gated Community
infrastructure or private improvements.
Section 10.11   Homeowners Association General Liability Policy
   1.   The Declaration shall require that the Homeowners Association carry a
general liability insurance policy insuring itself from liability for damages
related to or arising in connection with the streets, sidewalks, drainage
system, gate, and any other infrastructure.
   2.   The minimum amount of insurance required shall be $5,000,000.00.
   3.   The City of Valley shall be named as an additional insured on such
policy and the Homeowners Association shall, on at least an annual basis, or
upon request at any time, provide the City of Valley with a valid Certificate
of Insurance from an insurance company licensed and qualified to do business in
the State of Nebraska, evidencing such coverage.
Section 10.12   Gated Community Cost Disclosure Statement
   1.   No contract for the sale and purchase of a residential lot or home in a
Gated Community shall be effective until a Gated Community Cost Disclosure
Statement, in substantially the form of the Gated Community Cost Disclosure
Statement attached hereto as Exhibit “A”, has been provided to and executed by
such purchaser.
   2.   This Gated Community Cost Disclosure Statement shall be in conspicuous
type and shall be contained in a single document which shall be provided to the
purchaser separately from the contract for purchase and sale and other required
documents.
   3.   The Gated Community Cost Disclosure Statement type shall be deemed
conspicuous if it is all uppercase letters and typed in at least 12-point
typeface. In the case of sale and purchase of multiple lots to a single
purchaser in a Gated Community, execution of a single Gated Community Cost
Disclosure Statement, is sufficient, provided that all lots are listed on the
Gated Community Cost Disclosure Statement either by legal description or by
street address.
   4.   The deed conveying a residential lot or home to a purchaser, whether or
not the Grantor is the Subdivider or an owner subsequent to the Subdivider,
shall contain a representation that the Grantor provided a copy of the gated
Community Disclosure Statement to the Grantee.
   5.   The City of Valley shall have the right to file the Gated Community
Cost Disclosure Statement, or a summary thereof, against all the lots within
the gated community, either as a separate filing by the City or in conjunction
with the Declaration.
EXHIBIT “A”
If you are buying a lot or home in a Gated Community within the city limits of
the City of Valley, you should know these basic facts:
   1.   The City of Valley will not pay to maintain the streets, sidewalks, and
drainage systems and shall not permitted to remove storm debris in the Gated
Community because the streets, sidewalks, and drainage are private property and
the general public cannot access the Gated Community.
   2.   Although the cost of properly maintaining and repairing streets,
sidewalks, and drainage systems can be very high, only the owners of homes and
lots in this Gated Community will share these expenses. Tax dollars will not be
used.
   3.   Members of this Gated Community, through their mandatory HOA, must set
aside adequate reserves to pay for storm debris removal in the event of a
tornado, snowstorm, or other major storm event, to properly maintain, repair,
and replace the streets, sidewalks, and drainage system, and must have a
professional engineer regularly inspect the streets, sidewalks, and drainage
system and report what work is necessary to maintain and/or repair them.
   4.   The mandatory HOA is obligated to do the necessary repair work and the
members of the HOA are obligated to pay for the work through their assessments.
   5.   The HOA is also required to maintain liability insurance adequate to
pay claims for injuries and property damage arising on the private streets,
sidewalks, drainage areas, and other common areas in the Gated Community.
   6.   If the City of Valley determines that the Gated Community is not
meeting its obligations, it may revoke the Gated Community’s privilege to close
its gates so that the roads in the Gated Community become available for public
use.
I have read and understood the disclosures provided in this Gated Community
Cost Disclosure Statement prior to execution of a contract to purchase any lot
in the [   ] Gated Community.
Name of Purchaser   Signature of Purchaser
Name of Purchaser   Signature of Purchaser
Article 11: Site Plans
Section 11.01   Purpose
The site plan review provisions of this section are intended to promote
functional and aesthetic design of prop- erty development within the City.
These provisions are intended to alleviate the potentially harmful effects on
adjoining land of new development by encouraging site plans that respect their
environmental, land use and economic context. Regulations of this section
should ensure that new structures, utilities, streets, parking, circulation
systems, yards and open spaces are designed in the most efficient, attractive
and harmonious manner.
Section 11.02   Application and Scope of Site Plan Review and Approval
No building permit shall be issued, and no construction, grading or other land
development activity listed below may be commenced on property unless a site
plan has been submitted and approved for such activity as set forth in this
section. Development activities subject to the requirements of this section may
hereafter be carried out only in substantial conformance with the approved site
plan and any conditions or restrictions attached thereto. Material changes
shall not be made to an approved site plan without the approval of the City. A
permanent Certificate of Occupancy for a new development shall be not issued
until all storm water control, sanitary sewer, water mains, off street parking
facilities and all other site plan requirements have been constructed and
approved by the City, and are fully operational.
Section 11.03   Development Activities Subject to Site Plan Review
   1.   Site plan review is required for construction or expansion of any
building, structure or freestanding sign except single-family detached
dwellings, duplexes and townhouses of not more than two units and permitted
accessory structures to a single-family dwelling or duplex. Driveways to said
single-family and duplex dwelling units, garages and carports shall be paved
with a hard surface as defined in
Article 2.
   2.   Any change, alteration or modification in a structure or use which
would require the provision of additional off street parking spaces, additional
lot area, or other substantial change in zoning requirements applicable to such
structure or use.
   3.   The construction or creation of any parking lot or the expansion of any
existing parking lot.
Section 11.04   Administrative Waiver, When Permitted
City staff may waive the requirements for site plan review for any development
activity within the scope of this Article where staff reasonably believes such
a waiver will not adversely affect the purposes and intent of these
Regulations.
Section 11.05   Site Plan Review Procedures
   1.   Applicants for site plan review shall meet with City Staff and/or
designees prior to submission of a site plan. The purpose of this meeting is to
acquaint the applicant with site development standards and procedures. This
meeting shall also serve to allow the applicant to present the scope and nature
of the proposed project to City Staff and/or designees.
   2.   Following the initial meeting, the applicant may submit a completed
site plan for review.
Section 11.06   Site Plan Application Requirements
All applications for site plan review shall be prepared to show all information
currently required by the City, a list of which shall be available from the
Building and Zoning Department. At least six copies are required for all site
plan sheets, drawings and written information. The Building and Zoning
Development staff shall coordinate review of the submitted site plan with all
other appropriate City Departments.
   1.   The City Engineer shall approve and regulate the construction of new
streets, driveways, curb cuts and other paved surfaces, and storm water
facilities, sanitary sewer and erosion control measures and facilities. Within
14 working days of receiving a site plan, the Building and Zoning Department
shall notify the applicant of any approval, conditional approval or
disapproval. In cases of conditional approval or disapproval, written
notification shall be given for the reasons of such action.
      A.   Site plan approvals are valid for a period of two years from the
date of approval, during which time a building permit must be applied for.
Building and Zoning Department staff shall have the authority to grant one
extension for a period of up to 12 months, provided the approved site plan is
still compliant with all current City codes and ordinances.
      B.   One copy of the approved site plan shall be returned to the
applicant. One copy of the approved site plan shall remain on file in the
Building and Zoning Department.
Section 11.07   Site Plan Appeals
The Board of Adjustment shall review all appeals as an Administrative Appeal or
Interpretation of the regulations. Said appeal shall follow the procedures and
regulations found in
Article 13 of these Regulations.
Article 12: Site Design Standards
Section 12.01   Intent
These Site Design Standards are established in order to achieve the following
goals:
   1.   Provide standards for the orderly development of the City and the
promotion of quality sustainable development.
   2.   Implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan
related to quality development and neighborhood compatibility.
   3.   Maintain and protect the value of property.
   4.   Maintain a high quality of life without significantly increasing public
or private costs for development or unduly restricting private enterprise,
initiative, or innovation in design.
   5.   Ensure that the placement of buildings, structures, fences, lighting
and fixtures on each site shall not interfere with traffic circulation, safety,
appropriate use and enjoyment of adjacent properties.
   6.   Preserve and enhance property values by ensuring that yards, open
spaces, parking lots and public rights of way are designed and maintained with
respect to plants and landscape materials.
   7.   Ensure that development respects land capabilities and constraints,
minimizes erosion and destruction of natural amenities, and reduces conflicts
between lands and uses.
Section 12.02   Applicability
   1.   New Development:  Development requiring a site plan under Section
11.03 on a vacant site or substantially cleared real estate shall comply with
the Site Design Standards set forth herein.
   2.   Redevelopment:  Development requiring a site plan under Section
11.03 on a site with improved real estate, involving partial clearance of 25
percent or more of the building area and/or expansion of 25 percent or more of
the building area existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall comply
with the Site Design Standards set forth herein.
   3.   Waiver from Site Design Standards:  The City Council with concurrence
of the Planning Commission may grant waivers from the Site Design Standards of
this Article, as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of
the site plan review and approval provisions of this Article if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this Article is impracticable or will
exact an undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land
in question. The affirmative vote of at least four Planning Commissioners shall
be necessary to grant a waiver. The waiver may be granted subject to such
conditions as the Commission may establish to ensure the general purpose and
intent of the provisions of this Article are followed. At the Commission
meeting, the applicant and all other interested parties shall be presented a
reasonable opportunity to present their views. Decisions of the Zoning Advisory
Commission may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in the same manner as
appeals from a decision of an administrative officer.
Section 12.03   Site Development Requirements
12.03.01   Site Lighting
   1.   The following site features shall be illuminated by an exterior light
source:
      A.   Driveways and loading facilities; and
      B.   Pedestrian walkway surfaces and entrances to buildings.
   2.   The location and design of site lighting shall conform to the
following:
   3.   All exterior lighting shall be designed, installed and maintained so as
not to cause glare or to shine in adjacent lots and streets;
   4.   No light sources shall provide illumination onto adjacent lots,
buildings or streets in excess of 1-foot candle;
   5.   All exterior lighting luminaries shall be designed and installed to
shield light from the luminaire at angles above 72 degrees from vertical;
   6.   Fixtures mounted on a building shall not be positioned higher than the
roofline of the building;
   7.   Wooden utility type poles are acceptable only for temporary use during
construction; and
   8.   All electrical service lines to posts and fixtures shall be installed
underground and concealed inside the posts.
12.03.02   Utility Locations
Service lines and mechanical equipment for utilities shall be located in
accordance with the following requirements:
   1.   Service Lines: All electrical, telephone, cable, and other similar
utility lines serving the building and other site features shall be located
underground.
   2.   Mechanical Equipment: All roof-mounted and ground-mounted electrical
transformers, switching gears, relay boxes, meters, air conditioning units,
heat pumps and other similar mechanical equipment shall be screened from view
to the height of the equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened in such a manner that it will appear to be an integral part of the
building’s overall architectural design.
12.03.03   Stormwater Management
Stormwater management systems shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the City of Valley Stormwater Management Policies, as amended.
The site, including parking lots, shall be developed using best management
practices approved by the City Engineer.
In some cases, the following tools may be appropriate only after approval of
the City Engineer:
1.   Bio-swales: Vegetated swales with amended soil backfill and underdrains to
improve infiltration or filtration.
2.   Native plantings: Use of native plants to reduce the need for irrigation
and reduce runoff. Native plants also slow runoff and improve infiltration or
filtration with their deep, fibrous root systems.
3.   Rain gardens: Landscape depressions filled with amended, permeable soil
and native, deep-rooted, moisture-tolerant plants to promote infiltration or
filtration.
12.03.04   Parking Structures
Parking decks and ramps shall be designed in compliance with these design
standards in order to appear compatible with and similar to other
nonresidential buildings:
   1.   The ground floor facade abutting any public street or sidewalk shall be
designed and architecturally detailed to resemble a commercial or office
building.
   2.   Where possible, the ground floor abutting a public street or sidewalk
should include commercial or office uses.
   3.   The design of upper floors shall ensure that sloped floors do not
dominate the appearance of the facade.
   4.   Windows or openings shall be provided that mimic those of nearby
buildings.
12.03.05   Parking Lot Layout
See
Article 7 of these Regulations.
12.03.06   Sidewalks/Trails and Walkways
   1.   Continuous sidewalks a minimum of five feet wide shall be provided
along all public street frontages.
   2.   Clearly defined and lighted pedestrian walkways shall extend between
parking areas and all building entrances.
   3.   All sidewalks and walkways shall meet the ADA standards for
accessibility.
   4.   Any designated trail shall be a minimum of eight feet in width.
Section 12.04   Landscaping and Screening Requirements
12.04.02   Application and Scope
   1.   No new structure, building or parking lot shall be constructed unless
in compliance with the landscape and screening standards of this Article.
12.04.03   Landscape Area Requirements
   1.   Single-family and two-family dwellings shall maintain a minimum of 20
percent of lot area as a permeable and uncovered surface containing living
material. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from other
requirements of Section 12.04.
   2.   All other uses shall provide and maintain a landscaped area that equals
or exceeds the requirements of Section 12.04.
12.04.04   Site Landscaping
   1.   Major site plans shall include a landscaping plan indicating how
existing topography, natural features, and vegetation will be integrated into
the overall site development. A conceptual landscape plan shall be submitted
and approved prior to final site plan approval. A detailed landscape plan shall
be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
All landscape plans shall be prepared to show the information required by the
Planning Services Department.
   2.   Street trees planted in the public right-of-way shall not be counted
toward fulfillment of the minimum site requirements for number of trees.
   3.   Existing trees to be retained on site may be counted toward fulfillment
of the landscaping requirements.
   4.   Parking lot landscaping requirement in Section 12.04.05 shall not be
counted toward fulfillment of the minimum site landscaping.
   5.   The minimum required permeable area shall be 20 percent of the entire
site under review.
   6.   The following is the minimum landscaping requirement of trees and
shrubs, by number, and the type of ground cover required for the entire site
under review. Plant species used for landscaping shall be in accordance with
street trees and plant lists approved by the City.
      A.   Minimum tree planting requirements shall be one tree per 1,600
square feet of required permeable area. Minimum tree size shall be at least one
and one-half inch caliper measured six inches from the base of the tree for a
deciduous tree and six feet in height for a coniferous tree.
      B.   Minimum shrub requirements shall be six shrubs, or one shrub per
1,000 square feet of required permeable area, whichever is greater. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height or a minimum of three gallons potted.
12.04.05   Parking Lot Landscaping
   1.   A landscape buffer strip shall be provided along the frontage of all
surface parking areas at least ten feet wide along the public right-of-way. The
buffer strip shall consist of shade trees, low shrubs, perennial flowers, and/
or other plant materials approved by the Building and Zoning Department.
Landscaped earth berms and/or decorative walls and fences are permitted
provided they are integrated with the landscape screening described above. The
use of bio-filtration methods of landscape and drainage design is encouraged.
The number of trees and shrubs shall be per Section 12.04.04.
   2.   A landscape buffer at least seven feet wide shall be provided along the
remaining sides of all surface parking lots. This area shall be planted with
any combination of shade trees, coniferous trees, and/or shrubs. The number of
trees and shrubs shall be per Section 12.04.04.
   3.   Interior Parking lot landscaping and trees shall be dispersed
throughout the parking lot as follows:
      A.   For single parking bays, landscaped islands shall provide at least
one parking space of landscape area, measuring at least nine feet by 18 feet,
and shall be planted with a combination of one tree, low shrubs, perennial
flowers, and/or ground cover/ornamental grasses. Provide two landscape islands
with plantings, as listed, for each 20 parking spaces within the parking lot.
      B.   For double parking bays, both the end landscaped islands and the
intermediate landscaped islands shall provide a double-parking space of
landscape area, measuring at least nine feet by 36 feet, and shall be planted
with a combination of one shade tree or two ornamental/dwarf trees, low shrubs,
perennial flowers, and/or ground cover/ornamental grasses measuring no more
than three feet in height. Coniferous trees are prohibited in parking lot
islands. Provide one landscape island with plantings, as listed above. Provide
two landscape islands for each 40 parking spaces within the parking lot.
      C.   In lieu of providing interior landscape islands as described above,
for parking lots of 40 spaces or less, the landscape material that would have
been required in that situation can be placed in the buffer area around the
parking lot.
      D.   For parking lots larger than 40 spaces, islands shall be required at
the ends of each double-row of parking, broken into ten spaces between islands
maximum.
      E.   Parking lot islands can be used as bio-retention areas, with
landscaping included.
      F.   No tree, shrub, hedge, or berm shall be placed or encroach into an
area the City Engineer determines is an obstruction to visibility or extends
into a visibility triangle affecting the public right-of-way.
12.04.06   Street Trees
   1.   Street trees shall be planted within a landscaped parkway or in tree
pits within the sidewalk area according to the City of Valley policies on
Street Trees.
   2.   Street trees planted within the sidewalk area shall be planted using
best management practices.
12.04.07   Screening Requirements
   1.   All commercial and industrial uses that abut residential, shall
maintain screening not less than six feet high along the abutting property line
or lines.
   2.   Screening required by this ordinance shall be equivalent to the
following:
      A.   A combination of a fence or wall at least six feet in height, offset
from the property line a minimum of five feet with a mulched planting area
provided within the offset area. The mulched area shall be planted with shrubs,
perennials, and groundcovers over at least 60 percent of the area.
         i.   The fence or wall shall be at least 80 percent opaque (non-
transparent).
         ii.   Mulch to be four-inch depth hardwood, natural or brown-colored
only.
         iii.   Shrubs shall be as listed in 12.04.04.6B.
         iv.   Perennials shall be a minimum one-gallon size.
      B.   All service access areas shall be prohibited between building
facades and the street or easily visible from streets or parking lots unless
screened from view. Screening is required between adjacent zoning districts
when one of the following conditions in the more intensive zoning district is
directly visible from and faces toward the boundary of the less intensive
zoning district.
         i.   The following conditions require buffering:
            a.   The rear elevation of the buildings.
            b.   Outdoor storage areas.
            c.   Compressed natural gas or propane tanks.
            d.   Loading docks, service areas, and trash-storage and collection
areas.
            e.   Major machinery or areas containing a manufacturing process,
truck, or trailer parking.
            f.   Sources of glare, noise, or other negative environmental
effects.
         ii.   Screening required by this ordinance shall be equivalent to the
following:
            a.   A solid wood, vinyl, and/or masonry fence or wall.
            b.   A continuous tightly forming hedge row of landscape material
of coniferous and/or deciduous plant material capable of providing a minimum
height of six feet within three years of planting. Plantings should be full
height from ground to top of hedge row with no trimming up from the ground
surface.
            c.   A landscaped earth berm not exceeding 3:1 slope with landscape
material and/or fencing combination. Together the overall minimum height shall
be six feet. The berm surface shall be protected to prevent erosion with sod,
seeding (and erosion control blanket), and/or landscape plant material and
mulch, as soon as construction of berm is complete.
            d.   Screening shall not adversely affect surface water drainage.
   3.   All dumpsters and exterior trash storage shall be screened using walls
or fences that are a minimum of six feet in height. The walls and fences shall
be fabricated and finished using the same materials and colors as the adjacent
building and shall include a matching lockable gate that when closed,
completely eliminates the view of the trash area and its contents.
(Ord. 804, passed 12-12-2023)
Section 12.05   Design Standards for Designated Commercial Areas
   All commercial uses shall comply with the following standards. This section
does not apply to areas zoned residential or transitional agricultural within
the Highway Corridor Protection District. In addition, the applicant shall
submit building elevations for review by the City. Any structure existing at
the time of adoption of this Code which is expanded for retail commercial use
by 25 percent or more to the building area shall be subject to these Design
Standards. Intent: The building facades shall be designed including
architectural features that contribute to visual interest at the pedestrian
scale, reduce the massive scale of the building, minimize a uniform and
impersonal appearance of the building, and will provide visual interest
consistent with the community's identity, character, and scale. The design
shall provide variations in the roofline, add interest to, and reduce the
massive scale of large buildings. All commercial uses within the Highway
Overlay District or within any designated commercial areas shall comply with
the following standards:
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the building types and the
façades of a building shall be defined as follows:
      A.   Large free-standing commercial retail. A singular retail or
wholesale user that occupies no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor
area. These uses typically include: membership wholesale clubs, discount
stores, pharmacies, and grocery stores. See Exhibit A at the end of this
section.
      B.   Contractor bay. A bay style industrial flex space that occupies no
more than 10,000 square feet which have limited office space with a large open
bay and either a loading dock or overhead doors. Uses typically include: auto
repair, small building contractors, distributors, machine shops, plumbing and
heating contractors, electricians, roofer, etc. See Exhibit B at the end of
this section.
      C.   Shopping Center, Commercial Strip. A commercial development, usually
one store deep, that fronts on a major street for a distance of one city block
or more. Includes individual buildings on their own lots, and small linear
shopping centers with shallow on-site parking in front of the stores. See
Exhibit C at the end of this section.
      D.   Façade. The portion of any exterior elevation on the building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the
entire length of the building.
      E.   Front façade. The front or principal face of a building, containing
the main entrance; any building face, which can be touched by a line drawn
perpendicular to street (public or private).
      F.   Side façade. The face of a building extending from the front façade
to the rear façade of the building.
      G.   Rear façade. The face of a building extending along the rear of the
lot or site, containing employee and service entrances, loading docks, and
service areas (e.g., trash dumpster, utility boxes, and HVAC equipment).
   2.   Façade Design. Front and street facing side façades greater than 100
feet in length, measured horizontally, shall:
      A.   Incorporate wall plane projections or recessions of at least 12
inches in depth of the same durable material, extend at least 20 percent of the
length of the façade, and extend full height of the wall. The maximum
uninterrupted length of wall shall be no more than 100 feet. The use of
contrasting materials and color shall allow wall plane projections or
recessions to be less than 12 inches in depth.
      B.   Have a change in at least one of the following elements each 100
feet along the front and all street facing sides: color change, material
change, and/or texture change.
      C.   The front façade shall include architectural elements, such as
columns, awnings, projecting canopies, accent lines, colonnades, arcades,
reveals or projecting ribs along at least 40 percent of the front façade
length.
      D.   Except for entrances to the building, any part of the front façade
higher than 11 feet shall give the visual exterior appearance of having more
than one floor for each additional 11 feet in height, i.e., a 22-foot-high
building shall give the appearance of a two-story building.
   3.   Entryways.
      A.   Front facades shall have visible, clearly defined entrances that
include at least three of the following elements: canopies or porticos,
awnings, overhangs, recesses or projections, arcades, raised corniced parapets
over the door, distinctive roof forms, arches, or display windows.
   4.   Rooflines.
      A.   Rooflines shall be varied in height, at least each 100 feet,
measured horizontally, along the front façade and any side of a building facing
a street. Hips, gables, or changes in parapet elevation shall be used to
provide relief in height.
      B.   Gables and hip roofs are permitted. Parapets shall be used on flat
roofs to conceal rooftop mechanical equipment. The parapet design shall be a
minimum of three feet in height.
   5.   Transparent windows and doors.
      A.   A minimum of 20 percent of the surface area of the front façade and
street facing walls shall be transparent. Transparency may include glazed
doors, windows, overhead doors and display windows.
      B.   Highly reflective or glare producing glass with an external
reflectance factor of 25 percent or higher is prohibited on all facades.
      C.   All overhead doors (frame and paneling) on the front façade and
street facing walls shall vary from the adjacent building panels and façade and
shall not be white. A minimum of 50 percent of all overhead doors shall be
glass or resembling glass (acrylic, polygala or approved equivalent) and may be
transparent, tinted, frosted, or opaque. The color and appearance of the glass
or glass resembling material must contrast from the color of the frame and
paneling of the overhead door.
   6.   Materials.
      A.   Not less than 50 percent of the front of the building and 25 percent
of the sides of the building exclusive of transparent windows and doors shall
be durable material including brick, stone, masonry units that are integrally
colored, burnished, glazed, or textured concrete, drainable EFIS (Stucco).
Painted R and PBR panels, and prefinished metal panel systems (e.g., Aluminum
Composite Material (ACM) panels) are allowed but do not count towards the
required percentage as stated hereinabove. Cementitious lap siding may be used
as an accent material only.
      B.   The following exterior materials are prohibited: Materials with the
appearance of unfinished concrete block, smooth natural (grey) concrete,
painted smooth faced concrete block, vinyl siding, corrugated metal, or tilt-up
concrete panels without an architectural finish.
   7.   Colors.
      A.   Predominant building colors shall be subtle, neutral, or earth tone
that have low reflectivity with less than a 30 percent reflection factor.
Intense, bright, fluorescent, or metallic colors (e.g., bright yellow, orange,
bright red) shall not be used as the predominant color on any wall or roof.
These colors may be used as the building accent color but shall not constitute
more than ten percent of the area of each building façade.
   8.   Landscape Buffer or Screening.
      A.   A landscape buffer shall meet requirements of section 12.04.07 and
shall be required near or offset from the property line to screen service areas
and rear facades so they shall not be easily visible to the public from
streets, parking lots or adjacent properties. If the dumpsters or HVAC
equipment are not located along the rear faced, they shall be screened per
section 12.04.08.
   9.   Maximum Parking:
      A.   The maximum number of off-street parking spaces allowed shall be
equal to 125 percent of the required minimum number of spaces.
      B.   Parking spaces in excess of the maximum number permitted may be
allowed, provided:
         i.   Each parking space provided in excess of the maximum number
allowed shall be paved with a permeable paving material approved by the City;
or
         ii.   For each parking space provided in excess of the maximum number
allowed, 300 square feet of additional on-site green space shall be provided
and maintained with landscaping.
   10.   Amenities.
      A.   Commercial building sites with a lot size of ten acres or more shall
include at least one public gathering space, such as a patio seating area,
pedestrian plaza with benches, outdoor play area, and not less than two public
space amenities, such as kiosks, a water feature, a clock tower, or a
landscaped site for public artwork. Pedestrian public space shall be shaded,
landscaped, and screened. The size of the public gathering space shall not be
less than one percent of the gross enclosed building area.
   11.   Accessory Building or Accessory Structure Exception.
      A.   An accessory structure or accessory building shall not be subject to
the Design Standards for Commercial Areas contained in this Section 12.05
provided that all of the following requirements are satisfied:
         i.   The primary structure has been finalized.
         ii.   The total footprint of all accessory structures/buildings is ten
percent or less than the total footprint of the primary structure.
         iii.   No occupancy shall be allowed in any accessory structure/
building.
         iv.   No plumbing or electrical shall be allowed in any accessory
structure/building.
         v.   Any accessory structure/building shall only be used for dead
storage, to be defined as the safekeeping or holding of warehouse goods; said
warehouse goods to be removed at a later date.
         vi.   Any accessory structure/building shall only be used only in
connection with the specific commercial use of the lot and shall not be leased
or rented to any third party.
         vii.   No accessory structure/building shall be visible from the
street.
         viii.   Any accessory structure/building shall be engineered.
         ix.   A conditional use permit must be obtained for any accessory
structure/building.
   12.   Any conflict between these standards and the CMD Ordinance shall be
resolved in favor of the stricter standard.
   13.   These guidelines are not intended to inhibit creativity and innovation
in building design. The City will consider other building materials if the
applicant demonstrates that the use of such materials results in a quality,
durable building.
   Exhibit A: Large Free-Standing Commercial Retail
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1589.jpg]
   Exhibit B: Contractor Bay
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1591.jpg]
   Exhibit C: Shopping Center, Commercial Strip
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1593.jpg]
(Ord. 805, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 806, passed 3-12-2024)
Article 13: Board of Adjustment
Section 13.01   Members, Terms and Meetings
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-908 (R.R.S. 1997): The Board of Adjustment
shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional member designated as
an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is
unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed for a term of three years
and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and
after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant. One member only of the Board of Adjustment
shall be appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss
of membership on the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in
his or her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the
appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The
first vacancy occurring on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the
appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
of the City at such time as more than two hundred persons reside within such
area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the Board of Adjustment
shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the City but within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules
in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to sections
19-901 to 19-914. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such
chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall
be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
board and shall be a public record.
Section 13.02   Appeals to Board, Record of Appeal, Hearings and Stays
As provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-909 (R.R.S. 1997): Appeals to the Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom appeal is taken
and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record in application on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties, in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney.
Section 13.03   Powers and Jurisdiction on Appeal
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
   1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures; and
   2.   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, requests for interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other
special questions upon which the Board is authorized by this Ordinance to pass;
and
   3.   To grant variances, where by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment
of this Ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any regulation under this Ordinance would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal
relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
   1.   The strict application of the Ordinance would produce undue hardship;
and
   2.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same
zoning district and the same vicinity; and
   3.   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment
to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by
the granting of the variance; and
   4.   The granting of such variance is based upon reasons of demonstrable and
exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of
convenience, profit or caprice. No variance shall be authorized unless the
Board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the
intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to
make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be
adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance.
      In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members
of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance
or to affect any variation in this Ordinance.
Section 13.04   Appeals to District Court
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may appeal as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-912,
(R.R.S.1997).
Article 14: Amendments and Application Process
Section 14.01   Purpose
The Amendment Article describes the methods by which changes may be made in the
text of the Zoning Ordinance (text amendment) and/ or the official boundaries
of zoning districts (rezoning).
Section 14.02   Initiation of Amendments
   1.   Text Amendments
      Text amendments may be initiated by an applicant, the Planning
Commission, or the City Council.
   2.   Map amendments
      Map amendments nay be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent,
the Planning Commission, or the City Council
Section 14.03   Amendment Application Requirements
An application for a Rezoning may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the
owners' authorized agent with the Planning Commission. The application must be
filed, and all plans must be submitted, at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is to be heard. The
application shall include the following information:
   1.   Name and address of the applicant.
   2.   Owner, address and legal description of the property.
   3.   A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature
and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
   4.   Payment of any and all fees.
   5.   Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other
drawings, or other materials determined by the Planning Commission to be
necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. The site plan,
should be drawn to scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned
as necessary, showing at least the following information:
      A.   The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
      B.   The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site
improvements.
      C.   The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures on
the site.
      D.   The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking
and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks,
utilities, service areas, fencing, screening, landscaping, and lighting.
      E.   Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours
at no greater than five-foot intervals.
Section 14.04   Amendment Procedures
Regulations, restrictions, and boundaries authorized to be created pursuant to
Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 to 19-915 may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed.
   1.   Public Hearing.
      The Planning Commission and City Council shall each hold a public hearing
on any proposed amendment. The Public Hearings shall be held at a reasonable
hour and place for such public hearing, and they shall hold said hearings at
the next regular meeting after proper notification of adjacent property owners.
   2.   Planning Commission Review
      No amendment, supplement, change or modification of this Ordinance,
including the boundaries of any zoning district, shall be made by the City
Council without first the consideration by the City Planning Commission, the
Commission shall submit in writing its recommendations on each amendment,
supplement, change or modification to the City Council. Said recommendations
shall include approval, disapproval, or other suggestions and the reasons
thereof, and a discussion of the effect of each amendment, supplement, change
or modification on the Comprehensive Plan. Said recommendations shall be of an
advisory nature only.
   3.   Notice of Hearings.
      Public notice of hearing on a proposed amendment shall be published once
in the official City newspaper and at least ten days shall elapse between the
date of publication and the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall state
the date, time and place of the hearing and shall contain a statement regarding
the proposed change in regulations or restrictions or the zoning classification
or zoning district boundaries of the property.
      The provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-904 relative to public hearings and
official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. In addition
to the publication of the notice therein prescribed, a notice shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which action is pending. Such
notice shall not be less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width with a
white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half
inches (1-1/2) in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such
premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall
be so posted at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice
prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      If the record title owners of any lots included in such proposed change
be nonresidents of the municipality, then a written notice of such hearing
shall be mailed by certified mail to them addressed to their last-known
addresses at least ten days prior to such hearing.
      At the option of the legislative body of the municipality, in place of
the posted notice provided above, the owners or occupants of the real estate to
be zoned or rezoned and all real estate located within 300 feet of the real
estate to be zoned or rezoned may be personally served with a written notice
thereof at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, if they can be
served with such notice within the county where such real estate is located.
Where such notice cannot be served personally upon such owners or occupants in
the county where such real estate is located, a written notice of such hearing
shall be mailed to such owners or occupants addressed to their last-known
addresses at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
   4.   Protests.
      In case of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20
percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed
change, or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof
extending 300 feet there from, and of those directly opposite thereto extending
300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all
the members of the legislative body of such municipality.
      The provisions of this section in reference to notice shall not apply (1)
in the event of a proposed change in such regulations, restrictions, or
boundaries throughout the entire area of an existing zoning district or of such
municipality, or (2) in the event additional or different types of zoning
districts are proposed, whether or not such additional or different districts
are made applicable to areas, or parts of areas, already within a zoning
district of the municipality, but only the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §
19-904 shall be applicable.
Section 14.05   Building Inspector
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a
Building Inspector as appointed by the City Council, who shall have the power
to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her
duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Section 14.06   Zoning Permits
The following shall apply to all new construction and all applicable
renovations and remodels within Valley’s Zoning Jurisdiction:
   1.   It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of
any building, or any accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or
alteration of any buildings, including accessory buildings, until the Building
Inspector has issued a joint building and zoning permit for such work.
   2.   Issuance of a zoning permit. In applying to the Building Inspector for
a zoning permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or a scale
plan indicating the shape, size and height and location of all buildings to be
erected, altered or moved and of any building already on the lot. He shall also
state the existing and intended use of all such buildings, and supply such
other information as may be required by the Building Inspector for determining
whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. If the proposed
excavation or construction as set forth in the application is in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance, and other Ordinances of the City then in
force, the Building Inspector shall issue a zoning permit for such excavation
or construction. If a zoning permit is refused, the Building Inspector shall
state such refusal in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately thereupon
mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated upon the
application. The Building Inspector shall grant or deny the permit within a
reasonable time from the date the application is submitted. The issuance of a
permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provisions of this
Ordinance. A zoning permit shall become void 12 months from the date of
issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the project
described therein.
Section 14.07   Certificate of Occupancy
No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use or
structure shall be used until the Building Inspector shall have issued a
certificate of occupancy stating that such land, building or part thereof, and
the proposed use thereof, are found to be in conformity with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Within three days after notification that a building or
premises is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a Certificate of
Occupancy if the land, building, or part thereof and the proposed use thereof
are found to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, or, if such
certification is refused, to state refusal in writing, with the cause, and
immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the
address indicated upon the application.
Section 14.08   Penalties
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-913, the owner or agent of a building or
premises in or upon which a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance has
been committed or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or
entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist,
or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits,
takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or
premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed 100 dollars for any
one offense. Each day of non-compliance with the terms of this Ordinance shall
constitute a separate offense.
Section 14.09   Remedies
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land
is used in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§19-901 to 19-914, or this Ordinance,
or any regulation made pursuant to said sections, the appropriate authorities
of the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Article 15: Legal Status Provisions
Section 15.01   Severability
Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 15.02   Purpose of Catch Heads
The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are
inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they
shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in
construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 15.03   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 15.04   Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication according to law.
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of Valley, Nebraska, This    day of
   , 2018.
(Seal)
ATTEST:            
City Clerk   Mayor
 
Subdivision Regulations
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS
Section 1.01   Name and Citation of Titles
These regulations shall be known, referred to and cited as "The Subdivision
Regulations of Valley, Nebraska.”
Section 1.02   Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly development of
Valley and its Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). This shall be done through
prescribed rules and standards establishing functional arrangements of street
layouts; open spaces; and adequate community facilities and utilities. These
Subdivision Regulations shall coordinate development with the City's
transportation, land use and capital facilities plans, and shall provide
conditions favorable for the health, safety and convenience of the community,
in accordance with applicable State Statutes.
Section 1.03   Rules
For the purpose of this ordinance the following rules shall apply:
Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and numbers
used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future.
The word “persons” includes a corporation, members of a partnership or other
business organization, a committee, Board, commission, trustee, receiver, agent
or other representative.
The word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.
The words “use,” “used,” “occupy,” or “occupied” as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the words “intended,” “arranged,” or
“designed” to be used or occupied.
The word “Commission” shall refer to the Planning Commission of the City of
Valley, Nebraska.
Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning
in relation to the context.
Each gender shall include the other.
Section 1.04   Definitions
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
AGREEMENT FOR ESCROW OF SECURITY FUNDS shall mean an agreement between a
subdivider and the City that clearly establishes the subdivider’s
responsibility to deposit funds into an escrow account with a bank (as escrow
agent for the City) in an amount equal to the estimated costs of design,
construction and administration of the City-Owned Public Infrastructure
improvements required of the subdivision.
ALLEY shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
APPLICANT shall mean the owner or duly designated representative of land
proposed to be subdivided, or for which a special use permit, conditional use
permit, temporary use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, building
permit, or certificate of occupancy and other similar administrative permits
has been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner or his legal
representative in writing except for building permits.
BLOCK shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public
streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, non-platted land, City or County
boundaries, or adjoining property lines.
BOND shall mean any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond,
collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the City Council which meets the intent of such security
required by this Ordinance.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT shall mean the transfer of property by deed to a respective
owner or owners of contiguous property for the purpose of adjusting a boundary
line and not for the purpose of creating an additional lot or parcel.
BUILDING PERMIT shall mean any permit required by the City and issued by the
Building Official, to be obtained by any person engaged in any activity
governed by the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean the required zoning distance between a
building and the lot line.
CITY mean the City of Valley, Nebraska. Also, “City Council” or “Governing
Body.”
CITY COUNCIL  shall mean the Valley City Council.
CITY ENGINEER shall mean the City Engineer as hired or appointed by the Mayor
and City Council or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CITY OWNED PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE shall mean the City of Valley’s municipal
water system, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, street system,
sidewalk system, and trail sidewalk system.
CLERK shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Valley, Nebraska.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan of
Valley, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the
present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the
purposes and requirements set forth in the Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-903
(R.R.S.1997).
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL shall mean approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision
which requires the subdivider to take certain specified action in order to
secure approval of the subdivision. A motion approving a preliminary plat of a
subdivision shall specify the conditions to be met and the time by which the
conditions are to be met.
CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short public way with one end open to traffic and the
other end terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
CUL-DE-SAC, TEMPORARY shall mean a space on public dedicated right-of-way and/
or easement that permits the turning around of any vehicular traffic.
Provisions shall be made to allow for future connections to adjacent tracts of
land to provide a continuous traffic circulation as determined by the City
Engineer.
DEAD END STREET shall mean a public way which has only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and does not terminate in a vehicular turn-around.
DEDICATION shall mean the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to
some public use.
DESIGN shall mean a function of engineering which shall involve the subdivision
and grading of land, the sizing, location, interconnection, and use of public
infrastructure, including streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewer systems, water
distribution system, etc., which will be used to serve the subdivided parcels
of land which will be used for residential, commercial, and industrial
purposes. Design shall also involve the preparation of construction plans and
specifications for public infrastructure improvements.
DEVELOPER See "Subdivider".
EASEMENT shall mean a grant, made by a property owner, for the use of his or
her land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific purposes, such
as access to another property or the construction of utilities, drainage ways
or roadways.
EXTRA TERRITORIAL JUSISDICTION (ETJ) shall mean the area beyond the corporate
limits of the City, in which the State has granted the City the power to
exercise zoning jurisdiction and building regulations.
FLOOD shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal
waters, or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any sources.
FLOOD PLAIN shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FRONTAGE ROAD shall mean minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial
streets and highways, which reduce the number of access points to the arterial
street or highway for the purpose of increased traffic safety.
IMPROVEMENTS shall mean street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and
gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and
lines, water meters, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, pumping stations, storm
drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities, or other such
installation as designated by the City Council or its specific approving
authority.
LOT shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use
herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required,
that has frontage upon an improved street, and is a part of a recorded
subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the Regulation,
or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-
split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the Douglas County
Register of Deeds and abutting at least one improved public street or right-of-
way, two thoroughfare easements, or one improved private road.
LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets
at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135
degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The setbacks for a
front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, or THROUGH shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-
intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FLAG shall mean an interior lot, the majority of which has frontage and
access provided by means of a narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fa2d8a93e0898513ece6d6d328d71c97c9e714c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1423.png]
 
LOT CONSOLIDATION shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments
which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
LOT DEPTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible
street right-of-way other than an alley or an improved county road. For the
purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets or roads shall be considered frontage.
LOT LINE shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA shall mean the minimum square footage of land area occupied,
or to be occupied by a single principal building and accessory buildings as
applicable to designated zoning districts.
LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that
required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created
prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements
were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the
office of the Douglas County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public
road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the
effective date of this Regulation.
LOT, PLATTED shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision of the plat of
which, or the appropriate permit for which, has been legally approved by the
City and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Douglas County.
LOT COMBINATION shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments or
lot reductions, which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
LOT OF RECORD shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot
line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.
LOT SPLIT shall mean a subdivision of land involving the division of one lot
into two lots.
LOT WIDTH shall mean the minimum street frontage measured along the front
street property line except when a lot fronts on the inside or concave side of
a horizontal curvilinear alignment of a street or on a corner lot; in which
case, the minimum lot width shall be measured along the front building line of
the principal use structure extended to both lot property lines.
MONUMENT shall mean an identification marker established by certified land
survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle
point, block corner, street centerline, or other point.
NON-CITY OWNED PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE shall mean electrical power service,
street lighting, natural gas service, telephone service, cable t.v. service,
and internet service.
OPEN SPACE shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment,
exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking
areas, structures, and buildings.
OUTLOT. A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, or created
intentionally, which is intended as open space or other use, for which no
building permit shall be issued for any private structure.
PEDESTRIAN WAY shall mean a right-of-way or easement dedicated to public use,
which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets
and properties.
PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Valley, Nebraska.
PLAT shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description
of individual properties.
PLAT, ADMINISTRATIVE . This shall be a method to provide for lot splits, lot
combinations, and boundary adjustments which result in lots divided or combined
into not more than two (2) tracts without having to re-plat said lot, provided
that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without re-platting.
PLAT, FINAL shall mean the Final Plat of the preliminary plat of any parcel,
subdivision or dedication of land prepared for filing or recording in
conformance with these regulations. The final plat shall be in substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with this
Ordinance.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY shall mean the preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or
dedication prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
PLAT, REVISED PRELIMINARY . A revised plat or map of a previously approved
preliminary plat, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision
development, prepared in accordance with this ordinance.
PLAT OF RECORD shall mean a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations and any other applicable local regulations to be placed on
record in the office of the Register of Deeds of Douglas County.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT COST AGREEMENT shall mean an agreement between a subdivider and
the City that clearly establishes the subdivider’s responsibility to pay for
the City’s cost of planning for the subdivision, plat review fees, engineering
review and design fees for required Public Infrastructure improvements, legal
review fees, and other administrative and miscellaneous City costs.
PRIVATE INFRASTRUCTURE shall mean work and infrastructure provided by the
subdivider, and approved by the City, including, but not necessarily limited
to, private storm drainage, rain gardens, overall lot and site grading, lake
dredging, outlot and street landscaping, lake boat docks and fueling stations,
and fences.
REPLAT shall mean the further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously
subdivided, whether the re-subdivision results in more lots or fewer lots.
STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or
condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane,
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this
Regulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL shall mean a street designed with the primary function of
efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of a City or
county with controlled access to abutting property.
STREET, BOULEVARD  shall mean a street consisting of a long dead end stem and a
Terminal Street Roundabout at its end to permit continuous traffic flow. The
stem of the boulevard shall be connected to another street.
STREET, COLLECTOR shall mean a street or highway, which is intended to carry
traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the
principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for
circulation within the development.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short dead end public street consisting of a
long dead end stem and a terminal bulb at its end to permit vehicular turn-
around. The stem end of the cul-de-sac shall be connected to another public
street.
STREET, CURVILINEAR shall mean local streets that deviate from straight
alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
STREET, LOCAL shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides
direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
STREET, LOOPED shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting
streets and having its two outlets connected to the same street.
STREET, MAJOR shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high
volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial
streets.
STREET, PRIVATE shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or
alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal
means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street"
includes the term "place".
SUBDIVIDER shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other
entity, or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a subdivision. Subdivider is sometimes referred to as “Developer”.
SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, of transfer of
ownership or building development, whether immediate or future, provided that
the smallest lot created by the division is 10 acres or less in size.
SUBDIVISION MINOR shall mean the division of land, lot, and tract or parcel
into two or more but not to exceed fifteen (15) lots, parcels, plats or sites
or other divisions of land for the purpose of sale, lease, offer or
development, whether immediate or future. The term shall also include the
division of residential, commercial, industrial and transitional agricultural
or other land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, lease map plat or
other instrument.   
SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT shall mean an agreement between a subdivider and the City
that clearly establishes the subdivider’s responsibility regarding project
phasing, the provision of public and private facilities and improvements, and
any other mutually agreed to terms and requirements. The Subdivision Agreement
shall be executed by the subdivider and City after Planning Commission approval
of the Final Plan, but before the Final Plat is submitted to the City Council
for final approval.
TERMINAL STREET ROUNDABOUT shall mean a public way consisting of a long dead
end stem and a vehicular roundabout at its end to permit continuous traffic
flow. The stem end of the terminal roundabout street shall be connected to
another public street. The roundabout end shall consist of a continuation of
the street stem width in a 360 degree pattern to return traffic back to the
stem portion of the street, and shall permit two-way traffic in the roundabout.
TURNAROUND shall mean a space on private property that permits the turning
around of any passenger vehicle without the necessity of using any public
right-of-way to turn around.
WAIVER shall mean permission to depart from the requirements of an ordinance
with respect to the submission of required documents.
ZONING DISTRICT shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform
use regulations are specified.
ZONING ORDINANCE shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Valley, as
amended from time to time.
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.01   Jurisdiction
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all land located within the
legal boundaries of the City of Valley, as the same may be amended by
subsequent annexation, and shall also include all land lying within the Extra
Territorial Jurisdiction (i.e. ETJ) of the City, and not located in any other
municipality.
Section 2.02   Powers
No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the jurisdiction of the City
shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and a report
and recommendation thereon made by the Planning Commission to the City Council
and the City Council has approved the Final Plat, and all City Officials have
signed the Final Plat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or person having control of any land
within the corporate limits of the City, or within the area shown on the
Official Zoning Map, to subdivide land except in accordance with Neb. Rev.
Stat. §19-916 (R.R.S.1997) and the provisions of that title; provided, however,
that any subdivision of land caused by the acquisition of land by the federal
government, the state of Nebraska, any County, the City, or any Village
incorporated or unincorporated, within the jurisdiction of the City, shall be
deemed to have received approval pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-916
(R.R.S.1997).
Section 2.03   Applicability
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying
within the jurisdiction of this ordinance, shall be prepared, presented for
approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein
shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of sale or
development, whether immediate or future, including the subdivision or
replatting of land or lots, except that the division of land when the smallest
parcel created is more than 10 acres in area shall be exempt from these
regulations. Further, the regulations set forth by this ordinance shall be
minimum regulations, which shall apply uniformly throughout the jurisdiction of
this ordinance except as hereinafter provided.
Section 2.04   Exemptions
These regulations shall not apply in the following instances: 1) The division
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of more than ten
acres, 2) A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which does not
create an additional or substandard lot but only after review and approval by
the governing body, 3) Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a
drainage easement or other public utilities subject to local, state or federal
regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved, and 4) Any
transfer by operation of law.
Section 2.05   Interpretation
In interpreting and applying these regulations, they shall be held to be
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, convenience,
comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare.
Section 2.06   Conflict
No Final Plat of land shall be approved unless it conforms to the Subdivision
Regulations contained herein. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum
standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the Zoning
Regulations, Building Regulations, or other official regulations or ordinances,
the most restrictive shall apply.
Section 2.07   Building Permits
Unless a tract shall have been platted in accordance with the provisions of
this Article, no building permit shall be issued.
Section 2.08   Amendments
Any provisions of these regulations may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the governing body; provided,
however, that such amendments shall not become effective until after a study by
the Planning Commission; and a public hearing in relation thereto has been
held, public notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of
general circulation at least one time, 10 days prior to such hearing.
Section 2.09   Modifications
Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this regulation would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, or
other such non-self-inflicted conditions, or that these conditions would result
in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, the City
Council, after report from the Planning Commission, may vary, modify, or waive
the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured; provided, however, that: such, modifications or waiver will
not adversely affect the development, the character of which shall be in
conformance with recommended platting and development practices in the general
area of the proposed subdivision; will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the regulations; and, will not interfere with carrying
out the Comprehensive Development Plan of the Planning Area of the City. The
standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the
Governing Body after report by the Planning Commission in the case of a planned
development or a redevelopment project involving the re-subdividing and
rebuilding of blighted or slum areas; provided, however, that the placement of
structures within the area is shown on the development plan and becomes a part
of the recorded plat.
Section 2.10   Fees
All fees regarding the subdivision procedure shall be set by a separate
ordinance or resolution. The developer shall be responsible for all review,
engineering design, legal, administrative, and inspection fees regarding a
subdivision as described in a Predevelopment Agreement and/or the Subdivision
Agreement.
Section 2.11   Capital Facility Charges
All water supply and wastewater capital facility charges for a subdivision
shall be paid in accordance with the City of Valley Ordinances.
Section 2.12   Applicable to all Subdivision Requests
2.12.01   General. The provision of this Article shall apply to all subdivision
requests regardless of the procedure used to secure approval, unless otherwise
specifically noted.
2.12.02   Building and Occupancy Permits. No official of the City shall issue
either a building permit or occupancy permit on any property which does not
comply with the zoning and subdivision regulations of the City of Valley. The
issuance of any building permit or occupancy permit does not relieve the owner
thereof from compliance with all of the terms and conditions of the Subdivision
Regulations, including improvements and subdivision design. It is the duty and
obligation of the owner of the property to ensure compliance with the
Ordinances of the City.
2.12.03   Improvements Warranty and Guarantee. After construction of the
subdivider’s private infrastructure improvements, the subdivider shall provide
a warranty to the City guaranteeing the performance of all workmanship and
materials used for two years from the date of acceptance of each improvement.
2.12.04   Performance bond. Upon approval of the Final Plat of the subdivision,
and prior to filing the subdivision with the Register of Deeds, the subdivider
shall surrender to the City possession of a performance bond. Said bond shall
be in an amount adequate to cover the cost of the design, construction, and
installation of all improvements shown on the Final Plat, as established by the
subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon recommendation of the City
Engineer. No officer of the City is authorized to sign any document indicating
approval of any subdivision application until the filing and acceptance of a
satisfactory performance bond. Said performance bond shall be either issued by
a reputable insurance company licensed to issue such bonds in the State of
Nebraska, or a cash bond. Where a cash bond is used, the subdivider or owner
may present a Certificate of Deposit issued in the subdivider’s or owner’s name
and federal identification number for a term not to exceed six months, which
shall be endorsed payable to the City of Valley, Nebraska and which shall be
attached to a bond form.
2.12.05   Time for Construction of Improvements. Regardless of the subdivision
procedure utilized, unless otherwise specified in the document approving the
subdivision, required improvements shall be constructed as follows:
   1.   Prior to the issuance of any building permit for any land within the
subdivision, all streets, sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, natural gas
mains, electricity and telephone trunk lines and cable television trunk lines,
street signs, permanent survey monuments, bench marks, and street lights shall
be installed and completed by the subdivider and City, operating and approved
as provided in the Subdivision Regulations.
   2.   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure within
the subdivision, all sidewalks, street trees, landscape screens and storm
drainage shall be installed and completed by the subdivider, operating and
approved as provided in the Subdivision    egulations, provided that if storm
drainage on other property is required in order to provide proper functioning
of storm drainage on the property in question, such additional storm drainage
shall also be completed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
2.12.06   Title and Taxes. At the time of the filing of the application for a
subdivision, the subdivider shall provide evidence of title and evidence that
all taxes and special assessments have been paid on the land which is the
subject of the subdivision application.
2.12.07   Approval Resolution. Passage of the Resolution approving any
subdivision request requires a majority of the City Council.
2.12.08   City Owned Public Infrastructure Design and Construction. All City
Owned Public Infrastructure required to service new subdivisions (i.e. water
distribution and transmission mains; sanitary sewer collection system,
interceptor sewers, pumping stations, force mains; storm sewer systems; street
pavements, sidewalks and trail systems) shall be designed, advertised for bids,
and publicly let by the City of Valley in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §73.
The Subdivider shall be responsible for all costs associated with the City
Owned Public Infrastructure improvements as outlined in the Subdivision
Agreement.
2.12.09   Non-City Owned Public Infrastructure Design and Construction. All
non-city owned public infrastructure required to service new subdivisions (i.e.
electrical power, street lighting, natural gas, telephone, cable t.v.,
internet, etc.) shall be designed and constructed by each individual public
service provider. The subdivider shall be responsible for all costs associated
with the non-city owned public infrastructure as outlined in the Subdivision
Agreement.
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES
Section 3.01   Procedure for Filing Pre-application Plans and Data
3.01.01   Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a Preliminary
Plat the subdivider shall submit to the City of Valley plans and data in sketch
form showing ideas for the proposed subdivision of land. The sketch plan shall
include:
   1.   The proposed tentative layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing streets, utilities, topography and other conditions.
   2.   A general location map showing the proposed subdivision and its
relationship to existing abutting subdivisions and community facilities in the
area, such as streets, alleys, schools, parks, commercial areas and other data
supplementing the plans which outline or describe all of the proposed
development as it relates to existing conditions.
3.01.02   The subdivider shall meet with City Staff to discuss the sketch plat
of the proposed subdivision of land. The meeting shall address schedules and
the need for public infrastructure improvements to serve the proposed
subdivision, including a discussion of costs, coordination with the City on the
design, construction, and scheduling of City Owned Public Infrastructure
improvements, a discussion on the administrative requirements of subdivision
agreements, predevelopment cost agreements, and agreements for escrow of
security funds.
3.01.03   Submittal of the pre-application plans and data shall not require a
formal application fee. After meeting with City Staff to discuss the proposed
subdivision, the City will review the data and in turn shall inform the
subdivider whether such plans and data submitted and discussed meet the
objectives of these regulations and shall describe any inconsistencies with the
requirements of this Ordinance. With the concurrence of the developer, a Public
Hearing date will be set for the consideration of the Preliminary Plat with the
Planning Board when the appropriate application is accepted by the City.
Section 3.02   Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat
Before any subdivider or agent contracts for the sale or offers to sell any
subdivision of land or any part thereof, which is wholly or partly within the
City of Valley or which is within the Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of
the City of Valley or which is proposed to be annexed, the subdivider or his
agent shall file a Preliminary Plat of said subdivision with the City. The
Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth
herein, and shall be submitted to the City of Valley prior to the completion of
final surveys of streets and lots and before the start of grading or
construction work upon the proposed streets and lots and before any map of said
subdivision is made in a form suitable for recording. The City of Valley shall
determine whether the plat is in proper form and shall not receive and consider
such plat as filed until it is submitted in accordance with the requirements
hereof. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the most
advantageous development of the entire neighboring area and in conformity with
the Comprehensive Development Plan.
All plats, preliminary and final, shall be prepared in conformance with the
provisions of these regulations and in conformance with the Comprehensive
Development Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The subdivider shall be responsible for
such conformance.
The Subdivider or subdivider’s representative shall meet with the City of
Valley and the City Engineer to coordinate the need for public infrastructure
to service the proposed subdivision. The Subdivider shall provide the proposed
schedule for the platting process, overlot grading and all other pertinent
information to the City Engineer for the preparation of all City Owned Public
Infrastructure plans and specifications.
A total of 6 paper copies and an electronic PDF file of the Preliminary Plat
and required supplementary material as specified in Section
3.03 of these regulations shall be submitted to the City at least 30 days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The Zoning Administrator shall
distribute one copy of the Preliminary Plat with a request for comments to each
of the following: City Engineer, School Board, Fire District, Law Enforcement,
Douglas County if the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits, and
to whomever else deemed necessary by the City.
The Planning Commission shall consider the Preliminary Plat at a public
hearing, after proper notice, and shall (1) review the Preliminary Plat and
other material submitted for conformity to these regulations and (2) review any
recommendations of the City Engineer, School Board, Fire Department, Police
Department, Douglas County and other Agencies and (3) recommend to the
subdivider changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to
be made by subdivider. The Planning Commission shall act on the plat as
submitted. The Planning Commission may (1) approve with no conditions and
forward to the City Council, (2) conditionally approve and state the conditions
of such approval, or (3) disapprove and state the reasons for such disapproval.
The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on or attached to two
copies of the Preliminary Plat. One (1) copy shall be returned to the
subdivider and the other retained by the Planning Commission.
Upon a Planning Commission recommendation of approval or disapproval, the clerk
shall set a date and time for a public hearing before the City Council along
with proper notice thereof. The notice shall be published at least 10 days
prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the City of Valley.
The City Council shall act on the Preliminary Plat as submitted, and may (1)
concur with the Planning Commission's recommendation; (2) reverse the Planning
Commission's recommendation; or (3) refer the Preliminary Plat back to the
Planning Commission for reconsideration with specific instructions.
Procedure for approval of Preliminary Plats of land within the City’s ETJ shall
be the same, except that one copy of the Preliminary Plat shall be referred to
Douglas County Engineer’s Office with a request for their recommendations to be
submitted to the Planning Commission.
Conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute an acceptance
of the plat, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout
submitted on the Preliminary Plat, as modified by any required conditions.
Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute approval of the Final Plat.
Rather, the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
general design concept and serves as an acceptable guide for the preparation of
the Final Plat. Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall become void after 12
months from the date of such approval.
Section 3.03   Preliminary Plat Specifications
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet; shall
be plainly marked “Preliminary Plat” and shall include, show, or be accompanied
by the following information:
   1.   A location map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision
in relation to surrounding developments with a north arrow, scale and legend.
   2.   Both existing and proposed contours shall be shown.
   3.   Phasing lines shall be delineated on the plat and a phasing schedule
shall be provided, if the proposed subdivision is to be developed in phases.
   4.   The proposed name of the subdivision which must not be as similar to an
existing subdivision as to cause confusion. The Developer shall verify the name
with Douglas County.
   5.   The names and addresses of the owner and subdivider, and any engineer,
surveyor, or landscape architect (licensed to practice in Nebraska) responsible
for the Preliminary Plat.
   6.   The legal description of the area being platted, boundary lines and
dimensions, the location of monuments found or set, section lines, and the
approximate acreage of the proposed development. All work shall be completed
and certified by a Registered Land Surveyor in the State of Nebraska.
   7.   The width and location of platted streets and alleys within or adjacent
to the property.
   8.   The physical features of the property, including location of water
courses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures and other features
affecting the subdivision; contours with intervals of five feet or less; the
location of all existing utilities with their sizes indicated, as well as flow
lines; elevations of existing sanitary and storm sewer, the outline of wooded
areas (the location of important individual trees may be required), and any
floodway, floodplain, and flood fringe areas.
   9.   The proposed lot layout, lot and block numbers, and approximate lot
dimensions and square footage and grounds proposed to be dedicated for public
use.
   10.   The location and width of proposed streets, easements, building
setback lines, rights-of-way, pavement widths and type, sidewalks, alleys,
location of all proposed improvements including: sanitary sewers (including
proposed flow lines), water mains, storm water drainage and other features and
improvements required by these regulations with coordination with the City
Engineer.
   11.   When wetlands and jurisdictional waterways exist, or are believed to
exist, provide a delineation prepared by a qualified environmental specialist.
   12.   Easements for public utility and rights-of-way purposes.
   13.   The existing and proposed zoning classification and proposed uses of
land within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
   14.   A draft erosion control plan. Grading activities shall not proceed
until said plan has been approved by the State of Nebraska and the Papio-
Missouri River Natural Resources District and a copy of said approvals have
been submitted to the City.
   15.   The subdivider shall submit a complete list of the names and mailing
addresses of all owners of record of all land within 300 feet of the perimeter
of the property being proposed for subdivision.
   16.   Names of adjacent subdivisions together with arrangement of streets
and lots.
   17.   One draft copy of the Pre-Development Cost Agreement, Agreement For
Escrow of Security Funds, and Subdivision Agreement including any requests for
waivers from the requirements of this Ordinance.
   18.   The subdivider or subdivider’s representative shall be in attendance
at the Planning Commission meeting when Preliminary Plat is discussed.
   19.   Two copies of the following, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, shall be delivered to the City Engineer for review:
      (a)   An overlot grading plan
      (b)   A dredging plan, if required
      (c)   A drainage plan, pursuant to Section
6.06.
      (d)   A traffic impact analysis , if required by the City Engineer.
      (e)   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
   20.   Two copies of the following, coordinated with the subdivider, and
prepared by the City Engineer, delivered to the Planning Commission:
      (a)   Public Works plan including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
distribution and street pavement.
      (b)   A street profile(s) with a statement of proposed street
improvements.
   21.   All signature blocks required for Preliminary Plan submission and
approval.
Section 3.04   Procedure for Approval of Final Plat
The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved and may be
comprised of only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the
subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time. The Final Plat shall be
submitted to the City for approval by the Planning Commission at least 30 days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. Four Mylar copies and an
electronic PDF file of the final plat shall be prepared as specified in these
regulations.
The Pre-Development Cost Agreement and the Agreement for Escrow of Security
Funds shall be executed between the subdivider and City prior to submission of
the Final Plat to the Planning Commission. This provision shall allow for the
City and City Engineer to prepare Final Construction Plans and Specifications
for the City Public Infrastructure Improvements, at the required 80% completion
level, prior to Final Plat submittal.
The City departments shall review the Final Plat submittal and forward all
comments and corrections to the subdivider and Planning Commission for
consideration. All review comments and corrections shall be resolved prior to,
or during, the Planning Commission meeting.
The Planning Commission shall forward the Final Plat to the City Council for
approval consideration with Planning Commission recommendations. After Planning
Commission approval, but prior to City Council consideration, the Subdivision
Agreement shall be executed between the subdivider and the City. The City
Council shall consider the Final Plat at their regular meeting, in a public
hearing advertised by published notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing in
a paper of general circulation in the City of Valley. Final approval by the
City Council shall be by Resolution only. City Council approval and Final Plat
signatures shall be required before recording and prior to start of
construction. Upon approval of the Final Plat, a certification of approval by
the City Council shall be endorsed thereon by the City Clerk. Upon signing of
the Final Plat, it shall be filed with the Douglas County Clerk, and one copy
shall be filed with the City.
All outstanding plan review and administrative fees of the City of Valley shall
be paid in full prior to the City’s approval of the Final Plat. All City
engineering fees for City-Owned Public Infrastructure Improvements shall be
paid in full in accordance with the Pre-Development Cost Agreement prior to the
City’s approval of the Final Plat. Water Capital Facilities Charges and Sewer
Capital Facilities Charges shall be paid in full prior to the approval of the
Final Plat.
The signed Final Plat shall be filed with the Douglas County Register of Deeds
within one year of City Council approval. No building permits shall be
authorized until evidence has been submitted regarding the acceptance and
filing of the Final Plat to the Douglas County Register of Deeds.
Section 3.05   Final Plat Specifications
The Final Plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, shall conform
to the approved Preliminary Plat, and shall include the following:
   1.   The name of subdivision.
   2.   The date and a north arrow and graphic scale.
   3.   An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and
distances, referenced to section lines and/or adjacent subdivisions. The
boundary survey shall meet or exceed the "Minimum Standards For Surveys", as
established by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska.
   4.   A legal description of the perimeter of the subdivision.
   5.   The location and names of adjacent subdivisions, streets, alleys and
any easements.
   6.   Location and names or numbers of lots, streets, easements, public
highways, alleys and other features, with accurate bearings and distances. At a
minimum all curves shall be identified with the following data; radius, arc
distance, chord distance and chord bearing. It is intended that enough
information be shown, so the subdivision can be reestablished on the ground.
   7.   Location and description of all permanent monuments set. At a minimum
all monuments shall be made of iron pipe or iron rod, or some other material
capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic locators. Monuments shall
have a minimum diameter of five-eighths (5/8) inch and minimum length of 24
inches.
   8.   A notarized owner’s certification statement signed and acknowledged by
all parties having any titled interest in, or lien upon the land to be
subdivided, consenting to the Final Plat, including the dedication of parts of
the land for streets, easements, and other purposes, pursuant to
Article 5 of this document.
   9.   A notarized surveyor’s statement signed and acknowledged by a
registered land surveyor.
   10.   A signature block for the Douglas County Treasurer stating there are
no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the platted land.
   11.   A signature block for the approval of the Planning Commission,
pursuant to Section
10.03.
   12.   A signature block for the approval of the City Council, to be signed
by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk, pursuant to Section
10.04.
   13.   A signature block for the Douglas County Register of Deeds, pursuant
to Section
10.06.
   14.   A signature block for the Douglas County Engineer, pursuant to Section
10.07.
   15.   A signature block for the City Engineer, pursuant to Section
10.05.
   16.   A signature block for the Lien Holder or Lending Institution.
   17.   A performance bond.
   18.   One copy of any private restrictions or covenants affecting the
subdivision or any part thereof, if applicable.
   19.   One copy of the City-Owned Public Infrastructure plans and
specifications, 80% level of completion, prepared by the City Engineer.
   20.   Three original copies of the executed Pre-Development Cost Agreement,
one copy of the draft Subdivision Agreement and one draft copy of the Agreement
for Escrow of Security Funds shall also be included.
   21.   Four full sized mylar copies and one electronic copy of the Final Plat
document.
   22.   Two copies of the following, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, to be delivered to the City Engineer for review:
      (a)   An overlot grading plan
      (b)   A dredging plan, if required
      (c)   A drainage plan, pursuant to Section
6.06.
      (d)   A traffic impact analysis.
      (e)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
   23.   Two copies of the following, prepared by the City Engineer, delivered
to the Planning Commission:
      (a)   A sanitary sewer plan and profile(s).
      (b)   A street plan and profile with a statement of proposed street
improvements.
      (c)   A water distribution plan and profile(s).
      (d)   A storm sewer plan and profile(s).
Section 3.06   Conditions for Final Plat Approval and Signing
The Final Plat shall not be approved or signed until the following has
occurred:
   1.   Execution of the Subdivision Agreement.
   2.   Execution of the Predevelopment Agreement and payment of all amounts to
be paid to the City pursuant to the terms of the Pre-Development Agreement.
   3.   Execution of the Agreement for Escrow of Security Fund.
   4.   Subdivider’s deposit of the appropriate amount pursuant to the terms of
the Agreement for Escrow of Security Funds.
   5.   Payment in full of all plan review and administrative fees, City
engineering design fees for City-owned public infrastructure improvements, and
capital facilities charges. City having satisfied itself, in its sole and
absolute discretion, that the Subdivider has obtained all necessary Corps of
Engineering Approvals and Permits necessary to complete the development of the
subdivision, including but not limited to obtaining all required Section 404
Permits and any other required wetlands permits. City having satisfied itself,
in its sole and absolute discretion, that subdivision as designed is, or will
be, in compliance with all of City’s adopted Zoning and Subdivision
Regulations.
   6.   Creation of a Homeowner’s Association pursuant to the terms of
Subdivision Agreement, if required.
Section 3.07   Filing
3.07.01   The Subdivider shall file the Final Plat with the Douglas County
Register of Deeds within one year after receipt of the signed Final Plat from
the City, but prior to any public improvements being commenced. One copy of the
signed Final Plat shall be returned to the City Clerk immediately.
Section 3.08   Vacation of Plat
3.08.01   Applicability: An owner or owners of a plat may make application to
the Planning Commission to vacate any plat under the following conditions:
   1.   The Plat to be vacated is a duly recorded Final Plat or Replat.
   2.   The vacation of the subdivision will not interfere with development of,
nor deny access via public thoroughfare to, adjoining properties or utility
services or other improvements.
   3.   Vacation of the subdivision will not be contrary to the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
3.08.02   Procedures: The owner or owners shall present a proposal to the
Planning Commission, containing the legal description of the subdivision and
calling for vacation thereof. The Planning Commission shall study the proposal
and shall send recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall
approve or deny the proposal. If the proposal is approved (approved by
resolution), it shall then be recorded in the office of the Douglas County
Register of Deeds. The subdivider shall pay all fees for the recording of such
vacation. If the proposal is disapproved, the City Council shall state such
reason(s) for disapproval. The applicant shall be allowed to submit a new
application upon a showing that the reason or reasons for disapproval have been
corrected.
Section 3.09   Replats
3.09.01   For a Replat of an existing subdivision, the Planning Commission may
waive the separate submission requirements for the Preliminary and Final Plats
to expedite the subdivision review process if, in the judgment of the Planning
Commission, separate submission will not serve the public interest and will not
conflict with the intent of these regulations. Concurrent Plats shall:
   1.   Be discussed with the City of Valley at a scheduled pre-application
meeting pursuant to Section
3.01 of the adopted regulations.
   2.   Be submitted to the City at least 30 days prior to the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission at which request is to be heard.
   3.   Be accompanied by the applications fees and completed application forms
as required.
   4.   Follow the procedure set forth for herein and contain the required
Preliminary and Final Plat information.
3.09.02   Disapproval of Replats shall be based on the following guidelines:
   1.   A new street or alley is needed or proposed.
   2.   Vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or
easements are required or proposed.
   3.   Such action will result in significant increases in service
requirements, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.: or will
interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g., additional curb cuts,
repaving, etc.
   4.   There is less street right-of-way than required by this Ordinance or
the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedication can be made by
separate instrument.
   5.   All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
   6.   Such action taken during a replat will result in a tract without direct
access to a street.
   7.   A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created.
3.09.03   Changes required by the Planning Commission, during the Planning
Commission’s public hearing, shall be made prior to submitting to the City
Council. Replats shall be submitted to the City at least 30 days prior to the
next regular scheduled meeting for the City. The City Council shall review and
act on the Replat at a public hearing. Notice for such hearing shall be posted
at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the
City of Valley. The City Council shall, in writing, either approve the Replat
with or without conditions, or disapprove the Replat and state the reasons
thereof.
Section 3.10   Administrative Subdivisions
3.10.01    The intent of this section is to provide for lots splits, lot
combinations, and boundary adjustments which result in lots divided or combined
into not more than four tracts without having to re-plat said lot, provided
that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without re-platting. The
Zoning Administrator shall review the administrative subdivision application
and make a final determination. The Zoning Administrator may approve or
disapprove administrative subdivisions in accordance with the following
regulations.
3.10.02   Requests for an Administrative Subdivision approval shall be made by
the owner or a designated representative of the land to the Zoning
Administrator. Two copies on paper of the Administrative Subdivision shall
include the following:
   1.   A survey of the lot(s).
   2.   Location and precise nature of any structures located thereon, if any.
   3.   Location and dimensions of the proposed administrative subdivision.
   4.   A notarized surveyor’s statement signed and acknowledged by a
registered land surveyor, pursuant to Section
10.02.
   5.   A signature block for the Douglas County Register of Deeds, pursuant to
Section
10.06.
   6.   A signature block for the Douglas County Engineer, pursuant to Section
10.07.
   7.   A signature block for the Douglas County Treasurer stating there are no
regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the platted land, pursuant
to Section
10.08.
   8.   A signature block for the approval and signature of the Zoning
Administrator and the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk, pursuant to
Section
10.09.
   9.   A signature block for the City Engineer, pursuant to Section
10.05.
3.10.03   Disapproval of administrative subdivisions shall be based on the
following guidelines:
   1.   A new street or alley is needed or proposed.
   2.   Vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or
easements are required or proposed.
   3.   Such action will result in significant increases in service
requirements, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.: or will
interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g., additional curb cuts,
repaving, etc.
   4.   There is less street right-of-way than required by this Ordinance or
the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedication can be made by
separate instrument.
   5.   All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
   6.   Such action taken during an administrative subdivision will result in a
tract without direct access to a street.
   7.   A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created.
   8.   The lot has been previously split and/or re platted in accordance with
this Ordinance.
   9.   Required public improvements have not been installed.
   10.   New dedication of public right-of-way or easements are required
3.10.04   Prior to the approval of the administrative subdivision, the
subdivider shall provide a statement from the County Treasurer's office showing
there are no tax liens against said land within the proposed subdivision or any
part thereof. The subdivider shall also provide a statement from the City
Treasurer's office showing that all special assessment installment payments are
current as applied to said proposed subdivision or any part thereof. All taxes
shall be paid in full on all real property dedicated to a public use.
3.10.05   The Zoning Administrator shall, in writing, either approve the
Administrative Subdivision, or disapprove the Administrative Subdivision and
state the reasons thereof, within sixty (60) days of receiving the application.
3.10.06   The filing fee for Administrative Subdivisions shall be set in
accordance with Chapter 9 of the Revised Municipal Ordinance.
3.10.07   After approval from the Zoning Administrator the owner or designated
representative shall file the Administrative Subdivision with the Douglas
County Register of Deeds within one year of Zoning Administrator approval. No
building permits shall be authorized until evidence has been submitted
regarding the acceptance and filing of the Final Plat to the Douglas County
Register of Deeds.
Section 3.11   Minor Subdivisions
3.11.01   Preliminary and final plats may be reviewed and processed
concurrently as minor subdivisions if all requirements for both plats have been
satisfied prior to forwarding to the City Council for approval. The Zoning
Administrator may waive the requirements for existing and proposed contours,
streets sewers and a grading plan for the preliminary plat if no site
preparation work is necessary before building development.
ARTICLE 4: RESERVED
ARTICLE 5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 5.01   General
No subdivision shall be approved unless it is in conformance with the
requirements of these regulations and the Comprehensive Development Plan.
Before preliminary or final plat approval is given, the City may require the
subdivider to dedicate reserve sites for parks, playgrounds, open space,
schools, and other public land consistent with the Comprehensive Development
Plan, as determined by the City. Reservation of land for public acquisition
and/or use shall be for a period not to exceed three years from the date the
plat is officially recorded unless otherwise provided for in the subdivision
agreement. If such reserved site is not acquired by the City or other
governmental entity within said three year period, the subdivider may then re-
subdivide the site for alternative purposes and sell any or all of the site.
In certain situations, the contemplated use of land creates or contributes to
the public need for land or facilities including but not limited to
recreational and public safety facilities created by the nature of the
development and use of land. In such situations, City may require dedication
and/or other appropriate designation by the subdivider.
Where a park, playground, school, or other site for public use indicated in the
Comprehensive Development Plan is located in whole or in part in the
applicant's subdivision the City will determine the density and location of
said park(s) and may require the immediate acquisition, reservation or accept
the dedication of such area.
Land which the Planning Commission has found to be unsuitable for subdividing,
due to flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formation, or other features
likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare or health of the future residents,
shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods for subdivision are formulated
by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission that would eliminate
or substantially reduce such hazards.
The Planning Commission may require all contiguous land under common ownership
to be submitted with the Preliminary Plat in order to evaluate overall
development patterns and conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan and
issue proper extension of future roads and services.
Section 5.02   Streets
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of land to be serviced by such streets. All streets shall meet
applicable AASHTO design standards, minimum design standards set by the
Nebraska Board of Public Roads Classification and Standards and in conformance
with City of Valley design standards. See Section
5.30 Schedule A: Minimum Street Standards.
The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing
in areas adjacent to the area being subdivided. Where, at the determination of
the City Engineer, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining
properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries
of the subdivision. Where the City Engineer deems it necessary with a written
recommendation for approval, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a
temporary turnaround having a right-of-way radius of at least 60 feet and a
paved radius of 44 feet, or other approved design.
Concrete curb and gutters shall be required for all streets within the
boundaries of the subdivision.
Section 5.03   Dedication of Rights-of-Way for New Streets
The dedications of rights-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot
line shall be shown on the plat and shall meet the right-of-way requirements as
stated in Section
5.30 of this Ordinance.
Where a subdivision fronts on an arterial street, the City Engineer shall,
where possible, require frontage roads. Where lots back up to an arterial
street and such lots have access by means other than the arterial street, a
frontage road may not be required.
Section 5.04   Dedication of Rights-of-Way for Existing Streets
Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-
way or easements if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set
forth in this Ordinance. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be
dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When
the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one half of
the required right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the existing
roadway, shall be dedicated along with any proposed easements. Dedication of
one-half of the right-of-way for a proposed street along the boundaries of land
proposed for subdivision shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is practical and
reasonable to require the dedication of the other half of the right-of-way when
adjoining property is subdivided.
Section 5.05   Frontage Roads
Where a front or side yard abuts railroad, limited access freeway, or principal
highway or arterial street rights-of-way, a marginal access street or frontage
road may be required parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such rights-of-
way when necessary for adequate protection of properties from the arterial
street and to protect and preserve the safety and traffic handling capabilities
of the arterial street. The distance from said rights-of-way shall be
determined, with due consideration to minimum distance required for approach
connections to future grade-separated intersections. In the case of lots where
the rear yard is adjacent to an arterial street and such lots have access other
than off the arterial street frontage, a frontage road may not be required.
Section 5.06   Intersections
Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of 90 degrees, and no
intersection shall be constructed at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Street
curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 20 feet. Larger
intersection radii may be required in industrial or commercial area or when
directed by the City Engineer. When the smallest angle of street intersection
is less than 75 degrees, the City Engineer may require curb radii of greater
length.
Access onto any street intersecting an arterial street shall be located no
closer to the right-of-way of such arterial street than 75 feet, or more at the
discretion of the City Engineer.
Consideration shall be given to street and right-of-way widths such that
minimum sidewalk requirements are maintained.
Section 5.07   Curves in Streets; Horizontal and Vertical
A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reversed
curves on arterial and collector streets.
Where there is a deflection angle of more than 10 degrees in the horizontal
alignment of a street, a curve shall be installed with a radius adequate to
ensure safe sight distances. Minimum requirements shall conform to the
standards in Section
5.30 of this Ordinance.
Minimum sight distances shall meet applicable AASHTO standards and shall
conform to the minimum design standards set by the Nebraska Board of Public
Roads Classifications and Standards.
Section 5.08   Street Grades and Elevations
All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface
water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and drainage. The
minimum street grade shall not be less than three tenths of one percent (0.3%).
Minimum grades for gutters and ditches shall be three tenths and seven tenths
of one percent (0.3% and 0.7%), respectively. The City may allow lesser slopes
if approved by the City Engineer. Fill may be used in areas subject to flooding
in order to elevate streets and building pads provided such fill will not
increase flood elevations more than one foot in a floodplain and zero increase
in a floodway. Street grades shall conform to the maximum requirements provided
in Schedule A of this Ordinance.
Section 5.09   Access Control
In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the traffic-
carrying capacity of the street system, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall have the right to restrict and regulate points of access to all
property from the public street system. Such restrictions shall be indicated on
the Final Plat.
Section 5.10   Access / Egress
There shall be a minimum of two vehicular access points per platted
subdivision, unless the City Engineer deems it necessary with a written
recommendation for approval to the City Council. The City Engineer shall
determine the most suitable location for said access points during the review
period.
Section 5.11   Street Jogs
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet at intersections
shall be prohibited.
Section 5.12   Cul-de-sac Streets
Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall provide a turnaround
bulb at the end of the stem portion of the street. The stem portion shall have
a 28-foot street width and a 60-foot right-of-way. The bulb portion shall have
a radius at the outside of the pavement of at least 44 feet and a radius at the
right-of-way of at least 60 feet. Alternative designs for temporary turnarounds
may be approved by the City Engineer. Cul-de-sac street lengths shall be
measured from the center of the cul-de-sac bulb to the nearest right-of-way
line of the intersecting street.
Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be provided for streets which are platted to be
extended in the future into adjoining property. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall
have a turnaround bulb with the radius at the outside of the pavement of at
least 44 feet.
Section 5.13   Terminal Roundabout Streets
Cul-de-sacs longer than 500 feet shall become terminal roundabout streets,
allowing for the full two lane street width to continue to circle around the
terminal bulb and return to the stem portion of the street. Terminal roundabout
streets shall have a 28-foot street width (both stem and roundabout). The
right-of-way of the street stem shall be 60 feet radius. The Terminal
Roundabout bulb shall have a minimum 66-foot radius center landscaped green
space. The centerline radius of the pavement shall be at least 80 feet. The
radius of the right-of-way shall be at least 110 feet.
Section 5.14   Design Standards; Boulevards.
Boulevards shall have 20 foot lane widths on each side of the boulevard median,
with a 12 foot median width, 8 foot landscaped space between the back of curb
and sidewalk, a 5 foot sidewalk, and 1 foot space to the lot line. The total
right-of-way width would be 80 feet. Cul-de-sacs located at the end of a
boulevard are pursuant to Section
5.30 Schedule A: Minimum Street Standards.
Section 5.15   Street Names
Proposed streets, which are in alignment with other existing streets, shall
bear the name of such other existing streets. All proposed names of all streets
shall be approved by Douglas County and the City Council prior to such names
being assigned or used.
Section 5.16   Private Streets and Reserve Strips
New private streets may be created as part of a gated community or a planned
development district provided such streets are specifically authorized by the
Planning Commission and City Council as an exception to the terms of the
Ordinance. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their
control is definitely vested in the municipality under conditions of approval
by the Planning Commission as authorized in these regulations.
Section 5.17   Alleys
Alleys may be required in commercial, industrial, and residential areas. Dead-
end alleys shall be avoided, however, where a dead-end alley cannot be avoided,
a dead-end alley shall be provided with adequate turnaround capacity at the
dead-end. Alleys should be avoided in residential areas except where an
existing alley of an adjoining subdivision would dead-end at the boundary of
the proposed subdivision. Paved surfaces of Alleys shall be constructed of
Portland Cement Concrete.
Section 5.18   Water Lines and Hydrants (Fire Protection)
Fire protection shall be provided to all lots within a subdivision. All water
mains within a subdivision shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter, and
shall be sized and designed by the City Engineer. All water mains shall be
looped, unless a dead-end is approved by the City Engineer. Hydrant spacing and
layout shall not exceed 400 feet and shall be determined by the City Engineer.
Section 5.19   Water Mains and Sewer Mains (Location)
Except for good cause, all water mains and sewer mains shall be located within
the street right-of-way.
Section 5.20   Sidewalks
All sidewalks within a subdivision shall be of Portland cement concrete, a
minimum pavement width of five feet and shall be located one foot into the
street right-of-way adjacent to the residential lot line. No sidewalks are
required within Rural Residential RS zoning district.
Section 5.21   Trail Sidewalks / Walkways
All trail sidewalks required in addition to sidewalks within a subdivision
shall have a minimum pavement width of eight feet and be in conformance with
the City of Valley Trail System Masterplan.
Section 5.22   Blocks
In determining the lengths, widths and shapes of blocks, consideration shall be
given to the provision of adequate access and circulation, the suitability of
building sites to the needs of the use contemplated, and the zoning
requirements regarding minimum lot sizes, widths and frontages of the
anticipated zoning district. Except in unusual circumstances approved by the
City, block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet. Pedestrian easements 10 feet
wide shall be provided through or near the center of blocks more than 600 feet
long in order to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation.
Section 5.23   Lots
The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall conform to the
regulations of the applicable zoning district for the type of development and
use contemplated. All lots shall be developed such that surface drainage is
diverted to lot lines and not across adjacent properties. Corner lots for
residential uses shall be designed with adequate width to permit appropriate
building setback distances and orientation to both streets. The subdividing of
land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory vehicular access
from a public street or an approved private street. Side lot lines shall be
designed as close as possible to be perpendicular to street right-of-way lines
or radial to cul-de-sac center points.
Section 5.24   Double Fronted Lots
Double fronted lots shall be avoided and will only be considered by the City in
unusual situations.
Section 5.25   Easements
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
for utilities where necessary and shall be 20 feet in width. When located on a
lot line, said easement shall be centered so that there is 10 feet of easement
on each side of lot line. In those zoning districts that require five feet side
yard setbacks, the required easement shall require the side yard setback to be
increased to 10 feet to permit the full 20 foot utility easement.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, a storm water drainage
easement substantially following the width of such water course shall be
provided. The width of the easement shall be adequate for maintenance purposes,
and shall be determined by the City Engineer as part of the Preliminary Plat.
Perpetual easements shall be granted to the power company, gas company,
telecommunications company, or cable company to install, operate, maintain,
repair or renew utilities. The easements shall be 5 feet in width along the
front, rear, and side boundary lot lines of all lots. A 16 foot wide easement
shall be provided at the rear of all exterior (outer perimeter) lots within a
subdivision. No permanent buildings or retaining walls shall be placed in said
easement ways, but the same may be used for gardens, shrubs, and landscaping.
Section 5.26   Storm Sewer System
Provisions shall be made to limit the peak rate of storm water discharge from
the subdivision. Post development runoff shall not exceed pre-development
runoff by more than ten percent, based upon a 10-year storm event.. Pre-
development shall be the condition prior to improvements being completed. In
determining the size or type of the storm sewer system to be used, the design
shall be sufficient to handle all computed runoff from the proposed
development. For large drainage areas, natural drainage ways shall be
maintained, and the City may require cross drainage structures such as
culverts, bridges, etc. No downstream impacts, caused by the new development,
shall be allowed.
Section 5.27   Sanitary Sewer System
Design of all sanitary sewer systems shall be performed by the City Engineer.
Design standards shall conform to the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality (NDEQ). The minimum size of public sewer mains shall be 8 inches and
the minimum size service line to any residence shall be 6 inches.
Section 5.28   Flood Hazards
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for
residential or other development shall not be platted for such purposes. Such
land may be set aside on the plat for such uses compatible with the hazards
associated with flooding or erosion. All development shall be flood proof in
accordance with the flood hazard zoning provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks, are required to assure that
   a.   all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage,
   b.   all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or
eliminate them receiving flood damage,
   c.   adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards, and
   d.   Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is
lesser, shall include within such proposals the base flood elevation(s).
Section 5.29   Conformance with Other Regulations
No Final Plat of land within the City or its jurisdictional area shall be
approved unless it conforms with existing zoning regulations. Whenever there is
a conflict between the standards set forth in these regulations and those
contained in other regulations the highest standard shall govern.
Section 5.30   Schedule A: Minimum Street Standards
Street          Minimum Right-of-Way  Minimum Pavement Width (ft.)  Minimum Number of Traffic Maximum                                      Min. Pavement
Classifications (ft.)                  (5)                            Lanes                      Grade   Minimum Centerline Radius      Thickness (in.) 
                                                                                                 (%)
Street               Minimum Right-of-Way  Minimum Pavement Width (ft.)  Minimum Number of Traffic Maximum                                      Min. Pavement
Classifications      (ft.)                  (5)                            Lanes                      Grade   Minimum Centerline Radius      Thickness (in.) 
                                                                                                      (%)
Major Arterial (1)  100                    32                             4                          6       510                                  9
Other Arterial (2)  100                    32                             3                          6       510                                  8
Collector (3)        80                     28                             2                          8       300                                  7
Boulevard            80                     20                             2                          10      100                                  7
Local (4)            60                     28                             2                          10      100                                  7
Frontage             50                     28                             2                          10      100                                  7
Cul-de-sac Bulb (6)  60R                    44R                            2                          10      100                                  7
Terminal Roundabout 110R(7)                28                             2                          10      70                                   7
Bulb
Alleys               20                     18                             2                                  -                                    7
 
   (1)   Major Arterial streets shall generally consist of extensions of the
rural major arterials which provide continuous service through municipalities
for long-distance rural travel. They are the arterial streets used to transport
products into and out of municipalities.
   (2)   Other Arterial streets shall consist of two categories: Municipal
Extensions of Rural Other Arterials, and Arterial Movements Peculiar to a
Municipality's Own Complex, that is streets which interconnect major areas of
activity within a municipality, such as shopping centers, the central business
district, manufacturing centers, and industrial parks.
   (3)   Collector streets shall consist of a group of streets which collect
traffic from residential streets and move it to smaller commercial centers or
to higher arterial systems.
   (4)   Local streets shall consist of the balance of streets in each
municipality, principally residential access service streets and local business
streets. They are characterized by very short trip lengths, mostly limited to
vehicles desiring to go to or from an adjacent property.
   (5)   Pavement width measured from back of curb to back of curb.
   (6)   Minimum right-of-way radius for the cul-de-sac bulb shall be 60 feet;
the minimum pavement radius for the cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 44 feet.
   (7)   Minimum right-of-way applies to centerline radius for length of
terminal roundabout.
ARTICLE 6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 6.01   General
The subdivider shall design and construct private infrastructure and non-City
owned public infrastructure improvements using standards not less than the
standards outlined in this Ordinance. All such designs and construction plans
and specifications shall be approved by the City upon recommendation by the
City Engineer.
All City-owned public infrastructure work shall be designed, bid and
constructed by City and shall be completed within the time limitations
established herein. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in
accordance with specifications approved by the City. Standards applicable to
health and sanitation as required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality (NDEQ) and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)
shall be the minimum standards required thereof.
All costs of design, advertising, bidding and constructing of City-owned public
infrastructure and costs for required tests shall be paid by the subdivider.
The subdivider shall also pay for all fees, capital facility charges and other
costs for the development as outlined in the pre-development cost agreement,
the agreement for escrow of security funds, and the subdivision agreement.
Section 6.02   Monuments and Markers
6.02.01   Monuments and markers placement shall be located at all quarter
section points or other reference points tied to the federal land survey on the
boundaries of or within the area being platted.
6.02.02   Monument Construction. Monument construction shall meet or exceed the
"Minimum Standards for Surveys," as the same may be amended from time to time,
as adopted by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska in February
1989. These standards are as follows:
   1.   The surveyor shall establish or confirm the prior establishment of
permanent monuments at each corner on the boundary lines of the parcel being
surveyed. Monuments shall be solid and substantially free from movement. In
such cases where the placement of a permanent monument at the true corner is
impractical because of instability or is likely to be destroyed, the surveyor
shall set a corner accessory monument and show its relationship by dimension to
the true corner.
   2.   The monuments set shall be constructed of material capable of being
detected by commonly used magnetic locators. These monuments shall consist of
an iron pipe or steel rod with a minimal diameter of five-eighths (5/8) inch
and minimal length of 24 inches. When extenuating circumstances dictate, the
surveyor may use monuments (i.e., nail and washer) that have a probability of
permanence. Where a corner or a line falls on or within a wall, column line or
other physical feature and the placement of a monument is not feasible, the
wall, column line or physical feature shall become the monument by reference
thereto.
   3.   In addition, monuments shall be set at all block corners, lot corners,
deflection points and points of curvature, except in cases where it is deemed
clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the City Council.
Section 6.03   Street Grading, Construction and Surface Type
6.03.01   The subdivider or subdivider’s engineer shall grade all streets to
the full width of the right-of-way and to within six inches of the final street
grade established in the approved Final Plat construction plans and
specifications.
   1.   Design standards for the excavation and preparation of the road bed
shall be designed by the City Engineer. Where unusual soil conditions, extra-
ordinary traffic volumes, or other abnormal characteristics exist, the City
Engineer may provide for alternate design standards to address such condition,
if necessary.
6.03.02   Concrete curbs and gutters shall be required for all streets within
the boundaries of the subdivision.
6.03.03   All streets shall be poured-in-place using Portland cement concrete.
Concrete shall be Class “47B-3,600,” and shall conform to Division 600 of the
Nebraska Department of Transportation (DOT) Standard Specifications for Highway
Construction, 2017 Edition. Minimum compressive strength shall be 3,600 psi in
28 days. The concrete cylinders shall be tested by an approved testing
laboratory and results of the testing furnished to the City Engineer. Testing
shall be conducted at seven days and 28 days from the date of cylinder casting.
6.03.04   All materials used shall conform to Nebraska Department of
Transportation (DOT) Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, 2017
Edition, Division 1000, and Material Details. Curing shall be accomplished with
a continuous coating of white pigmented curing compound conforming to the
requirements of Section 1012 of the Nebraska Department of Transportation (DOT)
Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, 2017 Edition.
Section 6.04   Street Signs, Lighting and Electrical Power
6.04.01   At least one street sign shall be installed at each street
intersection within or on the perimeter of the subdivision and shall be located
in the northeast corner thereof, whenever possible, and within the area between
the street and sidewalk at a point approximately six inches from said sidewalk
or its intended location. Whenever possible, street signs shall be installed on
street utility poles. The subdivider shall provide and install all street
signs.
6.04.02   The developer shall arrange for, and pay for, the installation of
street lights at each entrance (street or sidewalk) into a subdivision and at
each street intersection within the subdivision and at such intermediate points
as necessary, as specified by the Public Power District and/or the City
Engineer.
   1.   Intermediate lights shall be at a maximum of 1,000-foot intervals.
6.04.03   New subdivision lighting and electrical power shall be installed
underground. The location of easements for such wiring shall be indicated on
the Preliminary and Final Plats. All underground wiring shall conform to
installation specifications required by the Omaha Public Power District (OPPD).
Section 6.05   Landscape Screens
Landscape screens as required by the City shall be installed at the
subdivider's expense as a buffer for the protection of residential properties
along arterial and collector streets, state and federal highways, county roads,
railroad rights-of-way, and land uses which are substantially different from
that proposed in the subdivision. All landscape screens shall be installed
prior to any building occupancy within the subdivision.
Section 6.06   Drainage
6.06.01   A drainage management system shall be provided by the subdivider. If
the plan involves City-owned public infrastructure, said infrastructure shall
be designed and constructed by the City, at subdivider’s cost, to provide for
the proper drainage of surface water within the subdivision.
   1.   Preliminary Plat Drainage Report (provided by subdivider) shall
include:
      (a)   Preliminary estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the
subdivision both naturally and once there has been full development of lots
within the subdivision.
      (b)   An analysis of existing conditions of the watershed that may affect
the proposed subdivision, such as soil type, drainage channels, and
obstructions to water flow.
      (c)   A preliminary grading plan illustrating the proposed drainage
management system.
   2.   Final Plat Drainage Report (provided by subdivider) shall contain:
      (a)   Calculations of the quantity of storm water entering the
subdivision naturally and estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the
subdivision once there has been full development of the lots within the
subdivision based on the proposed zoning.
      (b)   Quantities of flow at each pick-up point.
      (c)   Estimates and type of temporary erosion control measures necessary
to control erosion during construction.
      (d)   A description of an adequate drainage management system within the
subdivision and its design capacities based on a 10-year storm.
      (e)   An evaluation of the ability of the proposed water courses,
drainage tiles, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to
drainage or flood control within the subdivision to handle the run-off which
would be generated by the development of the land within and above the
subdivision and the impacts of such drainage on downstream drainage systems.
6.06.02   Drainage Requirements. The subdivider shall provide an overall
drainage management system for the subdivision, based on the criteria described
above. Drainage improvements involving City-owned infrastructure shall be
designed and built by the City, including culverts and storm sewers whenever
necessary or required by the City Engineer. Non-City owned drainage
improvements, including rain gardens, open ditches between lots, or other
offsite private improvements shall be designed and constructed by the subdivide
after all plans have been approved by the City Engineer.
6.06.03   Drainage Management System Standards.
   1.   All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system of
curbs, gutters and storm sewers or open ditches.
   2.   Curb drainage inlets shall be provided at appropriate intervals along
streets having curbs and gutters. Where inlets connect to storm sewers, a drain
inlet structure and a protective grating shall be installed.
   3.   Where storm water flows across the intersections of streets having
curbs and gutters, concrete cross gutters shall be installed at such
intersections.
   4.   All off-street drainage swales and ditches shall be protected by
drainage easements noted on the Preliminary and Final Plats. Where water
courses would cross lots diagonally, the subdivider shall straighten such
course and shall substantially follow lot lines.
6.06.04   Drainage Management System and Storm Drain Responsibility. The
subdivider shall be responsible for the overall drainage management system and
all non-City owned drainage systems. The City shall be responsible for the
design and construction of all City-owned storm sewer infrastructure. The
subdivider shall pay for all costs.
Section 6.07   Sanitary Sewers.
A sanitary sewer system shall be designed and constructed by the City for all
lots in the proposed subdivision. The subdivider shall pay for all costs. The
following requirements shall apply:
6.07.01   Within the corporate limits, a sanitary sewer collection system
including all pipes and manholes shall be provided and said collection system
shall be connected to the public sewage system in accordance with plans
prepared by the City Engineer and acceptable to the City.
6.07.02   Within the jurisdictional areas of the City but outside the corporate
limits, a sanitary sewer collection system including all pipes and manholes
shall be provided and said collection system shall be connected to the public
sewage system of the City in accordance with plans prepared by the City
Engineer and acceptable to the City. Should the proposed subdivision be located
in a drainage sub-basin without available sewer service, the subdivider may
utilize the City’s Sanitary Sewer Sub-Basin Pioneering Policy.
6.07.03   Within the jurisdictional areas of the City, no private collection
and treatment systems shall be allowed for new subdivisions. Special temporary
provisions may be allowed when appropriate for remote properties consisting of
approved on-site treatment systems approved by local and state environmental
officials.
6.07.04   Standards. The City shall prepare a sanitary sewer layout plan for a
permanent sewage system showing pipe sizes, gradients, type of pipe, invert and
finished grade elevations, location and type of manholes, and the location,
type and size of all pumping stations and force mains. The City shall design
and construct all sanitary sewer infrastructure. The sudivider shall pay for
all costs.
   1.   Design Standards of said system shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
      (a)   At least 8-inch PVC gravity sewer mains shall be installed.
      (b)   At least 6-inch service line connections from the sewer main to the
property line of each lot will be installed with the location marked.
      (c)   Manholes (54-inch min.) will be provided at all interceptor and
lateral junctions, at the end of each line, and at all changes in direction,
grade, and size.
      (d)   Manhole high build epoxy coating is required on all interior
surfaces.
   2.   Design standards of said system shall be in general compliance with the
requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ) – Title
123.
Section 6.08   Water Mains.
A water distribution system shall be designed and constructed by the City to
provide adequate water service to all lots in the proposed subdivision. The
subdivider shall pay for all costs. The following requirements shall apply:
6.08.01   Within the corporate limits, a water distribution system including
all pipes, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances shall be provided and
said distribution system shall be connected to the public water system in
accordance with plans prepared by the City Engineer and acceptable to the City.
6.08.02   Within the jurisdictional area of the City, but outside the corporate
limits, a water distribution system including all pipes, fire hydrants, valves
and other appurtenances shall be provided and said distribution system shall be
connected to the public water system in accordance with plans prepared by the
City Engineer and acceptable to the City. For remote subdivisions, separated
from the City infrastructure by open, developable land, the City’s Water Main
Extension and Pioneering Policy provisions may apply which allows for future
reimbursement of main extensions by other future subdividers.
6.08.03   Within the jurisdictional areas of the City, no private water supply
and distribution systems shall be allowed for new subdivisions. Special
temporary provisions may be allowed when appropriate for remote properties
consisting of a private well system approved by local and state health
officials.
6.08.04   Standards. The City shall prepare a water system layout plan for a
permanent water distribution system showing pipe sizes, type of pipe, locations
of fire hydrants and valves and, if applicable, booster pumps or storage
reservoirs, and other appurtenances.
   1.   Design Standards of said system shall in accordance with the following
standards:
      (a)   At least a 6-inch diameter DIP water mains shall be installed to
serve each lot located within the subdivision. Larger sizes may be required to
meet demands and to provide fire protection.
      (b)   Fire protection shall be provided for all properties within the
City and the City’s jurisdiction. Fire hydrants shall be provided and shall be
accessible by the Fire Department along the street facing each lot. Hydrants
shall be located at a maximum of 400-foot intervals, unless otherwise designed
by the City Engineer. The layout and flow design must meet the minimum
requirements as set forth by the City.
      (c)   Gate valves on cross-connecting water lines shall be so located
that no single break in the distribution system shall require more than 500
feet to be out of service in Commercial and Industrial districts or 800 feet in
other districts.
      (d)   Valves or cross-connecting mains shall be located that a break in
the secondary distribution system will not necessitate shutting down major
distribution lines.
      (e)   Design standards of the water distribution system shall be in
compliance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS) – Title 179.
Section 6.09   Extension of Utilities to Boundaries.
The subdivider shall be required to extend all necessary utility improvements
to the boundaries of his proposed subdivision at his expense to allow for
services to future anticipated developments on the adjoining lands, as
determined by the City.
Section 6.10   Off-site Extensions.
If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of the proposed
subdivision and the City determines that extensions across undeveloped areas
does not warrant the use of the City’s pioneering policies, the subdivider
shall pay the cost of such off-site improvements and provide for appropriate
off-site easements prior to the approval of the Final Plat.
Section 6.11   Land Preparation.
Any cut, fill and compaction of land within, and if applicable, adjacent to the
subdivision, shall be accomplished in accordance with design standards of the
City or as approved by the City Engineer. To control erosion and sedimentation
during and after land preparation, the subdivider, any successors and assigns
shall provide for disturbing only the areas needed for construction; removing
only those trees, shrubs and grasses that must be removed by construction;
installing required sediment basins and diversion dikes before disturbing the
land that drains into them; and temporary stabilizing each segment of graded or
otherwise disturbed land by seeding and mulching or by other approved methods.
As land preparation is completed, the subdivider, any successors and assigns
shall permanently stabilize each segment with perennial vegetation and
structural measures. Diversion dikes and sediment basins shall be leveled after
areas that drain into them are stabilized, and permanent vegetation shall be
established on those areas. Sediment basins that are to retained for storm
water detention shall be seeded to permanent vegetation no later than nine
months after completion of the sediment basins and shall be permanently
maintained by the subdivider or any successors and assigns.
The subdivider shall be required to provide for the control of erosion in areas
of the subdivision which are disturbed by grading operations by constructing
temporary terraces on slopes, temporary silt basins, sod swales and spillways,
and whatever may be necessary to prevent erosion and damage to adjacent
properties from surface drainage. All erosion control measures shall be
reviewed and approved by the City. The subdivider shall be responsible for all
erosion control costs, for periodic maintenance and repairs, and for
inspections after rainfall events.
Section 6.12   Sidewalks
The subdivision sidewalk system shall be designed by the City Engineer.
Sidewalks shall be provided in all subdivisions as required by City Ordinance
and shall be constructed of Portland Cement Concrete. Sidewalks shall be four
inches in thickness and 5 feet wide. Sidewalks shall be constructed in street
right-of-way and shall provide access to all lots within the subdivision. The
placement of the sidewalk shall be such that the street side portion of the
sidewalk is 10 feet from the back of street curb, and the far side portion is 1
foot from the front yard property line. Sidewalks shall be required in front of
all lots, in front of outlots and within street intersections to provide
continuity of pedestrian traffic through the subdivision.
Frontage sidewalks shall be constructed by the adjacent homeowner and must be
completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
Crossing sidewalk sections permitting pedestrian movement from one side of the
street to the other side shall be constructed by the adjacent homeowner at the
time the homeowner construct their frontage sidewalk.
Intersection sidewalks shall be located at all street intersections and shall
be constructed by the subdivider at the time that the street intersection is
constructed.
Trail sidewalks shall be designed by the City Engineer in accordance with the
City’s trail system master plan. If the master plan includes trail sidewalks
through, or adjacent to, a new subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to
construct said trail sidewalks, at their cost.
Section 6.13   Driveways
Driveways shall be required to provide access from public streets to private
property. The portion of the driveway constructed on City right-of-way (i.e.
the portion between the edge of the public street and the private lot line)
shall not be used for private or commercial purposes. Vehicles shall be parked
entirely on private property.
Driveways shall be constructed pursuant to
Article 7 of Valley’s Zoning Regulations.
ARTICLE 7: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS ON PUBLIC LAND
Section 7.01   Improvements Financing, General.
In order to provide consistent information concerning the financing of required
subdivision improvements; establish and equitable division of costs between the
developer and City; and to insure orderly, cost effective growth in Valley, the
City shall require that the developer pay for the following services and
improvements indicated as part of the subdivision process.
7.01.01   All costs associated with the preparation and revisions to the
preliminary plat including but not limited to surveying, preliminary grading,
drawings, and related services.
7.01.02   Unless otherwise agreed to by the City in a Subdivision Agreement,
the developer shall pay for all preparation of all items related to the final
plat and those improvements and related costs contained in
Article 5.
Section 7.02   Agreements
7.02.01   The Subdivider shall enter into the following agreements with the
City of Valley:    
   1.   Predevelopment Agreement
   2.   Agreement for Escrow Security Fund
   3.   Subdivision Agreement
7.02.02   Predevelopment Cost Agreement
   1.   The Predevelopment Cost Agreement shall provide for the subdivider to
pay the City of Valley for all costs incurred by the City for planning, plat
review fees, engineering fees, legal and other miscellaneous expenses
associated with the proposed subdivision. Payment of all costs shall occur
prior to the City of Valley approval of the Final Plat.
7.02.03   Agreement for Escrow Security Fund
   1.   The Agreement for Escrow Security Fund shall provide the subdivider to
deposit an amount for all costs of public infrastructure improvements to insure
completion of the construction of such improvements and act as a security for
Subdvider’s faithful performance of its obligations under the Subdivision
Agreement and to provide a fund for the payment of the contractor’s
construction of such improvements. The Security Fund shall be in an amount
determined by the City of Valley and deposited with a financial institution as
an escrow agent to the City of Valley before the City of Valley approval of the
Final Plat.
7.02.04   Subdivision Agreement
   1.   The Subdivision Agreement shall provide the subdivision of real
property into lots and of streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water
mains, sidewalks and landscaping in public right-of-ways to each lot within the
proposed subdivision. The Subdivision Agreement must be executed before the
City of Valley approval of the Final Plat.
Section 7.03   City Takeover Rights
7.03.01   In the event that subdivider should abandon the construction of the
Public Improvements at any time then City shall have the option of taking over
control of the construction of the Improvements in the following manner:
   1.   City shall give subdivider written notice of its intent to take control
of the construction of the Public Improvements.
   2.   Subdivider shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such written
notice to commence or re-commence construction of the Public Improvements.
7.03.02   In the event that subdivider commences or re-commences construction
of the Public Improvements within such sixty (60) day period, then City’s right
to take control of the construction of the Improvements shall terminate, but
only with respect to the alleged abandonment set forth in the written notice.
7.03.03   In the event that subdivider does not commence or re-commence
construction of the Public Improvements within such sixty (60) day period,
then, on the first business day after the expiration of such sixty (60) day
period the City can proceed with the construction of the Public Improvements.
All payments to the contractors constructing the Public Improvements, and any
reimbursements to the City as described herein, shall be made pursuant to the
terms of the Agreement for Escrow of Security Fund.
7.03.04   For the purposes of this Agreement abandonment of construction of the
Improvements shall be defined as the failure of subdivider to diligently pursue
construction of the Improvements for a continuous and successive period of
sixty (60) days.
Section 7.04   Certification and Inspection (Private Improvements)
Upon completion of the private improvements, the developer or designated agent
shall file with the City a statement either certifying that the improvements
meet the requirements of the city or provide a statement indicating the
improvements do not meet the requirements of the approved improvement plans and
specifications.
Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider through use of a registered
professional engineer shall file with the City a statement stipulating the
following:
   1.   That all required improvements are complete.
   2.   That these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards
specified by the City.
   3.   That there are no known defects from any cause in the improvements.
   4.   That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrances or
liens.
Section 7.05   Dedication
As a condition of Final Plat approval, the subdivider shall dedicate to the
public all streets and alleys as may be required by the Planning Commission and
City Council. If such streets and alleys are not to be dedicated and are to be
developed as private streets, the subdivider shall make adequate provision
pursuant to
Article 10 of Valley’s Zoning Regulations.
ARTICLE 8: WAIVERS
Section 8.01   Granting of Waivers (Exceptions) and Conditions
8.01.01   In addition to the exceptions contained in this Ordinance, the
Planning Commission and City Engineer may recommend and the City Council may
grant waivers from the provisions of these regulations, but only after
determining that:
   1.   There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property
that are not the result of actions by the subdivider.
   2.   The waivers are necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development
of the property in question.
   3.   The granting of the waivers will not be detrimental to the public or
injurious to adjacent and nearby properties.
Section 8.02   Subdivision; Annexation of Adjoining or Contiguous Properties
All subdivisions or additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate
limits of Valley may be included within the same and become a part of the City
of Valley upon approval of and acceptance by Ordinance. Such annexation shall
only occur after the City Council has voted to approve said inclusion by a
separate vote from that approving the Final Plat. Further, such annexation
shall occur prior to approval of the Final Plat for the subdivision.
When the intent of the Planning Commission and City Council is to annex said
subdivision or addition upon approval of the Final Plat; the following
procedures shall be taken:
   1.   Notice of the time and place of separate public hearings for the
Planning Commission to recommend and the City Council to approve the annexation
shall be provided pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-904 (R.R.S.1997).
   2.   The Public Hearings listed above shall be held separate from the public
hearings held to recommend and approve the Final Plat of the subdivisions or
additions.
Section 8.03   Amendments
Any provision of these Regulations from time to time may be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the City Council according to
law; provided, however, that such amendments, supplements, changes,
modifications or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after
public hearing and report by the Planning Commission.
ARTICLE 9: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 9.01   General
9.01.01   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce these
regulations and to bring to the attention of the Planning Commission and City
Council any violation or lack of compliance herewith.
9.01.02   No owner or agent of an owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a Final Plat of
such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council
in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed for record
with Douglas County Register of Deeds.
9.01.03   The subdivision or replat of any lot or any parcel by the use of
metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease which
would evade these regulations shall not be permitted. All such subdivisions
shall be subject to all the requirements contained in these regulations.
9.01.04   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided, sold, transferred
or leased in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
Section 9.02   Amendments
Any provision of this Ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified, or repealed from time to time by the City Council according to law,
provided however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modification or
repealed provisions shall not become effective until after the study, written
report and recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council.
Section 9.03   Violation and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
these regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Such conviction shall carry a fine of up to 100 dollars plus the cost of
prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The non-payment of such fine and costs shall
subject the guilty party to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
time not to exceed the lesser of 1) 30 days, or 2) the time necessary to pay
such fine and costs in full.
ARTICLE 10: CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION STATEMENTS
Section 10.01   Notary Public Acknowledgment
STATE OF NEBRASKA    )
         ) ss
COUNTY OF DOUGLAS   )
The forgoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day, of
______________ 20_____, by ___________________________________, who personally
appeared before me and whose name is affixed to this plat and who acknowledge
the execution thereof to be his/her voluntary act and deed.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal the day and year last above mentioned.
____________________________________                     (SEAL)
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ______________
Section 10.02   Surveyor’s Certification
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATION:
I hereby certify that I am a professional land surveyor, registered in
compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, and that this plat correctly
represents a survey conducted by me or under my direct supervision on the _____
day of ______________, 20_____, that any changes from the description appearing
in the last record transfer of the land contained in the Final Plat are so
indicated, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist as described or will
be installed and their position is correctly shown and that all dimensional and
geodetic data is correct.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Surveyor, RLS #               Date
(SEAL)
Section 10.03   Approval of Valley Planning Commission
Approval of the Planning Commission of Valley, Nebraska
This plat of
__________________________________________________________________________________
was approved by the Valley Planning Commission on this _____ day of
______________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Chairperson, Valley Planning Commission
Section 10.04   Acceptance by Valley City Council
Acceptance BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF VALLEY, NEBRASKA
This plat of
__________________________________________________________________________________
was approved by the City Council of the City of Valley, Nebraska on this _____
day of ______________, 20_____, in accordance with the State Statutes of
Nebraska.
____________________________________               
(City of Valley SEAL)
Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________________
City Clerk
Section 10.05   Acceptance by Valley City Engineer
This plat of
__________________________________________________________________________________
was reviewed and accepted by the Valley City Engineer on this _____ day of
______________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Valley City Engineer
Section 10.06   Acceptance by Douglas County Register of Deeds
ACCEPTANCE BY DOUGLAS COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS
This plat of
__________________________________________________________________________________
was recorded on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____, at book # ________,
page # ________.
____________________________________
Douglas County Register of Deeds                           (SEAL)
Section 10.07   Review of Douglas County Engineer
Review of Douglas County Engineer
This plat of
__________________________________________________________________________________
was reviewed by the office of Douglas County Engineer on this _____ day of
______________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Douglas County Engineer                              (SEAL)
Section 10.08   Douglas County Treasurer’s Certifications
Douglas County Treasurer’s Certifications
This is to certify that I find no regular or special taxes due or delinquent
against the property described in the Surveyor’s Certificate and embraced in
this plat as shown by the records of this office.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Douglas County Treasurer               Date
(SEAL)
Section 10.09   Administrative Subdivision Approval
APPROVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
This Administrative Subdivision was approved by the City of Valley on this
_____ day of ______________, 20_____.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
City Clerk                  Mayor               
____________________________________
Zoning Administrator                        
(City of Valley SEAL)
Section 10.10   Owners Certification
Owners Certification
I/we, the undersigned owner(s) of the real estate shown and described herein,
do hereby certify that I/we have laid out, platted and subdivided, and do
hereby lay out, plat and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with this
plat.
This subdivision shall be known and designated as
______________________________________________________ , an addition to the
City of Valley, Nebraska (delete previous phrase if the subdivision is located
outside of the corporate limits and will not be annexed to the City). All
streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby dedicated to
the public unless specifically noted herein. Other public lands shown and not
heretofore dedicated are hereby reserved for public use.
Clear title to the land contained in this plat is guaranteed. Any encumbrances
or special assessments are explained as follows:
__________________________________________________________________________________.
There are strips of ground shown on this plat and marked easement, reserved for
the use of public utilities and subject to the paramount right of a public
utility or the City to install, repair, replace and maintain its installations.
(Additional covenants or restrictions and enforcement provisions therein may be
inserted here or attached to the plat).
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Signature of Owner               Signature of Owner
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Printed name                  Printed name
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Date                     Date
ARTICLE 11: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section 11.01   Separability
Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 11.02   Purpose of Catch Heads
The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are
inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they
shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in
construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 11.03   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 11.04   Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication according to law.
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of Valley, Nebraska,
This ________ day of ______, 2019.
(Seal)
ATTEST:
   __________________________________         _________________________________
    City Clerk                  Mayor
