CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2026 S-10 Supplement:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4781, passed - -25
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1789
AN ORDINANCE TO REVISE ALL THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA AND TO
REPEAL PRIOR ORDINANCES, TO REQUIRE FILING, AND TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska are
hereby revised, codified, and printed in book form as the "Code of Ordinances
of Wahoo, Nebraska" consisting of the following Titles:
      TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Section 2.   The Code of Ordinances contains all of the provisions of a
general nature pertaining to the subjects enumerated and embraced in the code.
All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by the code are
repealed, except that nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions
involving, or fines, penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities incurred pursuant
to such ordinances prior to repeal.
   Section 3.   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in the Code of Ordinances,
including ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in full force and
effect unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
      1.   Vacating or setting boundaries of streets, alleys, or other public
places.
      2.   Annexing or detaching territory.
      3.   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land to
public use.
      4.   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property.
      5.   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made.
      6.   Levying taxes or special assessments.
      7.   Appropriating money.
      8.   Granting franchises or special licenses.
      9.   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
   Section 4.   At least one copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk and available for inspection by members of the
public during the hours the office is kept open for the ordinary transaction of
business. The Clerk shall file a copy of the ordinances with the County Court.
   Section 5.   This ordinance shall be in full force and shall take effect
from and after its passage, approval, and publication according to law.
   Passed and approved this 24th day of January, 2002.
   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
      By:   Phyllis J. Nozicka /s/
         Mayor
ATTEST:
Melissa M. Harrell /s/
Clerk
(SEAL)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Supplementation of code of ordinances
   
10.19   Public records
   
10.20   Confidential records
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Wahoo, Nebraska,
shall be designated as the Wahoo Municipal Code and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The city of Wahoo, Nebraska.
   CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL, or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the city
of Wahoo.
   CODE, THIS CODE, THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES, or WAHOO MUNICIPAL CODE. This city
code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters,
or sections.
   COUNTY. Saunders County, Nebraska.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities, the
public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies, and associations.
(Neb. RS 49-801(16))
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The state of Nebraska.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Mayor
and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general or permanent nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances of a general and permanent nature pertaining to
the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the
effective date of this code, provided that in construing the provisions of this
section, the following ordinances shall not be considered or held to be
ordinances of a general or permanent nature:
      (1)   Ordinances vacating streets and alleys.
      (2)   Ordinances authorizing or directing public improvements to be made.
      (3)   Ordinances levying taxes or special assessments.
      (4)   Ordinances granting any right, privilege, franchise, or license to
persons, firms, or corporations.
      (5)   Ordinances providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments
of indebtedness.
      (6)   Ordinances establishing grades.
      (7)   Real estate transactions.
      (8)   Any other ordinance which by nature would be considered special.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the Mayor and City Council requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes affecting publication, Neb. RS 17-613 and 19-3701
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. RS
17-100)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference" following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see Neb. RS
84-712 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code was derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1972, as subsequently amended, the 1972
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('72 Code, §      )."
§ 10.18 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Discretion. When preparing a supplement to this municipal code, the
codifier (that is, the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare
the supplement) may make formal nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate sections and
subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the ordinance printed in the supplement and make
changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this section," and the like, as may be
appropriate, or to "sections      to     " (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the code;
      (5)   Insert appropriate section numbers in references to code sections
such as "section     " or "sections      to     " which are not filled in prior
to adoption of an ordinance;
      (6)   Correct the spelling of words, correct obvious typographical
errors, correct erroneous division and hyphenation of words, capitalize or
decapitalize words, and make other similar changes in accordance with accepted
usage or for consistency with other provisions of the code;
      (7)   Change terminology for consistency with terminology used in other
provisions of the code; and
      (8)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to incorporate
ordinance material into the code while preserving the original meaning of the
ordinance sections.
   (B)   Prohibition. In no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the code and not repealed by any ordinance.
§ 10.19 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   Except as expressly stated by applicable Statutes of the State of
Nebraska and as incorporated in §
10.20 hereof, all citizens of the city, and all other persons interested in the
examination of the public records of the city, are hereby fully empowered and
authorized to examine such records and make memoranda copies thereof, subject
to the following:
      (1)   If the requester is using their own copying or photocopying
equipment, there shall be no charge provided the copying or photocopying is
done by the requester during the regular business hours, as established by the
governing body of the city, from time to time, in the city's administrative
office or at a location mutually agreeable to the requester and the Mayor of
the city.
      (2)   If the requester does not have their own copying or photocopying
equipment, and if the city has copying equipment reasonably available, said
copies may be obtained by the requester in any form designed by the requester
in which the public record is maintained or produced, including, but not
limited to, printouts, electronic data, disc, tapes, and photocopies, subject
to the following:
         (a)   The city may charge a fee for providing copies of such public
record which fee shall not exceed the actual cost of making the copies
available. Said actual cost shall have been established previous thereto by the
governing body of the city pursuant to a resolution and made available, in
written form, to the requester prior to the requester requesting copies of the
requested public record.
            1.   For photocopies, the actual cost of making the copies
available shall not exceed the amount of the reasonably calculated actual cost
of photocopies.
            2.   For printouts of computerized data on paper, the actual cost
of making copies available shall include the reasonably calculated actual cost
of computer run time and the cost of materials for making the copies.
            3.   For electronic data, the actual cost of making the copies
available shall include the reasonably calculated actual cost of the computer
run time, any necessary analysis and programing, and the production of the
report in the form furnished to the requester.
         (b)   The city shall not be required to produce or generate any public
record in a new or different form or format modified from that of the original
public record.
         (c)   If the city determines that the cost of the copies requested is
in excess of $50, the city may require the requester to furnish a deposit prior
to fulfilling such request.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a written request for access to or copies of a public
record, and if there is no legal basis for denial of access for copies, the
city shall provide to the requester as soon as practical and without delay, but
not more than four business days after actual receipt of the request, either:
      (1)   Access to the public record, or
      (2)   If copying equipment is reasonably available, copies of the public
record.
   (C)   If there is a legal basis for denial of access for copies, a written
denial of the request shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description of the contents of the records withheld and a
statement of the specific reason for the denial including citations to the
particular statute and subsection expressly providing the exception relied upon
as authority for the denial; and
      (2)   The name of the public official or employee responsible for the
decision to deny the request, and
      (3)   Notification to the requester of any administrative or judicial
right of review; or
      (4)   If the entire request cannot with reasonable good faith efforts be
fulfilled within four business days after actual receipt of the request due the
significant difficulty or the extensiveness of the request, a written
explanation, including the earliest practical date for fulfilling the request,
an estimate of the expected cost of any copies, and an opportunity for the
requester to modify or prioritize the items within the request.
   (D)   Any reasonably segregable public portion of a record shall be provided
to the requester as a public record upon request after deletion of the portions
which may be confidential in nature pursuant to §
10.20 hereof.
(Ord. 2123, passed 3-26-2013)
§ 10.20 CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS.
   Pursuant to Neb. RS 84-712.05, and this chapter, the following records of
the city shall be considered “confidential records”:
   (A)   Medical records, other than records of births and deaths, in any form
concerning any person.
   (B)   Records which represent the work product of the city's attorney and
the city which are related to preparation of litigation, labor negotiations, or
claims made by or against the city or which are confidential communications
between the attorney and the governing body of the city.
   (C)   Records developed or received by the city Police Department and other
public bodies charged with duties of investigation or examination of persons,
institutions, or businesses, when the records constitute a part of the
examination, investigation, intelligence information, citizen complaints or
inquires, information identification, or strategic or tactical information used
in law enforcement training, except those records developed or received
relating to the presence of an amount or concentration of alcohol or drugs in
any body fluid of any person.
   (D)   Appraisals or appraisal information and negotiation records concerning
the purchase or sale, by the city, of any interest in real or personal
property, prior to completion of the purchase or sale.
   (E)   Personal information in records regarding personnel of the city other
than salaries and routine directory information.
   (F)   Information solely pertaining to protection of the security of public
property and persons on or within public property, such as specific, unique
vulnerability assessments or specific, unique response plans, either of which
is intended to prevent or mitigate criminal acts the public disclosure of which
would create a substantial likelihood of endangering public safety or property;
computer or communications network schema, passwords, and user identification
names; guard schedules; lock combinations; or public utility infrastructure
specifications or design drawings the public disclosure of which would create a
substantial likelihood of endangering public safety or property, unless
otherwise provided by state or federal law.
   (G)   Personally identified private citizen account payment and customer use
information, credit information on others supplied in confidence, and customer
lists.
   (H)   Records or portions of records kept by the the city Library, which,
when examined with or without other records, reveal the identity of any library
patron using the library's materials or services.
   (I)   Job application materials submitted by applicants, other than
finalists, who have applied for employment by the city. JOB APPLICATION
MATERIALS means employment applications, resumes, reference letters, school
transcripts. FINALIST means any applicant who reaches the final pool of
applicants, numbering four or more, from which the successful applicant is to
be selected, or who is the original applicant when the final pool of applicants
numbers less than four or who is an original applicant and there are four or
fewer applicants.
   (J)   Social security numbers; credit card; charge card, or debit card
numbers and expiration dates; and financial account numbers supplied to the
city by citizens/customers of the city services.
(Ord. 2123, passed 3-26-2013)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this code of ordinances, set forth at length herein
or incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 dollars for each
offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours
of such failure to comply.
   (B)   Any official and/or employee of the city who shall violate the
provisions of applicable Statutes of the State of Nebraska and §
10.20 of this chapter regarding confidential records, shall be subject to
removal or impeachment or termination of employment and in addition shall be
deemed guilty of a Class III misdemeanor under prosecution by the Saunders
County Attorney or be determined to be guilty of an infraction under §
10.99 of the Wahoo Municipal Code if under prosecution by the attorney of the
city.
(Ord. 1712, passed 1-27-00; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 2-13-02; Am. Ord. 2123,
passed 3-26-2013)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Official corporate seal
   
11.02   Redistricting standards
§ 11.01 OFFICIAL CORPORATE SEAL.
   The official corporate seal of the city shall be kept in the office of the
City Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription: "Seal, City of Wahoo,
Saunders County, Nebraska." The City Clerk shall affix an impression of the
official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all other
official papers issued by order of the Mayor and Council and countersigned by
the City Clerk.
('72 Code, § 1-401)
Statutory reference:
   Authorization, Neb. RS 17-502
   Seal to be either embossed or ink, Neb. RS 64-118
§ 11.02 REDISTRICTING STANDARDS.
   As provided in Neb. RS 17-102, the Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska,
has the responsibility for establishing not less than two nor more than six
wards within the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, each ward to
contain, as nearly as practical, an equal portion of the population. The City
Council has established the following goals as a guide for determining the
distribution of population between the wards:
   (A)   Determining one person, one vote distribution of population among
wards. This concept shall be defended by limiting the difference in the
population between the ward with the smallest population and the ward with the
largest population to no more than 10%. The aforenoted deviation shall be
determined using the following process:
      (1)   Divide the total population of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska by the
number of wards. This establishes the “ideal ward” population.
      (2)   Calculate the “absolute deviation” by subtracting the proposed ward
population from the “ideal ward” population. This number represents the
difference between the “ideal ward” population and the ward's proposed
population.
      (3)   Calculate the “relative deviation” by dividing the “absolute
deviation” by the “ideal ward” population for each ward. This number represents
the percentage of deviation for a ward from the “ideal ward” population.
      (4)   Add the absolute deviation for the ward with the smallest
population and the absolute deviation for the ward with the largest population
and if the sum of these two percentages does not exceed 10%, the goal of one
person, one vote shall have been met.
   (B)   Establishing ward boundaries that are easy to describe to residents
(i.e. following streets in a straight line, or following geographical
boundaries).
   (C)   Limiting the number of ballots for other political subdivision
elections that must be created per ward.
   (D)   Obtaining a population of each ward that is as close to the “ideal
ward” population as possible.
(Ord. 2076, passed 11-22-2011)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; ORDINANCES
         
31.   APPOINTED OFFICIALS
         
32.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
33.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
         
34.   FIRE, POLICE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENTS
         
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
         
36.   ELECTIONS
         
37.   CIVIL DEFENSE
         
38.   UTILITY RATES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; ORDINANCES
Section
Mayor
   
30.01   Selection and duties
   
30.02   Vacancy
City Council
   
30.15   Selection and duties
   
30.16   President; Acting President
   
30.17   Organization
   
30.18   Vacancy
   
30.19   Restrictions on other employment or elective office
   
30.20   Standing committees
Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions
   
30.30   Grant of power
   
30.31   Introduction to ordinances
   
30.32   Style
   
30.33   Title
   
30.34   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders, bylaws
   
30.35   Publication or posting
   
30.36   Certificate of publication or posting
   
30.37   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
30.38   Amendments and revisions
   
30.39   Procedure for resolutions and motions
MAYOR
§ 30.01 SELECTION AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The
Mayor may vote on any matter that requires either a majority vote of the City
Council or a majority vote of all the elected members of the City Council if:
         (a)   The Mayor's vote is required due to the City Council members
being equally divided, or
         (b)   A majority of the City Council members or majority vote of all
the elected members cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy, or abstention of
one or more City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the Mayor is
deemed to be a member of the City Council.
      (2)   The Mayor shall have superintendence and control of all the
officers and affairs of the city and shall take care that the ordinances of the
city and all laws governing cities of the second class are complied with.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by
the City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of
or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim. If the Mayor
approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract, or claim, he or she
shall sign it, and it shall become effective. If the Mayor vetoes the
ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract, or any item or items of
appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the City Council stating
that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at
which the measure passed or within seven calendar days after the meeting. If
the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall notify the City
Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in
writing of the Mayor's veto. Any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to
enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the Mayor may
be passed over his or her veto by a vote of 2/3 of the members of the Council.
If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of
any claim, but fails to veto the measure within the time required by this
section, the measure shall become effective without his or her signature. The
Mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill or any claims bill,
and approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items vetoed may be passed
by the Council over the veto as in other cases.
   (C)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the City Council
such information and recommend such measures as, in his or her opinion, may
tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health, security,
ornament, comfort, and general prosperity of the city.
   (D)   The Mayor shall have the power, when he or she deems it necessary, to
require any officer of the city to exhibit his or her accounts or other papers,
and to make reports to the Council, in writing, touching any subject or matter
pertaining to his or her office.
   (E)   The Mayor shall have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him or her
by ordinance, over all places within five miles of the corporate limits of the
city, for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulation
thereof and shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in him or her by
ordinance, excepting taxation, within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
of the city.
   (F)   The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures, and to
grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the ordinances of
the city.
   (G)   The Mayor shall hold no other elective or appointive office or
employment with the city.
   (H)   The Mayor shall sign the City Clerk's minutes of all meetings of the
City Council, and he or she shall sign all resolutions that have been passed
and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the Council.
   (I)   The Mayor shall have such other duties as are reposed on the Mayor by
the laws of the State of Nebraska or as the Council may by resolution confer
upon the Mayor.
(’72 Code, § 1-101) (Am. Ord. 1045, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1246, passed 10-
10-85; Am. Ord. 2452, passed 1-23-24)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizing and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-110 through 17-
117 and 32-533
§ 30.02 VACANCY.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or in case of his or
her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall exercise the
office of Mayor until the vacancy is filled or the disability is removed, or in
case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
   (B)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be prevented from
assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to hold over the
term, but the office shall automatically become vacant and the President of the
Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until the vacancy is filled.
   (C)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause assume the office
of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on
the Council which shall be filled as provided in §
30.18.
('72 Code, § 1-106) (Ord. 1047, passed 12-11-75)
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 SELECTION AND DUTIES.
   The City Council shall consist of six members, who shall be elected and
serve for a four-year term. The City Council shall be the legislative division
of the city government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as
may be authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety, and assess such taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions.
('72 Code, § 1-103)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see Neb. RS 32-533
§ 30.16 PRESIDENT; ACTING PRESIDENT.
   The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who shall be
styled the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of
the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor and
the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one of its own body
to occupy that place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President of the
Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting President of the
Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the
President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council, while so acting,
shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the city as if done by the
elected Mayor.
(Neb. RS 17-148) ('72 Code, § 1-102)
§ 30.17 ORGANIZATION.
   City Council members of this city shall take office and commence their
duties on the first regular meeting in December following their election. The
newly elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law, together
with the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular
meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the
reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive
offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by
appointment. After the meeting has been called to order, the City Clerk shall
report to the City Council the names of all City Council members-elect who have
qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be spread upon
the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of the city shall
be represented by at least two Council members. No person shall be eligible who
is not at the time of election an actual resident of the ward for which the
person is qualified and a registered voter. If any City Council member moves
from the ward from which the Council member was elected, his or her office
shall thereby become vacant.
('72 Code, § 1-104) (Am. Ord. 1046, passed 12-11-75)
Statutory reference:
   Council member qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-104
Cross-reference:
   Division into wards, see §
36.12
§ 30.18 VACANCY.
   (A)   The office of a member of the City Council shall be vacant upon the
happening of any of the events specified in Neb. RS 19-3101 and 32-560, except
as provided in Neb. RS 32-561.
   (B)   Any vacancy on the City Council shall be filled as provided in
division (C) below.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) or (C)(3)
below or § 30.02, vacancies in city elective offices shall be filled by the
Mayor and Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy,
except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing
and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear
as a part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council shall at once give public
notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city or by posting in three public places in the city
the office vacated and the length of the unexpired term.
         (b)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council or place
the issue of filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting, at
which time, the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to
fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The regular or special
meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or within four weeks after
the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented. The Council
shall vote upon the nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of the nominee,
the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to receive a
majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall, at
the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to
receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at that meeting to
submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination, and the Council
shall continue to vote upon the nominations at such meeting until the vacancy
is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in
case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a
ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights,
including voting, as if that person were elected.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a city
elected office as provided in division (C)(1) above, call a special city
election to fill such vacancy.
      (3)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
city election to fill such vacancies. Candidates for such special election
shall file a candidate filing form pursuant to §
36.08.
(’72 Code, § 1-105) (Am. Ord. 1047, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1261, passed 11-
13-86; Am. Ord. 1361, passed 1-24-91; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord.
2021, passed 7-23-09; Am. Ord. 4781, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-567 through 32-572
§ 30.19 RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER EMPLOYMENT OR ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   The Mayor and members of the City Council shall hold no other elective
or appointive office or employment with the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTIVE OFFICE means any office which has candidates nominated or
elected at the time of a statewide primary election, any office which has
candidates nominated at the time of a statewide primary election and elected at
the time of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates
elected at the time of a statewide general election, any office which has
candidates nominated or elected at a city or village election, and any office
created by an act of the Legislature which has candidates elected at an
election and includes an office which is filled at an election held in
conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body created by an act of the
Legislature.
      HIGH ELECTIVE OFFICE means a member of the Legislature, an elective
office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII, section 3 or
10, of the Constitution of Nebraska, or a county, city, or school district
elective office.
(Neb. RS 32-109)
   (C)   No candidate for member of the Legislature or an elective office
described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII, section 3 or 10, of
the Constitution of Nebraska shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to
petition on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political
party or by party convention, caucus, or committee to fill a vacancy, or to be
a declared write-in candidate for more than one elective office to be filled at
the same election except for the position of delegate to a county, state, or
national political party convention. No candidate for any other high elective
office shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the ballot as a
candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by party convention,
caucus, or committee to fill a vacancy, or to be declared a write-in candidate
for more than one high elective office to be filled at the same election.
(Neb. RS 32-603)
   (D)   Except as provided in divisions (E) or (G) of this section, no person
shall be precluded from being elected or appointed to or holding an elective
office for the reason that he or she has been elected or appointed to or holds
another elective office.
   (E)   No person serving as a member of the legislature or in an elective
office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII, section 3 or
10, of the Constitution of Nebraska shall simultaneously serve in any other
elective office, except that such a person may simultaneously serve in another
elective office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the
annual meeting of a public body.
   (F)   Whenever an incumbent serving as a member of the Legislature or in an
elective office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII,
section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska assumes another elective
office, except an elective office filled at an election held in conjunction
with the annual meeting of a public body, the office first held by the
incumbent shall be deemed vacant.
   (G)   No person serving in a high elective office shall simultaneously serve
in any other high elective office.
   (H)   Notwithstanding divisions (E) through (G) of this section, any person
holding more than one high elective office upon September 13, 1997, shall be
entitled to serve the remainder of all terms for which he or she was elected or
appointed.
(Neb. RS 32-604) ('72 Code, § 1-107) (Ord. 1635, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   Merger of offices or employment, see Neb. RS 17-108.02
§ 30.20 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   At the annual organizational meeting of the Mayor and City Council,
the Mayor shall appoint members to such standing committees as the City Council
may by ordinance or resolution create. Except as provided in §
33.07 of this title, membership of each standing committee shall consist of
three Council members. The Mayor shall attempt, through appointment, though it
shall not be mandatory that there be one Council member from each of the three
wards of the city on each Council committee. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio
member of each standing committee. Members of the standing committees shall
serve a term of office of two years. The purposes of the various standing
committees shall be to recommend policy for consideration by the City Council;
to allow the various Council persons on the committees to develop expertise in
a specified area; to review specific problems or situations with the assigned
areas; to provide recommendations to the Mayor and Council, as a whole. It is
not the purpose of the committees to usurp the administrative powers of the
Mayor or City Administrator. The various standing committees shall meet on a
periodic basis and shall keep accurate minutes and records of their meetings.
Staff of the city shall be available to lend assistance to the various
committees. The minutes and records of the various committee meetings shall be
presented to the Mayor and Council at a regular monthly meeting. (’72 Code, §
2-101)
   (B)   The following shall constitute the standing committees of the Council
of the city and their statement of purpose.
      (1)   General Committee. This committee's responsibility shall be to
serve as a liaison with the City Planning Commission, Board of Adjustment, and
Police Department, fire Department and Emergency Medical Services Department.
City staff to assist this committee shall consist of the Building Inspector,
the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and/or EMS Director, and City Administrator.
      (2)   Personnel and Finance Committee. This committee's responsibility
shall be to review the nonproprietary city budget, recommend financing, taxes
and fees, review the nonproprietary funds audits, recommend investment
policies, review the Mayor's recommendations regarding employee wage and
benefit packages, and review personnel policies which are city-wide in scope.
City staff to assist this committee shall consist of the City Clerk, City
Treasurer, and City Administrator.
      (3)   Park, Recreation and Cultural Committee. This committee's
responsibility shall be to serve as a liaison with the Parks and Recreation
Departments, and Library Board. City staff to assist this committee shall
consist of the Clerk Parks and Recreation Director, Librarian and City
Administrator.
      (4)   Streets and Sanitation Committee. This committee's responsibility
shall be to review capital improvement projects, operating policies, and
procedures regarding streets, cemeteries, solid waste disposal, and storm
sewers. City staff to assist this committee shall consist of the Street
Commissioner and/or Cemetery Sexton, and the City Administrator.
(’72 Code, § 2-102)
      (5)   Economic Development Committee.
         (a)   The duties of the members of this committee shall be to review
and recommend policies regarding housing and economic development in the city.
In addition, two members of this committee shall serve on the Wahoo Economic
Development Committee as described in division (b) of this section. City staff
to assist this committee shall consist of the Utility General Manager and City
Administrator.
         (b)   The Wahoo Economic Development Committee shall be a committee of
the Board of Directors of the Greater Wahoo Development Foundation, a Nebraska
nonprofit corporation, and shall be comprised of two representatives of the
Council of the city, two representatives appointed by the Greater Wahoo
Development Foundation, one representative appointed by the Wahoo Chamber of
Commerce Board of Directors, and one representative appointed by the Board of
Directors of Wahoo Industries, Inc., a Nebraska profit corporation. Said
individuals shall constitute the governing body of the Wahoo Economic
Development Committee whose purpose shall be to promote economic development in
the city and surrounding area. At the annual organizational meeting of the City
Council, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall appoint
two voting representatives and one alternate representative of the Mayor and
Council of the city to serve on the Wahoo Economic Development Committee. The
alternate representative may vote only in the absence of one of the other
representatives of the Mayor and Council of the city.
(’72 Code, § 2-103) (Ord. 1445, passed 12-9-93; Am. Ord. 1815, passed 10-24-02;
Am. Ord. 2269, passed 2-8-18; Am. Ord. 2302, passed 3-14-19)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS
§ 30.30 GRANT OF POWER.
   The City Council may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations, and
resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the state of Nebraska, as may be
expedient for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of the city
and its trade, commerce, and manufactories.
(Neb. RS 17-505) ('72 Code, § 1-601) (Am. Ord. 1595, passed 9-25-97)
§ 30.31 INTRODUCTION TO ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the Council Body in one of the
following ways:
   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council, read aloud the
substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the City Clerk for
future consideration; or
   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the Council, shall read aloud the substance of the ordinance
and file it for future consideration.
('72 Code, § 1-602) (Am. Ord. 1596, 9-25-97)
§ 30.32 STYLE.
   The style of all city ordinances shall be:
   "Be it ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska:…."
(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-605)
§ 30.33 TITLE.
   No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly expressed in the
title.
(Neb. RS 17-614) ('72 Code, § 1-606)
Statutory reference:
   Additional requirements, see Neb. RS 17-614
§ 30.34 READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS.
   (A)   (1) All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or
payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of
a majority of all elected members of the City Council. The Mayor may vote on
any such matter if (i) the Mayor's vote is required due to the City Council
members being equally divided or (ii) a majority vote of all the elected
members of the City Council cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy, or
abstention of one or more City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the
Mayor is deemed to be a member of the City Council.
      (2)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title
on three different days unless ¾ of the City Council vote to suspend this
requirement. Such requirement shall not be suspended (i) for any ordinance for
the annexation of territory, or the redrawing of boundaries for City Council
election districts or wards or (ii) as otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read
by title and then moved for final passage.
      (4)   Three-fourths of the City Council may require a reading of any such
ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this
section.
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and every
resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City Council, the yeas and
nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance, or
any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number
of members elected to the City Council shall be required. All appointments of
the officers by the City Council shall be made viva voce, and the concurrence
of a like majority shall be required, and the names of those, and for whom they
voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment, shall be recorded. The
requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a city
which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
(’72 Code, § 1-603) (Am. Ord. 1482, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 9-25-
97; Am. Ord. 2451, passed 1-23-24)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-614 and 17-616
§ 30.35 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published one time, within 15 days after they are passed:
   (A)   In some newspaper published in the city or, if no paper is published
in the city, then by posting a written or printed copy in each of three public
places in the city; or
   (B)   In book or pamphlet form.
(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-604) (Am. Ord. 1266, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord.
1598, passed 9-25-97)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency ordinance, see Neb. RS 17-613
§ 30.36 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   The passage, approval, and publication or posting of an ordinance shall be
sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the City
Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what
paper the ordinance was published, or when and by whom and where the ordinance
was posted.
(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-608)
Statutory reference:
   Passage, rules, and regulations, see Neb. RS 17-615
§ 30.37 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
30.35 and division (B) of this section, an ordinance for the government of the
city which has been adopted by the City Council without submission to the
voters of the city shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage of
the ordinance.
(Neb. RS 19-3701)
   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other
impending danger, failure of a public utility, or any other emergency requiring
its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation
of the Mayor and the posting thereof in at least three of the most public
places in the city. Such emergency ordinance shall recite the emergency, be
passed by a ¾ vote of the City Council, and be entered of record on the City
Clerk's minutes.
(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-607) (Am. Ord. 1599, passed 9-25-97)
§ 30.38 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the city and modifications to zoning or building
districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 17-614) ('72 Code, § 1-609) (Am. Ord. 1600, passed 9-25-97)
§ 30.39 PROCEDURE FOR RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   (A)   Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the methods
prescribed for the introduction of ordinances. After their introduction, they
shall be fully and distinctly read one time in the presence and hearing of a
majority of the members elected to the Council. The issue raised by said
resolutions or motions shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of
parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of the Council. A majority vote
shall be required to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution
or motion shall be by roll call vote.
('72 Code, § 1-610)
   (B)   A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a member
voting with the majority, or who was absent when the vote was taken, but such
motion to reconsider must be made before the expiration of the third regular
meeting after the initial consideration of the question. When any question is
under debate, no motion shall be made, entertained or seconded, except the
previous question, a motion to table, and to adjourn. Each of said motions
shall be decided without debate. Any of the rules of the Governing Body for
meetings may be suspended by a 2/3 vote of the members present. In all cases in
which provisions are not made by these rules, Roberts Rules of Order is the
authority by which the Governing Body shall decide all procedural disputes that
may arise.
CHAPTER 31: APPOINTED OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Appointment; removal; listing
   
31.02   Merger of offices
   
31.03   Vacancies
Officials
   
31.15   City Attorney
   
31.16   Park and Recreation Director
   
31.17   Reserved
   
31.18   City Physician
   
31.19   Police Chief
   
31.20   City Police
   
31.21   Fire Chief
   
31.22   City Engineer
   
31.23   Special Engineer
   
31.24   City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer
   
31.25   Street Commissioner
   
31.26   Director of Civil Defense
   
31.27   Building Inspector
   
31.28   Electrical Inspector
   
31.29   Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector
   
31.30   City Clerk
   
31.31   City Treasurer
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; LISTING.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint such
officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law. The
Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint such a number
of regular police officers as may be necessary. The City Council may establish
and provide for the appointment of members of a law enforcement reserve force
as provided by law.
   (B)   All appointed officials may be removed at any time by the Mayor except
police officers, who may be removed from office pursuant to §
34.32.
   (C)   The appointed officials to be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council as required by ordinance or otherwise required by law,
shall be as follows:
      (1)   City Attorney; see §
31.15 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (2)   City Physician: see §
31.18 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (3)   Police Chief; see §
31.19 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (4)   EMS Director; see §
34.50 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (5)   City Engineer; see §
31.22 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (6)   Special Engineer; see §
31.23 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (7)   City Administrator; see §
31.24 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (8)   City Clerk; see §
31.30 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (9)   City Treasurer; see §
31.31 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (10)   Street Commissioner; see §
31.25 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (11)   Director of Civil Defense; see §
31.26 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (12)   Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator; see §
31.27 of the Wahoo Municipal Code and Section 9.03 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Wahoo;
      (13)   Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector; see §
31.29 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (14)   Park and Recreation Director; see §
31.16 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (15)   Fire Chief; see §
31.21 of the Wahoo Municipal Code;
      (16)   Librarian; see the City of Wahoo - City of Wahoo Library Board
Agreement dated June 30, 2016;
      (17)   Utilities General Manager; see §
33.07(F)(1) of the Wahoo Municipal Code.
   (D)   Any appointed official appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
City Council, to two or more appointed positions shall not receive a salary
greater than the highest salary of the appointed office to which said person is
appointed.
(’72 Code, § 1-201) (Am. Ord. 1086, passed 2-24-77; Am. Ord. 1593, passed 9-25-
97; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 2-8-18; Am. Ord. 2273, passed 2-22-18; Am. Ord. 2296,
passed 11-29-18)
Statutory reference:
   Appointments generally, see Neb. RS 17-107
   Water Commissioner, see Neb. RS 17-541
   Law enforcement reserve force, see Neb. RS 81-1438
§ 31.02 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The City Council may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and merge any
elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of any
such offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member, with any other
elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such offices
or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or employments
may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time. The offices or
employments so merged and combined shall always be construed to be separate and
the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a consolidation of
official duties only. The salary or compensation of the officer or employee
holding the merged or combined offices or employments or offices and
employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for
the salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment, or employments
so merged and combined. For purposes of this section, volunteer firefighters
and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers.
(Neb. RS 17-108.02) ('72 Code, § 1-202) (Am. Ord. 1262, passed 11-13-86; Am.
Ord. 1362, passed 1-24-91)
§ 31.03 VACANCIES.
   In the event of a vacancy in any office of any appointed official, except
when the same occurred through the expiration of a term of office, the Mayor
shall appoint another person to fill such office for the unexpired term, with
the advice and consent of three-fourths of the members of the Council.
('72 Code, § 1-203)
OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney is the city's legal advisor, and as such he or she shall
commence, prosecute, and defend all suits on behalf of the city. When requested
by the Mayor and Council, he or she shall attend meetings of the Council, and
shall advise any city official in all matters of law in which the interests of
the city may be involved. He or she shall draft such ordinances, bonds,
contracts, and other writings as may be required in the administration of the
affairs of the city. He or she shall examine all bonds, contracts, and
documents on which the Mayor and Council will be required to act, and attach
thereto a brief statement in writing to all such instruments and documents as
to whether or not the document is in legal and proper form. He or she shall
prepare complaints, attend, and prosecute violations of the city ordinances
when directed to do so by the Mayor and Council. Without direction, he or she
shall appear and prosecute all cases for violation of the city ordinances that
have been appealed to and are pending in any higher court. He or she shall also
examine, when requested to do so by the Mayor and Council, the ordinance
records and advise and assist the City Clerk as much as may be necessary to the
end that each procedural step will be taken in the passage of each ordinance to
insure that they will be valid and subsisting local laws in so far as their
passage and approval are concerned. The Council shall have the right to
compensate the City Attorney for legal services on such terms as the Mayor and
Council and the City Attorney may agree and to employ any additional legal
assistance as may be necessary out of the funds of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-610) ('72 Code, § 1-204)
§ 31.16 PARK AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.
   The Park and Recreation Director shall, subject to the orders and directives
of the Mayor and Council, have the general charge, direction, and control of
all parks and recreational facilities, recreation programs, and senior citizen
services of the city and shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and
Council may require. It shall be the duty and responsibilities of the Director
to establish, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, rules and regulations
for the governance of the parks, recreation facilities, and senior citizen
facilities of the city as deemed necessary for their preservation and to
maintain their usefulness and efficiency. The Director shall, subject to
approval by the Mayor and Council, have the power to fix and impose, by general
rules, penalties, and forfeiture for trespass upon or injury to the parks,
recreational, and senior citizen facilities or for violation of any rule or
regulation and to fix and impose reasonable fees for the use of the parks,
recreational, and senior citizen facilities of the city and provide rules and
regulations for the closing of parks, recreational, and senior citizen
facilities, in whole or in part, to the general public, and charge admission
thereto during such closing. Any rule and regulation for which the city
declares a monetary penalty for the violation thereof shall be enforceable by
the city police department or any other law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction in the city. Said penalty shall first be resolved through the
Bureau of Violations of the city as found in §
70.20 of this code before proceeding through the court system of the State of
Nebraska.
(Ord. 2269, passed 2-8-18)
§ 31.17 RESERVED.
§ 31.18 CITY PHYSICIAN.
   The City Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health of the city and
perform the duties devolving upon him or her as the medical advisor of the said
board. In all injuries where a liability may be asserted against the city, the
City Physician shall immediately investigate the said injuries, the extent
thereof, and the circumstances. He or she shall then report the results of his
or her investigation with the name of the party injured and all other persons
who may have personal knowledge of the matter. He or she shall make all
physical examinations, and necessary laboratory tests incident thereto, and
issue such health certificates as are required by ordinance. For the purpose of
making examinations of the sanitary conditions of the property and the state of
health of the inhabitants therein, he or she shall have the right at all
reasonable hours to go upon and enter all premises, buildings, or other
structures in the city. He or she shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him or her by the laws of the state of Nebraska and the ordinances
of the city. When ordered to do so by the Mayor and Council he or she shall
disinfect or fumigate the premises or persons in or about the premises when the
premises are quarantined, and to call upon indigent sick persons, and perform
other professional services at the direction of the Mayor and Council. The City
Physician shall receive as compensation for his or her services such sum as the
Mayor and Council may from time to time set. He or she shall receive no
compensation for his or her services as a member of the City Board of Health.
(Neb. RS 17-121, 17-208) ('72 Code, § 1-209)
§ 31.19 POLICE CHIEF.
   The City Police Chief shall direct the police work of the city and shall be
responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He or she shall act as Health
Inspector and Building Inspector, except in the event the city appoints another
person. He or she shall file the necessary complaints in cases arising out of
violations of city ordinances and shall make all necessary reports required by
the city ordinances or the laws of the state of Nebraska. The Chief of Police
shall have control and management of all matters relating to the Police
Department, its officers, and members, and shall have the custody and control
of all property and books belonging to the Department. It shall be his or her
duty to protect the rights of persons and property. He or she shall provide a
proper police force at fires. He or she shall take notice of all nuisances,
impediments, obstructions, and defects in the public ways and property. He
shall execute the processes issued from the proper court and shall cause all
persons arrested to be brought before the proper judicial official for trial as
speedily as possible. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to assist
the Police Chief in the prevention of any crime or in the arrest of any person
when so requested by the Police Chief.
('72 Code, § 1-210)
Statutory reference:
   Merger of offices, see Neb. RS 17-107
   Chief of Police designated as secretary and quarantine officer of Health
Board, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 31.20 CITY POLICE.
   The City Police, whether regular, or special shall have the power to arrest
all offenders against the laws of the state of Nebraska or the city, by day or
by night, and keep the said offenders in the county jail, or some other place
to prevent their escape until trial can be held before the proper official of
the state of Nebraska or the city. They shall have full power and authority to
call on any person whenever necessary to assist them in performing public
duties, and failure, neglect, or refusal to render such assistance shall be
deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine. Every city police
officer shall be expected to be conversant and knowledgeable with the city and
state laws, and no law enforcement official shall have any interest in any
establishment having a liquor license. City police officers shall have the duty
to file such complaints and reports as may be required by the city ordinances
and the laws of the state of Nebraska. Any city police officer who shall
willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make an arrest or who purposely and
willfully fails to make a complaint after an arrest is made shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined. It shall be
unlawful for the City Council to retain any city police officer in that
position after he or she has been duly convicted of the willful violation of
any law of the United States of America, the state of Nebraska, or any
ordinance of the city, except minor traffic violations. It shall be the duty of
every city police officer making a lawful arrest to search all persons in the
presence of some other person, whenever possible, and shall carefully keep and
produce to the proper judicial official upon the trial everything found upon
the person of such prisoners. Badges shall be furnished to the city police by
the city. Any member who shall lose or destroy the same shall be required to
pay the replacement costs, and in the event that any member shall leave the
force, he or she shall immediately deliver his or her badge to the Police
Chief. The City Council may from time to time provide the city police with such
uniforms, equipment, and transportation as may be essential in the performance
of their official duties.
(Neb. RS 17-118, 17-124, 17-213) ('72 Code, § 1-211) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish, see Neb. RS 17-118 and 17-124
§ 31.21 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Duties and powers. The City Fire Chief shall enforce all laws and
ordinances covering the prevention of fires; the storage and use of explosives
and flammable substances; the installation of fire alarm systems; the
maintenance of fire extinguishing equipment; the regulation of fire escapes;
and the inspection of all premises requiring adequate fire escapes. He or she
shall within two days investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires
arising within his or her jurisdiction. The State Fire Marshal shall have the
right to supervise in the enforcement of such codes. He or she shall, on or
before the first day in April and October of each year, cause the secretary to
file with the City Clerk and the Clerk of the District Court a certified copy
of the rolls of all members in good standing in their respective companies in
order to obtain the exemptions provided by law. He or she shall have the power
during the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours thereafter to arrest any
suspected arsonist or any person for hindering the department's efforts,
conducting himself or herself in a noisy and disorderly manner, or any person
who refuses to obey any lawful order by the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief or an assistant in charge of operations at a fire may command
the services of any person present at any fire in extinguishing the same or in
the removal and protection of property. Failure to obey such an order shall be
an offense punishable by a fine. The Fire Chief shall have the right to enter
at all reasonable hours into buildings, and upon all premises within his or her
jurisdiction for the purpose of examining the same for fire hazards and related
dangers.
   (B)   Procedure for appointment. The members of the Fire Department shall,
at the time of each annual meeting of the Fire Department, recommend to the
Mayor of the city one or more persons for the office of Fire Chief of the Fire
Department. The Mayor of the city, upon receiving the names of the candidates
for Fire Chief from the Fire Department shall interview the candidates and
determine that the candidates possess the qualifications to serve in such
command capacity. In determining the qualifications of the candidates, the
Mayor shall employ uniform standards as adopted by the membership of the Fire
Department, as set forth in writing and provided to the Mayor. After completing
the above, the Mayor will make a recommendation to the Council as to the person
to be the Fire Chief for the city. The Fire Chief, upon being confirmed by the
Council, shall hold office until his or her successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
(’72 Code, § 1-212) (Am. Ord. 1049, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 2273, passed 2-
22-18)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to procure equipment, organize companies, and prescribe rules, see
Neb. RS 17-147
   Authority to enforce ordinances by imposing fine, see Neb. RS 17-505
   Membership, rolls, and filings, see Neb. RS 35-102
   Life insurance required, see Neb. RS 35-108
   Investigations and reports required, see Neb. RS 81-506
   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum Products and
Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see §§
34.01 et seq.
§ 31.22 CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Engineer shall accurately make all plats, sections, and maps as may
be necessary under the direction of the City Council. Upon request, he or she
shall make estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or
furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates, and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of
culverts, bridges, curbing, and gutters and the improvement of streets and
erection and repair of buildings, and shall perform such other duties as the
City Council may require.
('72 Code, § 1-213) (Am. Ord. 1815, passed 10-24-02)
Statutory reference:
   Duties related to sewers, see Neb. RS 17-150 and 17-919
   Duties related to annexation, see Neb. RS 17-405
   Duties related to public works, see Neb. RS 17-568.01
   Engineers and Architects Regulation Act, see Neb. RS 81-3401 through 81-3455
§ 31.23 SPECIAL ENGINEER.
   The City Council may employ a Special Engineer to make or assist the City
Engineer in making any particular estimate, survey, or other work. The Special
Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys and all other
work done for the city. He or she shall, when directed by the City Council,
accurately make all plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be necessary in
the judgment of the City Council. He or she shall, upon request of the City
Council, make estimates of the costs of labor and material which may be done or
furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates, and
calculations necessary for the establishment of grades, bridges, building of
culverts, curbing and gutters, and the improvement of streets and erection and
repair of buildings, and shall perform such other duties as the City Council
may require. All records of the Special Engineer shall be public records which
shall belong to the city and shall be turned over to his or her successor.
('72 Code, § 1-214) (Am. Ord. 1199, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1815, passed 10-
24-02)
Statutory reference:
   Duties related to sewers, see Neb. RS 17-150 and 17-919
   Duties related to annexation, see Neb. RS 17-405
   Authority to employ special engineer, see Neb. RS 17-568
   Duties related to public works, see Neb. RS 17-568.01
   Engineers and Architects Regulation Act, see Neb. RS 81-3401 through 81-3455
§ 31.24 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the city the office of City
Administrator. The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer
of the city and shall serve as administrative agent for the Mayor and City
Council in the supervision of the offices and appointed boards/committees of
the city. All the departments and/or boards/committees of the city shall be
under the administrative supervision and direction of the City Administrator,
and the Mayor and Council shall deal with all departments and/or boards/
committees of the city and employees through the City Administrator. The job
description of the City Administrator shall be on file at the city hall and may
be amended from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The City Administrator
shall receive such compensation and allowance as the Mayor and Council may
provide in the same manner as other employees of the city.
   (B)   The office of City Administrator shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor by and with the consent of the majority of the City Council and shall
serve at their pleasure unless removed by a majority vote of the City Council.
The City Administrator need not be a resident of the city at the time of their
appointment, but shall become a resident of the city or live within the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city within such reasonable time as
the Council and Mayor may allow. The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation and allowances as the Mayor and Council may provide in the same
manner as other employees of the city.
(Ord. 2290, passed 10-25-18)
§ 31.25 STREET COMMISSIONER.
   The City Street Commissioner shall, subject to the orders and directives of
the Mayor and Council, have general charge, direction, and control of all work
on the streets, sidewalks, culverts, bridges, and cemeteries of the city, and
shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may require. It shall
be his or her responsibility to see that gutters and drains therein function
properly, and that the same are kept in good repair. He or she shall, at the
request of the Mayor and Council, make a detailed report to the Council on the
condition of the streets, sidewalks, culverts, alleys, bridges, and cemeteries
of the city, and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs,
extensions, additions, and additional employees as he or she may believe are
needed to maintain a satisfactory street system and to maintain the cemeteries
in the city along with an estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall assume
such other duties as the Mayor and Council may direct.
(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-119, 17-214) ('72 Code, § 1-216) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-
12-05)
§ 31.26 DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE.
   The Director shall be the executive head of the Department of Civil Defense,
and shall have responsibility for the organization, administration, and
operation of the civil defense and disaster control organization subject to the
direction and control of the Mayor. The Director of Civil Defense shall be
responsible for public relations, information and education regarding all
phases of civil defense. The Director shall be responsible for the development
of a civil defense and disaster control plan and upon adoption shall be
responsible for such implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it
on a current state of readiness at all times. The Director shall coordinate all
activities for civil defense and disaster control and shall maintain liaison
and cooperate with all other interested and affected agencies, public and
private. The Director shall coordinate the recruitment and training of
volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the
city for civil defense purposes. The Director may issue proper insignia and
papers to civil defense workers and other people directly concerned with civil
defense. The Director of Civil Defense is hereby authorized to exercise the
powers granted to the Mayor in regard to civil defense either in the absence or
inability to serve of the Mayor or the President of the Council.
('72 Code, § 1-217)
Cross reference:
   Civil Defense, see
Ch. 37
§ 31.27 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The City Building Inspector shall conduct surveys and make inspections in
any area of the city to determine whether all buildings and structures are in
compliance with the city ordinances. He or she shall investigate all complaints
whether they are verbal, written, or in the form of a petition alleging, and
charging that a violation of the city ordinances exists, and that a building or
structure is unfit or unsafe for human habitation. The Building Inspector is
authorized upon properly identifying himself or herself to enter, inspect,
survey, and investigate between the hours of 8:00 a.m., and 5:00 p.m., or at
any time if an emergency exists, or if requested by the owner, or occupant
thereof. He or she shall keep records of all complaints received, inspection
reports, orders, and complaints issued. The records shall be available for
public inspection, and he or she shall prepare an annual report including
statistics based on the records kept. The Building Inspector or his or her duly
authorized agent, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of
his or her official duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself liable
personally and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages
that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act required or by
reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her official duties.
Any suit brought against the Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized
agent, because of any such act or omission performed by him or her shall be
defended by the legal department of the city until final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector shall have no financial interest in the
furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration,
or maintenance of a building, except where he or she is the owner of a
building, and he or she shall not act as an agent for any said dealer or as an
agent for the sale, lease, or rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector
shall report to the Mayor and Council as often as they may deem necessary and
shall have such other duties and issue such permits as they may direct. The
Building Inspector may be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause by
the Mayor and Council. He or she shall not be removed from office except after
he or she has been given a full opportunity to be heard concerning the specific
charges of misbehavior or incompetence alleged. During the temporary absence or
disability of the Building Inspector, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
three-fourths of the members of the City Council, shall designate an acting
Building Inspector for such temporary absence or period of disability. When no
other official is named, the Chief of Police shall be the acting Building
Inspector.
('72 Code, § 1-218)
Cross reference:
   Building Inspector, see §§
150.080 et seq
§ 31.28 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   All new electrical installation and services shall be inspected by the
State Electrical Inspector.
   (B)   The City Electrical Utility Department, or its representative, shall
enforce all laws relating to electrical wiring and connections thereto. When
acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or her official
duties, the representative shall not himself or herself be held personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of
any act required by him or her, or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in the discharge of his or her
official duties, and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into
any building, structure, or premise at any reasonable hour. The Electrical
Utility Department, or its representative, shall perform such other duties and
issue any permits that the Mayor and Council may direct.
('72 Code, § 1-219)
Statutory reference:
   Related provision, see Neb. RS 17-107
§ 31.29 PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL INSPECTOR.
   The City Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating
to the installation of plumbing and mechanical systems and connections thereto.
When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or her
official duties, he or she shall not himself or herself be held personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of
any act required by him or her or by reason of any act, or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in the discharge of his or her
official duties, and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into
any building, structure or premise at any reasonable hour. He or she shall
perform such other duties and issue any permits that the Mayor and Council may
direct. The Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector may be removed at any time for
good and sufficient cause by the Mayor and Council. The Plumbing and Mechanical
Inspector shall not be removed except by a two-thirds vote of the Council. The
Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector shall post a bond with the city in such sum
as the Mayor and Council may set by resolution.
('72 Code, § 1-220)
Statutory reference:
   Related provision, see Neb. RS 17-107
§ 31.30 CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall have custody of all laws and ordinances of the city.
The job description of the City Clerk shall be on file at the city hall and may
be amended from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The City Clerk shall
receive such compensation and allowance as the Mayor and Council may provide in
the same manner as other employees of the city.
(Ord. 2290, passed 10-25-18)
Statutory reference:
   Additional duties of Clerk, see Neb. RS 17-605
   Examination of public records free of charge, see Neb. RS 84-712
   Penalty on Clerk for violations of Neb. RS 19-1101 through 19-1103, see Neb.
RS 19-1104
   Publication of proceedings of Council, see Neb. RS 19-1101 et seq.
   Publication rates, see Neb. RS 33-141 through 33-143
   Records Management Act, see Neb. RS 84-1201 through 84-1227
§ 31.31 CITY TREASURER.
   The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the
city. The job description of the City Treasurer shall be on file at the city
hall and may be amended from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The City
Treasurer shall receive such compensation and allowance as the Mayor and
Council may provide in the same manner as other employees of the city.
(Ord. 2290, passed 10-25-18)
Statutory reference:
   Annual report required to be published, see Neb. RS 19-1101 and 19-1103
   Penalty on Treasurer for violations of Neb. RS 19-1101 through 19-1103, see
Neb. RS 19-1104
   Statutory duties of Treasurer, see Neb. RS 17-606 through 17-609
CHAPTER 32: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Meetings
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
32.03   Videoconferencing, requirements
   
32.031   Telephone conference calls; when allowed
   
32.04   Closed sessions
   
32.05   Emergency meetings
   
32.06   Minutes
   
32.07   Votes
   
32.08   Notice to news media
   
32.09   Public participation
   
32.10   Order of business
   
32.11   Parliamentary procedure
   
32.12   Change in office
   
32.13   Regular meetings; quorum
   
32.14   Special meetings
Bonds and Oaths
   
32.25   Bonds; form
   
32.26   Oath of office; city officials
Compensation
   
32.40   City officials
   
32.41   Conflict of interest involving contracts
   
32.42   Job description adopted by reference
   
32.43   Pay schedule; exceptions
Employee Retirement Plan
   
32.55   Adopted by reference
   
32.56   Authorization
   
32.57   Only for benefit of employees of city
   
32.58   Effective date
Risk Management
   
32.70   Intergovernmental risk management
MEETINGS
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEETINGS. All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or informal, of a
public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business,
formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.
(Neb. RS 84-1409(2)) ('72 Code, § 1-501)
   PUBLIC BODY.
      (1)   (a)   The City Council;
         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter created by
constitution, statute, ordinance, or otherwise pursuant to law; and
         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of the bodies
designated in this definition unless a quorum of the public body attends a
subcommittee meeting or unless such subcommittees are holding hearings, making
policy, or taking formal action on behalf of their parent body.
(Neb. RS 84-1409(1) ('72 Code, § 1-502)
(Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1421,
passed 2-25-93)
§ 32.02 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   The formation of public policy is public business and may not be
conducted in secret. Every meeting of a public body shall be open to the public
in order that citizens may exercise their democratic privilege of attending and
speaking at meetings of public bodies, except as otherwise provided by the
State Constitution, federal statutes, and the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-
1407 et seq.
   (B)   (1)   Each public body shall give reasonable advance publicized notice
of the time and place of each meeting as provided in division (B)(2) below. The
notice shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and to the
public.
      (2)   The notice shall be given by:
         (a)   1.   a.   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation
within the public body's jurisdiction that is finalized for printing prior to
the time and date of the meeting;
               b.   Posting on such newspaper's website, if available; and
               c.   Posting on a statewide website established and maintained
as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers.
            2.   Such notice shall be placed in the newspaper and on the
websites by the newspaper.
         (b)   1.   a.   Posting to the newspaper's website, if available; and
               b.   Posting on a statewide website established and maintained
as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers if no
edition of a newspaper of general circulation within the public body's
jurisdiction is to be finalized for printing prior to the time and date of the
meeting.
            2.   Such notice shall be placed in the newspaper and on the
websites by the newspaper.
         (c)   Posting written notice in three conspicuous public places in
such city, village, or district. Such notice shall be posted by the public body
in the same three places for each meeting.
      (3)   (a)   In case of refusal, neglect, or inability of the newspaper to
publish the notice, the public body shall:
            1.   Post such notice on its website, if available;
            2.   Submit a post on a statewide website established and
maintained as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers;
and
            3.   Post such notice in a conspicuous public place in such public
body's jurisdiction.
         (b)   The public body shall keep a written record of such posting. The
record of such posting shall be evidence that such posting was done as required
and shall be sufficient to fulfill the requirement of publication.
      (4)   Each public body shall record the methods and dates of the notice
in its minutes.
      (5)   The notice shall contain an agenda of subjects known at the time of
the publicized notice or a statement that the agenda, which shall be kept
continually current, is readily available for public inspection at the office
of the public body during normal business hours. Agenda items shall be
sufficiently descriptive to give the public reasonable notice of the matters to
be considered at the meeting. Except for items of an emergency nature, the
agenda shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled
commencement of the meeting or 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the corporate limits of the city.
The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of
an emergency nature only at such public meeting.
(Ord. 2485, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings required to be public, see Neb. RS 84-1408
   Notice, agenda, and the like, see Neb. RS 84-1411
§ 32.03 VIDEOCONFERENCING, REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation
Act or the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act or of the City Council of a risk
management pool or advisory committee organized in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by means of videoconferencing
if:
      (1)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;
      (2)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's right
to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such
as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided
if videoconferencing were not used;
      (3)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the videoconference;
      (4)   At least one member of the City Council or advisory committee is
present at each site of the videoconference; and
      (5)   No more than one-half of the City Council's or advisory committee's
meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.
   (B)   Videoconferencing shall not be used to circumvent any of the public
government purposes established in this subchapter.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VIDEOCONFERENCING. Conducting a meeting involving participants at two or
more locations through the use of audio-video equipment which allows
participants at each location to hear and see each meeting participant at each
other location, including public input. Interaction between meeting
participants shall be possible at all meeting locations.
(Neb. RS 84-1409) ('72 Code, § 1-515) (Ord. 1594, passed 9-25-97)
§ 32.031 TELEPHONE CONFERENCE CALLS; WHEN ALLOWED.
   (A)   A meeting of the governing body of an entity formed under the
Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act or of the governing
body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by
telephone conference call if:
      (1)   The territory represented by the member public agencies of the
entity or pool covers more than one county;
      (2)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which identifies each
telephone conference location at which a member of the entity's or pool's
governing body will be present;
      (3)   All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the notice are
located within public buildings used by members of the entity or pool or at a
place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;
      (4)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's right
to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such as public
comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided if a
telephone conference call was not used;
      (5)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the telephone conference call;
      (6)   At least one member of the governing body of the entity or pool is
present at each site of the telephone conference call identified in the public
notice;
      (7)   The telephone conference call lasts no more than one hour; and
      (8)   No more than one-half of the entity's or pool's meetings in a
calendar year are held by telephone conference call.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of
consultants, members of the press, and other nonmembers of the governing body
at sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls shall
not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes established in
sections 84-1408 to 84-1414 RS Neb.
(Neb. RS 84-1411(3)) (Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01)
§ 32.04 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest, or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has
not requested a public meeting. Closed sessions may be held for but shall not
be limited to such reasons as:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation, or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has
not requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for
the closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and
concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a
closed session shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed
portions to only those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the
closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any
formal action may be taken. For purposes of this section, formal action shall
mean a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a
decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or
formation of a position or policy but shall not include negotiating guidance
given by members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in
closed sessions authorized under subdivision (A)(1)(a) of this section.
   (C)   Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting, and no public body shall designate itself
a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this subchapter. No closed session, informal meeting, chance
meeting, social gathering, or electronic communication shall be used for the
purpose of circumventing the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to chance meetings
or to attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a
public body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally
convened and there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over
which the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory
power.
(Neb. RS 84-1410) ('72 Code, § 1-504) (Am. Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1422, passed 2-25-93; Am. Ord. 1481, 3-9-95)
§ 32.05 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency.
Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of §
32.08 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes
of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any
formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no
later than the end of the next regular business day.
(Neb. RS 84-1411(4)) ('72 Code, § 1-505) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord.
1200, passed 9-22-83)
§ 32.06 MINUTES.
   (A)   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed.
   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received or
disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public inspection
during normal business hours.
   (C)   Minutes shall be written or kept as an electronic record and shall be
available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened
meeting, whichever occurs earlier, except that the city may have an additional
ten working days if the employee responsible for writing or keeping the minutes
is absent due to a serious illness or emergency.
(’72 Code, § 1-506) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 2424, passed 2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Rights of the public, see Neb. RS 84-1412
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 84-1413
§ 32.07 VOTES.
   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record
shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by the
city utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. RS 84-1413(2))
   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by
secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Neb. RS 84-1413(3))
('72 Code, § 1-507) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75)
Statutory reference:
   Voting procedure generally, see Neb. RS 17-616
§ 32.08 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The City Clerk, secretary, or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall
make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and
place of each meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411(3)) ('72 Code, § 1-508) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75)
§ 32.09 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter and the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407
et seq., the public has the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings
of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for
closed sessions called pursuant to §
32.04, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or recorded by
any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, a camera, video
equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
Except for closed sessions called pursuant to §
32.04, a public body shall allow members of the public an opportunity to speak
at each meeting.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of division (A) above for any public body
to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting, or recording its meetings, including meetings held by virtual
conferencing.
   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting, nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior
to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body shall
require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself, including an address and the name of any organization
represented by such person, unless the address requirement is waived to protect
the security of the individual.
   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter
or the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407 et seq., hold a meeting in a place
known by the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this
state.
   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if, a member entity of the
public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements of Neb.
RS 84-1412 are met.
   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented
at the meeting.
   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and
copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting, either in paper or electronic
form. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407 et seq., posted in the meeting room at a location
accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the
public shall be informed about the location of the posted information.
(Neb. RS 84-1412)
(’72 Code, § 1-509) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83;
Am. Ord. 1281, passed 9-24-87; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2484,
passed - -25)
§ 32.10 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   All meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be open to the public. Promptly
at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the
City Council, the City Clerk, the Mayor, and such other city officials that may
be required shall take their regular stations in the meeting place, and the
business of the city shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the
manner prescribed by the official agenda on file at the office of the City
Clerk.
('72 Code, § 1-511)
§ 32.11 PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE.
   The Mayor shall preserve order during meetings of the City Council and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council. When any
person is called to order, he or she shall be seated until the point is
decided. When the Mayor is putting the question, no person shall leave the
meeting room. Every person present, previous to speaking shall rise from his or
her seat and address himself or herself to the presiding officer and while
speaking shall confine himself or herself to the question. When two or more
persons rise at once, the Mayor shall recognize the one who spoke first. All
resolutions or motions shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon, if
requested by the City Clerk or any member of the Council. Every member of the
City Council who is present when a question is voted upon, shall cast his or
her vote unless excused by a majority of the Council present. No motion shall
be put or debated unless seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by the
Mayor before being debatable. In all cases where a motion or resolution is
entered on the minutes, the name of the member of the Council making the motion
or resolution shall be entered also. After each vote, the "Yeas" and "Nays"
shall be taken and entered in the minutes upon the request of any member of the
Council. Before the vote is actually taken, any resolution, motion, or proposed
ordinance may be withdrawn from consideration by the sponsor thereof with the
consent of the member of the Council seconding the said resolution, motion, or
ordinance. When, in the consideration of an ordinance, different times, or
amounts are proposed, the question shall be put on the largest sum, or the
longest time. A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a member
voting with the majority, but such motion to reconsider must be made before the
expiration of the third regular meeting after the initial consideration of the
question. When any question is under debate, no motion shall be made,
entertained, or seconded except the previous question, a motion to table, and
to adjourn. Each of the said motions shall be decided without debate. Any of
the rules of the Council for meetings may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of
the members present. In all cases in which provisions are not made by these
rules, Robert's Rules of Order is the authority by which the Council shall
decide all procedural disputes that may arise.
('72 Code, § 1-512)
§ 32.12 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   The change in office shall be made as follows: the Mayor and Council shall
meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in which a city
election is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing members of the
Council shall present their reports, and upon the old Council having completed
its business up to the said time, the outgoing members of the Council shall
surrender their offices to the incoming members, and the outgoing officers
shall thereupon each surrender to his or her successor in office all property,
records, papers and moneys, belonging to the same.
('72 Code, § 1-513) (Am. Ord. 1051, passed 12-11-75)
§ 32.13 REGULAR MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The meetings of the City Council shall be held at city hall. Regular
meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month at the
hour of 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   A majority of all the members elected to the City Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members.
Whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent for and
compelled to attend.
   (C)   Unless a greater vote is required by law, an affirmative vote of at
least one-half of the elected members shall be required for the transaction of
any business.
(Neb. RS 17-105)
   (D)   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the City Clerk shall proceed to
call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum
is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or
if absent, by the President of the Council. In the absence of both the Mayor
and the President of the Council, the City Council members shall elect a
President pro tempore.
('72 Code, § 1-510(part)) (Am. Ord. 1179, passed 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1791, passed
2-13-02)
Statutory reference:
   Election, qualifications, term, see Neb. RS 17-104
Cross-reference:
   Bond, see §
32.25
   Oath, see §
32.26
§ 32.14 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three members of the
City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing.
The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon
the journal by the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-106)
   (B)   On filing the call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall notify
the Council members of the special meeting, stating the time and its purpose.
Notice of a special meeting need not be given to a Council member known to be
out of the state or physically unable to be present.
   (C)   All ordinances passed at any special meeting shall comply with
procedures set forth in §§
30.30 et seq.
('72 Code, § 1-510(part)) (Am. Ord. 1179, passed 10-8-81)
BONDS AND OATHS
§ 32.25 BONDS; FORM.
   Official bonds of the city shall be in form joint and several and shall be
made payable to the city in such penalty as the City Council may set by
resolution, provided that the penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below
the legal minimum, when one has been set by the state of Nebraska, for each
particular official. All official bonds of the city officials shall be executed
by the principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties
who shall be freeholders of the county, or by the official as principal and by
a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company, provided that no city
official, while still in his of her official term of office, shall be accepted
as surety on any other official's bond, contractor's bond, license bond, or
appeal bond under any circumstances. Only companies that are legally authorized
to transact business in the state of Nebraska shall be eligible for suretyship
on the bond of an official of the city. All said bonds shall obligate the
principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of all duties required by law
of such principal and shall inure to the benefit of the city and any persons
who may be injured by a breach of the conditions of such bonds. No bond shall
be deemed to be given or complete until the approval of the City Council and
all sureties are endorsed in writing on the said instrument by the Mayor and
City Clerk pursuant to the said approval of the City Council. The premium on
any official bond required to be given may be paid out of the general fund or
other proper city fund, upon a resolution to that effect by the City Council at
the beginning of any municipal year. All official bonds, meeting the conditions
herein, shall be filed with the City Clerk for his of her official records, and
it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond
so filed upon the payment of a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the
City Council. In the event that the sureties on the official bond of any
officer of the city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient,
the City Council may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the
said officer may give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. In the
event that the officer should fail, refuse, or neglect to give a new bond or
additional sureties to the satisfaction and approval of the City Council, then
the office shall, by such failure, refusal, or neglect, become vacant, and it
shall be the duty of the City Council to appoint a competent and qualified
person to fill the said office. Any official who is re-elected to office shall
be required to file a new bond after each election.
('72 Code, § 1-301)
Statutory reference:
   Bonds generally and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 11-103 through 11-118
   Power to regulate offices, see Neb. RS 17-604
§ 32.26 OATH OF OFFICE; CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall before entering upon
their respective duties take and subscribe the following oath, which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:
"I,                                              , do solemnly swear that I
will support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the
State of Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely and
without mental reservation or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will
faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of,
                          , according to law and to the best of my ability. And
I do further swear that I do not advocate nor am I a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time
as I am in this position I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence. So help me God."
   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath shall be
filed in the office of the Secretary of State or with the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 11-101) ('72 Code, § 1-302)
COMPENSATION
§ 32.40 CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The compensation of any elective official of the city shall not be
increased or diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been
elected except when there has been a merger of offices, provided that the
compensation of the members of the City Council, a board, or commission may be
increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member,
whether or not the terms of one or more members commence and end at different
times. No elected official may be rehired at a greater salary if he or she
resigns and desires to be rehired during the unexpired term of office. He or
she may be rehired after the term of office during which he or she resigned at
a greater salary. All salaries shall be set by ordinance of the City Council
and will be available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The annual salaries of the Mayor and Council of the city shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Mayor: $4000
      (2)   Council member: $2000.
   (C)   The annual compensation shall be paid to the elected officials once
each year at the end of each year in the month of December; if an elected
official does not serve a full 12-month term, the compensation shall be
prorated on a monthly basis.
('72 Code, § 1-901) (Am. Ord. 1672, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1865, passed 1-8-04)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation for merged offices, see Neb. RS 17-108.02
   Compensation of elected offices regulated, see Neb. RS 17-612
§ 32.41 CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   (1)   BUSINESS ASSOCIATION means a business:
         (a)   In which the individual is a partner, limited liability company
member, director, or officer; or
         (b)   In which the individual or a member of the individual's
immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or
is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market
value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
   An individual who occupies a confidential professional relationship
protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This definition shall
not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if the filer reports
the name and address of the stockbroker.
(Neb. RS 49-1408)
      (2)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY  means a child residing in an individual's
household, a spouse of an individual, or an individual claimed by that
individual or that individual's spouse as a dependent for federal income tax
purposes.
(Neb. RS 49-1425)
      (3)   OFFICER means:
         (a)   A member of any board or commission of the municipality which
spends and administers its own funds, who is dealing with a contract made by
such board or commission; or
         (b)   Any elected municipal official. OFFICER does not mean volunteer
firefighters or ambulance drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters
or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or 70-624.04, no
officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her governing
body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an interest
in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment of such contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict.
An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the county attorney, the governing body, or any resident within the
jurisdiction of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after
the contract is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the
reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods,
material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the governing body has benefited thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of
the contract.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply if the contract is an
agenda item approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested
officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the Governing Body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   An officer who:
      (1)   Has no business association with the business involved in the
contract or
      (2)   Will not receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result
of the contract shall not be deemed to have an interest within the meaning of
this section.
   (E)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling
of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (F)   If an officer's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
officer's governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to 1) all employees or 2) all employees within a
classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for
special action.
   (G)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.01)
   (H)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in subdivisions (a) through (e) of this division (H)(1)
about every contract entered into by the governing body in which an officer of
the body has an interest and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division
(C) of this section. Such information shall be kept in the ledger for five
years from the date of the officer's last day in office and shall include the:
         (a)   Names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   Date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   Amount of the contract; and
         (e)   Basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this division (H) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.02)
   (I)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by division (H) of
this section shall be filed within ten days after such account is opened.
Thereafter, the person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain a running account of amounts purchased on the open account.
Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to
this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.03)
   (J)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (I) of this section, the
governing body may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an
officer of the governing body may have an interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.05)
   (K)   The Governing Body may exempt from divisions (A) through (I) of this
section, contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of such body may
have an interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.06)
('72 Code, § 1-902) (Am. Ord. 1202, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 11-
13-86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
Statutory reference:
   Private gain by public officers, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312
   Penalty for violation, see Neb. RS 49-14,103.04
   Utility officers permitted to serve in elected office, see Neb. RS 70-624.04
§ 32.42 JOB DESCRIPTION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   In order to provide adequate written information for employees and
supervisors of the city, job descriptions and pay schedules as prepared by the
City Personnel Committee are hereby incorporated by reference in addition to
all amendments which may now or in the future be made, as though printed in
full herein. Copies of the herein adopted job descriptions will be distributed
to each pertaining employee with the original kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
('72 Code, § 1-903) (Am. Ord. 1196, passed 9-8-83)
§ 32.43 PAY SCHEDULE; EXCEPTIONS.
   Any employee, due to previous experience, ability, initiative, and industry
may, by action of the Mayor and Council be advanced in Grade Steps.
('72 Code, § 1-904) (Am. Ord. 1196, passed 9-8-83)
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLAN
§ 32.55 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To accumulate for the benefit of the employees of the city, who are, and
will become, participants in the City Employees' Retirement Plan, certain sums
as provision for themselves after retirement from service with the city, the
Mayor and City Council of the city do adopt, as amended, the City Employees'
Retirement Plan in the form of the Basic Plan Document and Full Flex Money
Purchase Pension Plan Non-Standardized (004) Adoption Agreement dated June 1,
2003 which, by this reference, is hereby incorporated by reference. Three
copies of this City Employees' Retirement Plan shall be on file at the office
of the City Clerk and are available for public inspection at any reasonable
time.
('72 Code, § 1-1001) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 1844, passed 7-
24-03)
§ 32.56 AUTHORIZATION.
   The Mayor and other appropriate elected officials and officers of the city
shall be, and they hereby are, authorized to do all the things necessary to
carry out this subchapter, including the execution of the Full Flex Money
Purchase Pension Plan Non-Standardized Adoption Agreement dated June 1, 2003
for the city, and to continue the tax qualification of the City Employees'
Retirement Plan under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. If
any provision of this Plan is subject to more than one interpretation, such
ambiguity shall be resolved in favor of that interpretation which is consistent
with this Plan being so qualified.
('72 Code, § 1-1002) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 8144, passed 7-
24-03)
§ 32.57 ONLY FOR BENEFIT OF EMPLOYEES OF CITY.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions set forth in this Plan
are applicable only to employees in the employ of the city, on or after June 1,
2003. Former employees whose benefits were paid prior to June 1, 2003, or who
had terminated employment prior to that date, and beneficiaries of the former
employees, shall be entitled to the benefits, if any, to which they were
entitled under the Plan as it existed immediately prior to June 1, 2003.
However, former employees with unpaid vested benefits as of June 1, 2003 will
have their benefits paid in accordance with the Plan as in effect upon
distribution, except as required to maintain the qualified status of the Plan
under Code section 401(a).
('72 Code, § 1-1003) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 8144, passed 7-
24-03)
§ 32.58 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the Plan shall be June 1, 2003.
(Ord. 8144, passed 7-24-03)
RISK MANAGEMENT
§ 32.70 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT.
   The City Council and any one or more public agencies, as defined in Neb. RS
44-4303, may make and execute an agreement providing for joint and cooperative
action in accordance with Neb. RS 44-4301 through 44-4339 to form, become
members of, and operate a risk management pool for the purpose of providing to
members risk management services and insurance coverages in the form of group
self- insurance or standard insurance, including any combination of group self-
insurance and standard insurance, to protect members against losses arising
from any of the following:
   (A)   General liability;
   (B)   Damage, destruction, or loss of real or personal property, including
but not limited to loss of use or occupancy and loss of income or extra expense
resulting from loss of use or occupancy;
   (C)   Errors and omissions liability; and
   (D)   Workers' compensation liability.
('72 Code, § 1-1301) (Ord. 1282, passed 9-24-87)
Statutory reference:
   Intergovernmental risk management authorized and regulated, see Neb. RS 44-
4301 through 44-4339
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Section
   
33.01   Library Board
   
33.02   Planning Commission
   
33.03   Board of Adjustment
   
33.04   Board of Health
   
33.05   Community Development Agency
   
33.06   Housing Authority
   
33.07   Board of Public Works
§ 33.01 LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   The Library Board shall consist of five appointed members. Four
members shall be residents of the municipality and one memeber may be a
resident of the area over which the city is authorized to exercise
extraterritorial zoning. Terms shall be four years. The board members shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council. Neither the
Mayor nor any member of the City Council shall be a member of the Library
Board. The terms of members serving on the effective date of a change in the
number of members shall not be shortened, and any successors to those members
shall be appointed as the terms of those members expire. In cases of vacancies
by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the City Council shall fill the vacancy
for the unexpired term. No member shall receive any pay or compensation for any
services rendered as a member of the Library Board.
(Neb. RS 51-202)
      (2)   The City Council may require the members of the Library Board to
give a bond in a sum set by resolution and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties.
   (B)   (1)   The members of the Library Board shall immediately after their
appointment meet and organize by electing from their number a President, a
Secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary. A majority of the
members of the Library Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
(Neb. RS 51-204)
      (2)   No member of the Board shall serve in the capacity of both the
President and Secretary of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to
keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the
same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public
inspection at any reasonable time.
      (3)   The Board shall meet at such times as the Board may designate.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the President or a majority of
the members of the Board.
(’72 Code, § 2-201) (Am. Ord. 1054, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1176, passed 10-
8-81; Am. Ord. 1182, passed 1-14-82; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord.
2178, passed 3-12-15)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, regulations, see Neb. RS 51-202
Cross-reference:
   Library, see
Ch. 93
§ 33.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine regular members who
shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or
occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two of
the regular members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When
there is a sufficient number of residents in the area over which the city
exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one regular
member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is
determined by the City Council that a sufficient number of residents reside in
the area subject to extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, and no
such resident is a regular member of the Commission, the first available
vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the appointment of such an
individual. For purposes of this section, a sufficient number of residents
shall mean 500 residents. The term of each regular member shall be three years,
except that three regular members of the first Commission shall serve for terms
of one year, three for terms of two years, and three for terms of three years.
All regular members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. Any
member may, after a public hearing before the City Council, be removed by the
Mayor, with the consent of a majority vote of the members elected to the City
Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, or other
good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the
Mayor.
   (B)   All regular members of the Commission shall serve without compensation
and shall hold no other city office except when appointed to serve on the Board
of Adjustment as provided in Neb. RS 19-908. All members of the Commission may
be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give bond in a sum set
by resolution of the Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
their duties. The Commission shall elect its Chairperson and a Secretary from
its members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine.
The term of the Chairperson and the Secretary shall be one year, and they shall
be eligible for reelection. No member of the Commission shall serve in the
capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission. It shall be
the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of
all meetings and to file them with the City Clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection during office hours. The Commission shall be funded by
the City Council from time to time out of the general fund. The expenditures of
the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated
for that purpose by the City Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for
expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts. A number of
Commissioners equal to a majority of the number of regular members appointed to
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar
quarter, except the City Council may require the Commission to meet more
frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may call for a meeting when
necessary to deal with business pending before the Commission. Special meetings
may also be held upon the call of any three members of the Commission. The
Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business
and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, which shall be a public record. The Commission shall make and
adopt plans for the physical development of the city, including any areas
outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to
the planning of the city, and shall carry out the other duties and exercise the
powers specified in section Neb. RS 19-929. All actions by the Commission shall
be subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor and City Council. The
Commission shall make its recommendations to the City Council so that they are
received by the City Council within 15 days after the Commission begins
consideration of a matter relating to the comprehensive development plan,
capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development, the annexation
of territory, or zoning. The Commission shall be responsible for making such
reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may, from time to
time, designate.
   (C)   The Mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members
of the City Council, shall appoint one alternate member to the Commission. The
alternate member shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other city
office. The term of the alternate member shall be three years, and he or she
shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed and approved. The
alternate member may be removed from office in the same manner as a regular
member. If the alternate member position becomes vacant other than through the
expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion
of the term by the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the City Council. The alternate member may attend any meeting and
may serve as a voting and participating member of the Commission at any time
when less than the full number of regular Commission members is present and
capable of voting.
('72 Code, § 2-202) (Am. Ord. 1485, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1518, passed 1-25-
96; Am. Ord. 1649, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   General provisions; Planning Commissions regulated, see Neb. RS 19-924
through 19-929
§ 33.03 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Council, a Board
of Adjustment which shall consist of five regular members plus one additional
member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of
the regular members is unable to attend for any reason. Each member of the
Board shall serve a term of three years, unless reappointed, and shall be
removable only for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a
public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member
whose term becomes vacant. One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be
appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of
membership on the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his
or her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the
appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. After
the effective date of this section, the first vacancy occurring on the Board of
Adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who resides in the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city at such time as more than 200
persons reside within such area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member
of the Board of Adjustment shall reside outside the corporate boundaries of the
city but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
   (B)   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and may be
required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a sum set by
resolution of the City Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance
of their duties. The Board shall organize at its first meeting in January of
each year and elect from its membership a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall
be the duty of the Secretary to keep complete and accurate minutes of all Board
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board and shall be public record. All meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public and shall be held at such times as the
City Council may designate, or at such other times as the Chairperson may, in
his or her discretion, call a meeting. Special meetings may be also held upon
the call of any three members of the Board. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall adopt
rules in accordance with the provisions of Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Board:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by a city official
based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation
relating to the location or soundness of structures;
      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of the zoning
regulations, requests for interpretation of any map; and
      (3)   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of
a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon
the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the
property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
   (D)   (1)   No variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds
that:
         (a)   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
         (b)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same zoning district and the same vicinity;
         (c)   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance; and
         (d)   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.
      (2)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the
condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to the zoning regulations.
   (E)   In exercising the abovementioned powers, the Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such city official or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such regulation or to
effect any variation in such regulation.
(Neb. RS 19-910)
   (F)   The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing
such other duties as the City Council may designate. No member of the City
Council shall serve as a member of the Board of Adjustment. No member of the
Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of both Chairperson and
Secretary of the Board.
('72 Code, § 2-203) (Am. Ord. 1519, passed 1-25-96)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, duties, powers, see Neb. RS 19-907 through 19-912
   Authority to request county board to serve as city Board of Adjustment, see
Neb. RS 19-912.01
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Code, see
Chapter 151
§ 33.04 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Counsel, a Board
of Health which shall consist of four members. The members of the Board shall
include the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairperson, the President of the City
Council, and two other members. One member shall be a physician or health care
provider, if one can be found who is willing to serve. Such physician or health
care provider, if appointed, shall be the Board's medical advisor. If the Mayor
has appointed the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall serve on the Board
as Secretary and quarantine officer. The members of the Board shall serve,
without compensation, a one year term of office, unless reappointed and unless
removed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council, and shall
reorganize at the first meeting in January of each year. No member of the Board
of Health shall hold more than one Board of Health position.
   (B)   The Secretary shall keep full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and file the same with the City Clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection during office hours. The Board of Health shall be funded
by the City Council from time to time out of the general fund. A majority of
the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The
Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may designate. Special
meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any two members of the
Board.
   (C)   The Board shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the full
force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the city. The
Board shall enforce the rules and regulations and provide fines and punishments
for any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress, and prevent the
occurrence of nuisances and enforce all laws of the state of Nebraska and
ordinances of the city relating to nuisances and to matters of sanitation which
affect the health and safety of the people. The Board shall regularly inspect
such premises and businesses as the City Council may direct. All members of the
Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such other
duties as the City Council may, from time to time, designate.
('72 Code, § 2-204) (Am. Ord. 1606, passed 9-25-97) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-121
Cross-reference:
   Health and safety regulations, see
Chapter 94
§ 33.05 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council hereby find and determine that it is
necessary and desirable for purposes of providing for the redevelopment and
general welfare of the city that a Community Development Agency be created
pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2101.01.
   (B)   There shall be and there is hereby created in and for the city an
agency to be known as the Community Development Agency of the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska, which shall consist of the Mayor and City Council as exercising the
powers of such Agency in accordance with Neb. RS 18-2101.01. As provided in
Neb. RS 18-2101.01, such Agency shall exercise all of the powers and authority
provided for in Neb. RS 18-2101 to 18-2144, both inclusive and 18-2145 to 18-
2154, both inclusive, as now existing, as amended, and as hereafter amended.
   (C)   The Agency, as hereby created shall function under the direction of
the Mayor and Council and shall exercise such of the powers herein described or
referred to as shall be determined appropriate from time to time by the Mayor
and Council as the governing body of such Agency and as determined by
resolution or ordinance duly adopted by said body from time to time.
('72 Code, § 2-206) (Ord. 1619, passed 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 1891, passed 2-10-05)
§ 33.06 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the Council, five
persons who shall constitute the Housing Authority, and such persons shall be
called the Commissioners. One Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each
Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until a successor is
duly appointed, provided that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
terms. The Mayor may, with the approval of the Council, appoint one of its
members to serve as one of the five members of such Housing Authority for such
term as the governing body may determine. No person shall serve as a
Commissioner unless he or she resides within the area of operation of that
Housing Authority. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any
Commissioner shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk, and such certificate
shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such Commissioner. A
Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her services, but he or
she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses,
incurred in discharge of his or her duties.
   (B)   A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Authority
for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all
other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon the vote of the
majority of the Commissioners present unless in any case the bylaws of the
Authority shall require a larger number. The Commissioners shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice- Chairperson from among the Commissioners and shall have
the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex officio
Secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also employ legal counsel, or it
may call upon the chief law officer of the municipality, for such services as
it may require. It may employ technical experts and such other officers,
agents, and employees as it may require and shall determine their
qualifications, duties, compensations, and terms of office. The Authority may
delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees as it may deem
proper.
   (C)   During his or her tenure, and for one year thereafter, no
commissioner, officer, or employee of the Municipal Housing Authority shall
voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any
property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contract
or proposed contract relating to any housing project. If any such commissioner,
officer, or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or voluntarily
or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or employment
as commissioner, officer, or employee, the commissioner shall immediately
disclose the interest in writing to the Authority, and such disclosure shall be
entered upon the minutes of the Authority, and he or she shall not participate
in any action by the Authority relating to the property or contract in which he
or she has any such interest, provided that nothing herein shall apply to the
acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the Authority issued in
connection with any housing project, or to the execution of agreements by
banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a
project, or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility
services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency.
   (D)   The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty or misconduct
in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor shall send a notice
of removal to such Commissioner, which notice shall contain a statement
containing the charges against him or her. Unless within ten days from the
receipt of such notice, such Commissioner files with the Clerk a request for a
hearing before the governing body, the Commissioner shall be deemed as removed
from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the governing
body of the municipality shall hold a hearing at which the Commissioner shall
have the right to appear in person or by counsel and the governing body shall
determine whether the removal shall be disapproved or upheld. If the removal is
disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his or her position.
   (E)   The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its
activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a report to
the governing body on all such information.
§ 33.07 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The findings set forth in Ordinance 1815 are hereby made a part of
this section as fully as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council hereby establish a Board of Public Works
for the city for the following public works of the city: electricity, natural
gas, sewers and water, hereinafter called Utility and/or Utilities, said Board
of Public Works to be known and designated as the Wahoo Board of Public Works.
   (C)   The purpose of the Board of Public Works is to provide governance for
the aforenoted Utilities as provided herein.
   (D)   The structure and governance of the Board of Public Works shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The Board of Public Works shall consist of five voting members
members and one ex-officio nonvoting member who shall be the City
Administrator. The voting members of the Board shall be comprised of the
following:
         (a)   Four members of the Board shall be citizens and bonafide
residents of the city who shall be called at large members and provided further
that one at large member may be a member of the City Council;
         (b)   One member of the Board shall be member of the City Council and
shall be called City Council Member;
      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, or
a majority thereof, the five members of the Board of Public Works. Said member
or members may be removed by the Mayor and a majority of the City Council at
anytime;
      (3)   (a)   Each at large member of the Board of Public Works shall serve
until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, provided, that the at large
members of the Board of Public Works shall be appointed in such a manner that
the terms shall be for one, two, three, or four years, in the manner designated
by the Mayor, as the case may be, commencing the first meeting in January of
2019 of said Board, after which the term of each at large member shall be four
years;
         (b)   The City Council Member of the Board of Public Works shall serve
until the end of the City Council's term on the City Council.
      (4)   Vacancies in the at large and/or City Council membership of the
Board of Public Works shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council, or a majority thereof;
      (5)   Each member of the Board of Public Works shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath to discharge faithfully
the duties of his or her office. Further, each of the members of said Board
before entering upon the duties of their office shall be required to give bond
to the city with corporate security. Such bond shall be in the sum of $5,000
and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the
members of the Board of Public Works and the security on such bond shall be
approved by the Mayor and Council and shall be filed with the City Treasurer,
provided, the premium on said bond shall be paid out of the funds of the Board
of Public Works;
      (6)   No member of the Board of Public Works shall receive any salary or
compensation for his or her services as a member of such Board, but the actual
and necessary expenses incurred by said member in the performance of his or her
duties shall be allowed and paid as a part of the cost and operation of the
Utilities of the city;
      (7)   The Board of Public Works is hereby empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations as may be necessary for its government and the transaction of
business and to provide for amendments thereto. Further, the Board shall
establish regular times for its meetings and keep a record of their proceedings
and publish within the Wahoo Newspaper the minutes of each meeting of the Board
of Public Works within 30 days after said meeting;
      (8)   The members of the Board of Public Works shall organize as soon as
practical after their appointment, by electing a chair, vice chair, and a
secretary at the first meeting of June of each year, who shall serve until the
first meeting in January next following their appointment, and thereafter, said
Board of Public Works shall elect a chair, vice chair, and a secretary at the
first meeting of January of each year. In the absence of regular officers,
temporary officers to serve in their places may be chosen by the members
present at any meeting. Further, the members may select such other officers,
clerks, deputies, laborers and other help and assistants as may be necessary by
such Board to be necessary or expedient.
   (E)   The Mayor and City Council shall retain all statutory powers regarding
the governance of the Utilities of the city not heretofore or hereinafter
transferred and/or assigned to the Board of Public Works.
   (F)   The Board of Public Works is hereby empowered as follows:
      (1)   The members of the Board of Public Works shall on or before their
November meeting of each even year, recommended to the Mayor a person for the
office of Utilities General Manager. The Mayor, upon receiving the name of the
person for Utilities General Manager from the Board of Public Works, shall
interview the person and determine that the person possess the qualifications
to serve in such capacity. In determining the qualifications of the person, the
Mayor shall employ uniform standards as adopted by the Board of Public Works
and confirmed by the City Council, as set forth in writing, and provided to the
Mayor. After completing the above, the Mayor will make a recommendation to the
City Council as to the person to be the Utilities General Manager for the city.
The Utilities General Manager, upon being confirmed by the Council, shall hold
office until his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified;
      (2)   To provide that the current Utilities General Manager of the city
shall, after the effective date of this section, be employed thereafter by the
city at such reasonable compensation as established by the City Council based
upon the recommendation of the Board of Public Works, at the time of such
employment and shall thereafter be under the jurisdiction of said Board and the
City Administrator.
      (3)   To provide that all contracts made by the Board of Public Works,
regarding the Utilities, shall be authorized by a majority of the Board of
Public Works by appropriate action, and the record of all actions by said Board
shall be spread in full upon the minute record of the Board proceedings;
      (4)   To cooperate and participate in the pension plan on file in the
office of the City Clerk and intended for the benefit of the employees of the
city and for the purpose of such pension plan, the Board of Public Works may
make contributions under such plan, authorize deductions from salaries of
employees, and take such other steps as may be necessary and are consistent
with said plan;
      (5)   To participate in a group insurance plan for the benefit of its
employees covering sickness, dental, accident, and life insurance on file in
the office of the City Clerk and intended for the benefit of the employees of
the city and for the purpose of such group insurance plan, the Board of Public
Works may make contributions under such plan, authorize deduction from salaries
of employees, and take such other steps as may be necessary and are consistent
with said plan;
      (6)   To provide that the procedures and enforcement of all city
ordinances relative to the aforenoted Utilities of the city and
Chapters 50,
51,
52,
53, and
54 of Title IV, Public Works of this code, except those ordinances and chapters
and portions thereof, relative to utility rate setting, are hereby assigned and
transferred to the Board of Public Works;
      (7)   To provide that the Board of Public Works shall keep separate books
of account for each Utility under its control showing current entries of the
receipts and expenditures of the Board and duplicate vouchers of all of its
expenditures for each of said Utilities, which records shall, at all times, be
open to the examination of the Mayor and City Council or a committee thereof.
The Board of Public Works shall make a monthly report of their receipts and
expenditures for each separate Utility to the Mayor and City Council. The audit
and report, at the close of the fiscal year, of the financial transactions and
affairs of the said Utilities, operating through the Board of Public Works,
shall be entirely separate from the general audit of the city's accounts at the
close of its fiscal year and may be carried out by a different accountant than
the one making such general audit for the city;
      (8)   To operate, manage and maintain the city's Utilities and any and
all property owned by the city and used in connection with the operation and
maintenance of such Utilities, including the erection and construction of
additions, extensions, and improvements in and to such systems; in furtherance
thereof, the Board of Public Works may utilize its own engineering staff and
may hire consulting engineers for the design and installation of extensions and
improvements of the Utilities under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Works, provided, however, said Board of Public Works shall follow the
requirements of Neb. RS 17-568.01 pertaining to advertisements for bids for the
enlargement or improvement of any of the Utilities;
      (9)   To purchase all materials and supplies for the operation and
maintenance of such Utilities;
      (10)    To study and recommend to the Mayor and City Council revisions,
changes, and amendments to all rates of the Utilities of the city;
      (11)    To collect all rates, charges, revenues and profits accruing on
account of the ownership and operation of such Utilities;
      (12)    To provide that the collection of rates for the Utilities or
other services furnished and rendered by said Utilities, shall be under the
control and supervision of the Board of Public Works. All revenues of said
Utilities shall be segregated from all other fun and revenues of the city and
shall be paid and deposited into separate funds, as designated by the Board of
Public Works, said funds to be administered solely by said Board of Public
Works for the purpose of paying operating expenses of said Utilities, the
maintenance and repair of each of said Utilities, and for paying the interest
on and principal of all revenue bonds or combined revenue bonds of said
Utilities, provided, that any surplus funds arising out of the operation of any
of the Utilities by the Board of Public Works may, if not invested pursuant to
the provisions of any other law upon the subject, be invested by said Board of
Public Works as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska, as amended or
superseded. The Board of Public Works shall be bound by the terms of any
ordinance, duly passed and adopted by the Mayor and City Council in respect to
all utility funds in the issuance of bonds and all other matters;
      (13)    To keep the accounts of cash received and disbursed on account of
the operation and maintenance of such Utilities and all amounts receivable and
payable on account thereof;
      (14)    To pay all salaries, labor, insurance premiums, materials and
supplies, and such other expenses incident to the operation and conduct of such
Utilities;
      (15)    To perform such other acts as the Board may deem expedient in the
operation, maintenance and conduct of such Utilities and the business and
services incident thereto and not in conflict herewith.
   (G)   The Board of Public Works shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   The authority of the Mayor and City Council to approve the budget
of the Board of Public Works as provided in the Municipal Propriety Function
Act;
      (2)   To spend any amount, as set forth in the budget which has been
approved by the Mayor and City Council for the operation and management of the
Utilities. It shall further have authority to spend any amount not to exceed
$60,0000 for the improvement, construction, or extension of any of the
Utilities hereof. In case of emergency, defined as a failure of one or more of
said Utilities, a three-fourths vote of the Board of Public Works may authorize
the Utilities General Manager to exceed the amounts as specified herein;
      (3)   To provide that the management, operation and maintenance of the
Utilities and of the property used in connection therewith shall, at all times,
be in conformity with the provisions of all bond ordinances applicable thereto
and the refunding revenue bonds of the city issued pursuant thereto, prior
hereto, and in conformity with the provisions of any ordinance pertaining to
the refunding of such outstanding bonds, or the issuance of new or additional
bonds secured by the revenues of said Utilities. If at any time the provisions
of this section shall appear to conflict in any manner with the provisions of
such bond ordinances or the bonds issues pursuant thereto or with the
provisions of any ordinance pertaining to the refunding of said bonds or
issuance of new or additional revenue bonds secured by the revenues of said
Utilities, then the provisions of such bond ordinances and of the bonds issues
pursuant thereto and the provisions of any ordinance pertaining to the
refunding of outstanding bonds or issuance of new or additional bonds secured
by the revenues of said Utilities shall prevail over the provisions of this
section and the provisions of this section shall yield thereto to the extent
necessary to reconcile any such conflicting provisions;
      (4)   To provide that no member of the Board of Public Works shall ever
be financially interested in a contract entered into by the Board on behalf of
the Board of Public Works;
      (5)   To provide that the Board of Public Works shall not be entitled to
or have any authority over any money raised by taxation for street lighting
purposes. Funds so raised shall be under the control of the Mayor and City
Council. The Board of Public Works may, by mutual contract or agreement with
the Mayor and City Council furnish electric power, and provide for the
installation, operation, and maintenance for street lighting at such rates and/
or fees as may be agreed upon.
   (H)   The Mayor and City Council, by appropriate resolution and/or
ordinance, shall assign the following to the Board of Public Works:
      (1)   The employees designated in Ordinance 1815 are assigned to the
Board of Public Works, as of December 1, 2002;
      (2)   All assets and liabilities pertaining to the Utilities of the city;
      (3)   All rights-of-way of the city for the aforenoted Utilities, subject
to existing franchise/usage fees presently imposed by the city for the usage of
said rights-of-way or which may be hereafter imposed by the city;
      (4)   All existing easements of the city for said aforenoted Utilities;
      (5)   Space in the Wahoo City Hall, at a rental amount or a shared
services agreement to be agreed upon between the Board of Public Works and the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 1815, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 2099, passed 8-12-12; Am. Ord. 2291,
passed 10-25-18)
CHAPTER 34: FIRE, POLICE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES DEPARTMENTS
Section
Fire Department
   
34.01   Operation and funding
   
34.02   Membership
   
34.03   Records
   
34.04   Fires
   
34.05   Distant fires
   
34.06   Fighting distant fires
   
34.07   Preservation of property
   
34.08   Inspections
   
34.09   Notice of violation
   
34.10   Mandatory assistance
   
34.11   Power of arrest
   
34.12   Fire investigation
   
34.13   Unlawful handling of equipment
   
34.14   Hose tested
   
34.15   Drills
Police Department
   
34.30   Reserve officer bond
   
34.31   Arrest and enforcement jurisdiction
   
34.32   Police officers; discipline or removal from duty; notice and hearing;
determination
Abandoned Personal Property
   
34.40   Abandoned personal property
   
34.41   Storage fees
   
34.42   Lien for storage fees and disposition
Emergency Medical Services Department
   
34.50   Creation, duties, operation and funding
   
34.51   Officers generally; appointment
   
34.52   Emergency Medical Services Department Head; powers and duties generally
   
34.53   Membership
   
34.54   Suspension and expulsion of volunteer members
   
34.55   Discipline and discharge of paid staff
   
34.56   Service outside city limits restricted
   
34.57   Contracts for service
   
34.58   Approved mutual aid agreements
   
34.59   Interference with pre-hospital emergency medical service providers and
medical equipment
   
34.60   Departmental expenditures
   
34.61   Equipment
   
34.62   False call
   
34.63   Donations trust fund
   
34.64   City Physician Medical Director
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The city operates the City Fire Department and Licensed Ambulance
Service through the City Fire Chief and Firefighters. The City Council, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improving the
Fire Department may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limits
prescribed by state law on the taxable value of all taxable property within the
city. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Fire Department Fund.
The Fund shall be at all times in the possession of the City Treasurer.
   (B)   For the purpose of further defraying the costs of maintaining the Fire
Department and to provide additional fire protection, the city may enter into
an agreement with the Rural Fire District for mutual aid and protection,
provided that any such agreement shall be placed on file at the office of the
City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time. The Fund shall be at all
times in the possession of the City Treasurer.
('72 Code, § 3-101)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create; operation, see Neb. RS 17-147
   Taxing authority, see Neb. RS 17-718
   Fire station creation and maintenance, see Neb. RS 17-953
§ 34.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided
by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way they may
decide, subject to the review of the City Council. The Fire Chief shall appoint
no more than 25 members for each fire department company subject to the review
and approval of the City Council. All vacancies shall be filled in this manner.
   (B)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or required of
them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the Fire Department
shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and exercise the
powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and authority to
arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the municipal code or the laws of
the State of Nebraska.
   (C)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social
activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall, upon
request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City
Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
   (D)   Members of the Fire Department shall be considered to be employees of
the city for the purpose of providing them with workers' compensation and other
benefits. The City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire
Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount
set by resolution.
   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of
group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the city's
active volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person
serves more than one municipality or rural or suburban fire protection
district, the policy shall be purchased only by the first municipality or
district which he or she serves. The policy shall provide a minimum death
benefit of $10,000 for death from any cause and shall, at the option of the
insured, be convertible to a permanent form of life insurance at age 65. The
coverage of such policy shall terminate as to any individual who ceases to be
an active volunteer member of the fire department of the city.
(Neb. RS 35-108)
   (F)   For purposes of Neb. RS 33-139.01, volunteer firefighters and rescue
squad members testifying as witnesses in that capacity alone shall not be
deemed employees of the city.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01)
('72 Code, § 3-102) (Am. Ord. 1055, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-
04)
Statutory reference:
   Witness fees prohibited, see Neb. RS 33-139.01
   General regulations, see Neb. RS 35-101 through 35-103
   Life insurance required, see Neb. RS 35-108
§ 34.03 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of
the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members, a record of all
fires, and shall make a full report of such records to the City Clerk during
the month of January for the previous calendar year. The record of any fire
shall include the cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, and whether
criminal conduct may have been involved. In the event of sizable property
damage, he shall include the information of whether such losses were covered by
insurance, and if so, in what amount, All records shall be available to the
public at any reasonable time.
('72 Code, § 3-103)
§ 34.04 FIRES.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for the
extinguishment of fires, to protect property within the city, and to secure the
observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and regulations with
respect to fires and fire prevention.
('72 Code, § 3-108)
§ 34.05 DISTANT FIRES.
   Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief such fire equipment of the
city as may be designated by the City Council as rural equipment may be used
beyond the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires.
('72 Code, § 3-109)
§ 34.06 FIGHTING DISTANT FIRES.
   The firefighters of the city shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or saving
property or life outside the corporate limits of the city when directed to do
so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire Department, or some person authorized to
act for such Chief and, in so doing, may take such fire equipment of the city
as may be designated by the City Council.
('72 Code, § 3-110)
§ 34.07 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   Any official of the City Fire Department shall have the power during the
time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public property whenever
it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of such property from
fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining property. The
said officials may direct the city firefighters to remove any building,
structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire, and
the official in charge of the fire fighting effort shall have the power to blow
up or cause to be blown up with powder or otherwise any building or erection
during the progress of a fire for the purpose of extinguishing or checking the
same.
('72 Code, § 3-111)
§ 34.08 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, when
directed to do so by the City Council, to inspect or cause to be inspected by
Fire Department officers, members, or some other official as often as may be
necessary, but not less than two times a year in outlying districts and four
times a year within the fire limits, all buildings, premises, and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to create a fire
hazard. The inspection shall be of the storage, sale, and use of flammable
liquids, combustibles, and explosives; electric wiring and heating; and the
means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire in schools, churches, hotels,
halls, theaters, factories, hospitals, and all other buildings in which numbers
of persons congregate from time to time for any purpose whether publicly or
privately owned; the design, construction, location, installation, and
operation of equipment for storing, handling, and utilizing of liquefied
petroleum gases, specifying the odorization of said gases and the degree
thereof; and chemicals, prozylin plastics, nitrocellulose films, or any other
hazardous material that may now or hereafter exist.
('72 Code, § 3-106)
Statutory reference:
   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum Products and
Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512
§ 34.09 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Upon the finding that the city code has been violated, the Fire Chief shall
notify, or cause to be notified, the owner, occupant, or manager of the premise
where a violation has occurred. Notice may be made personally or by delivering
a copy to the premise and affixing it to the door of the main entrance of the
said premise. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the
owner, such order may be served personally, or by mailing a copy to the owner's
last known post office address if the owner is absent from the jurisdiction.
Any such order shall be immediately complied with by the owner, occupant, or
manager of the premise or building. The owner, occupant, or manager may, within
five days after such order by the Chief of the Fire Department or his agent,
appeal the order with the Council requesting a review and it shall be the duty
of the Council to hear the same within not less than five days nor more than
ten days from the time when the request was filed in writing with the City
Clerk. The Mayor and Council shall then affirm, modify, or rescind the said
order as safety and justice may require and the decision shall then be final,
subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or
equity. The said order shall be modified or rescinded only where it is evident
that reasonable safety exists and that conditions necessitate a variance due to
the probable hardship in complying literally with the order of the Fire Chief.
A copy of any decision so made shall be sent to both the Fire Chief and the
owner, occupant, or manager making the appeal.
('72 Code, § 3-107)
§ 34.10 MANDATORY ASSISTANCE.
   Any official of the City Fire Department may command the assistance and
services of any person present at a fire to help in extinguishing the fire or
in the removal and protection of property. In the event that a spectator
refuses, neglects, or fails to assist the Fire Department after a lawful order
to do so, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('72 Code, § 3-112) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.11 POWER OF ARREST.
   The City Fire Chief or the assistant Fire Chief shall have the power, during
the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment, to
arrest any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering or resisting the fire
fighting effort, or any person who conducts himself or herself in a noisy or
disorderly manner. The officials shall be severally vested with the usual
powers and authority of city police officers to command all persons to assist
them in the performance of their duties.
('72 Code, § 3-113)
§ 34.12 FIRE INVESTIGATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate or cause to be
investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in
the city in which property has been destroyed or damaged in excess of $50. All
fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and such officers shall especially
make an investigation and report as to whether such fire was the result of
carelessness, accident, or design. Such investigation shall be begun
immediately following extinguishment of such fire or as soon as it is
determined to be safe to do the same, and the State Fire Marshal shall have the
right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he or she deems it
expedient or necessary. The officer making the investigation of fires occurring
within the city shall immediately notify the State Fire Marshal and shall
within one week of the occurrence of the fire furnish him or her with a written
statement of all the facts relating to the cause and origin of the fire, and
such further information as he or she may call for.
('72 Code, § 3-114)
§ 34.13 UNLAWFUL HANDLING OF EQUIPMENT.
   All apparatus and appliances for the extinguishment of fire shall be under
the direct and immediate control of the Chief of the Fire Department and of the
several fire companies to which such appliances have been delivered. No person
shall, under any pretense whatsoever, remove any of such appliances from the
place where it is kept by its respective company, except the members of such
company, without the order of one of the properly authorized officers of such
company, the Chief of the department, or someone authorized to act in his or
her stead. It shall be the duty of the fire companies to keep all apparatus and
hose in a serviceable and clean condition and in such a state as to be of
immediate use in case of fire.
('72 Code, § 3-115)
§ 34.14 HOSE TESTED.
   All fire hoses shall be pressure tested at least one time each year.
('72 Code, § 3-104)
§ 34.15 DRILLS.
   The City Fire Department shall hold departmental fire drills at least twelve
times per year at such times as the members of the Fire Department shall
decide.
('72 Code, § 3-105)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.30 RESERVE OFFICER BOND.
   No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid until a
bond in the amount of $2,000, payable to the city, has been filed with the City
Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond arranged and paid
for by the City Council and bonding all such officers of the City Council has
been filed. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Neb. RS Chapter
11, Article 1.
(Neb. RS 17-118, 81-1444) ('72 Code, § 3-1101) (Ord. 1268, passed 11-13-86)
§ 34.31 ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise perform the
functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction.
Primary jurisdiction means the geographic area within territorial limits of the
municipality.
   (B)   Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this state, but
beyond his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and authority to enforce
the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated
village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office, including the
authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing
the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases:
      (1)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow such person
into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and detain such
person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
      (2)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic
infraction, may follow such person anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the
boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there arrest and detain
such person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
      (3)   Any municipal law enforcement officer has such enforcement and
arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local,
state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance. A law
enforcement officer in need of assistance shall mean:
         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger; or
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an
arrest and the suspect:
            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested;
            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to
property unless immediately arrested; or
            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime;
and
      (4)   If the municipality, under the provisions of the Interlocal
Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act, enters into a contract with any
other municipality or county for law enforcement services or joint law
enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have such enforcement
authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political
subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the
agreement, the municipality shall provide liability insurance coverage for its
own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.
   (C)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is operating or in
the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug or otherwise in
violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-
4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01, or 60-6,211.02, a municipal
law enforcement officer has the power and authority to do any of the following
or any combination thereof:
      (1)   Transport such person to a facility outside of the law enforcement
officer's primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing of the person;
      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer's primary
jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or
      (3)   With respect to such person, perform other procedures or functions
outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction which are
directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any
other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-
1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01, or
60-6,211.02.
(Neb. RS 29-215)
   (D)   If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law
enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the event of
disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection with any
program of practice or training for such disaster, emergency, or civil defense
emergency when such program is conducted or participated in by the Nebraska
Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training program, the law
enforcement personnel have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this
state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the local government where they
are rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office, including
the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or
performing the functions within their primary jurisdiction. The municipality
shall self-insure or contract for insurance against any liability for personal
injuries or property damage that may be incurred by it or by its personnel as
the result of any movement made pursuant to this division.
(Neb. RS 81-829.65)
('72 Code, § 3-1102) (Ord. 1486, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1651, passed 7-23-98;
Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
§ 34.32 POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM DUTY; NOTICE AND HEARING;
DETERMINATION.
   (A)   No police officer, including the Chief of Police, shall be
disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed, or discharged except upon written
notice stating the reasons for such disciplinary action, suspension, demotion,
removal, or discharge. Such notice shall also contain a statement informing the
police officer of his or her right to a hearing before the City Council.
   (B)   Any police officer so disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed, or
discharged may, within ten days after being notified of such disciplinary
action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge, file with the City Clerk a
written demand for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall
set the matter for hearing not less than ten nor more than 20 days after the
filing of the written demand for a hearing. The City Council shall give the
police officer written notice of the hearing not less than seven nor more than
14 days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the police officer shall have the right to:
      (1)   Respond in person to the charges and to present witnesses and
documentary evidence;
      (2)   Confront and cross-examine available adverse witnesses; and
      (3)   To be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Not later than 30 days following the adjournment of the meeting at
which the hearing was held, the City Council shall vote to uphold, reverse, or
modify the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge.
The failure of the City Council to act within 30 days or the failure of a
majority of the elected Council members to vote to reverse or modify the
disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge shall be
construed as a vote to uphold the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion,
removal, or discharge. The decision of the City Council shall be based upon its
determination that, under the facts and evidence presented at the hearing, the
challenged disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge was
necessary for the proper management and the effective operation of the Police
Department in the performance of its duties under the state statutes.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the preemptory
suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer, pending the hearing
authorized by this section, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty, or
disobedience of orders.
(Neb. RS 17-107) ('72 Code, § 3-1103) (Ord. 1572, passed 4-24-97)
ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 34.40 ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the city to take into its
possession, for storage, all personal property abandoned on public property as
set forth and defined in §§
94.20 and
94.21 of this code.
(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)
§ 34.41 STORAGE FEES.
   The Mayor and City Council are hereby authorized to adopt, by resolution, a
storage fee schedule to be utilized by the Police Department for the assessment
of storage fees of personal property, in its possession, found abandoned on
public property pursuant to §
94.21 of this code.
(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)
§ 34.42 LIEN FOR STORAGE FEES AND DISPOSITION.
   Pursuant to Neb. RS 52-601.01 et seq. the Police Department of the city is
authorized to dispose of said personal property pursuant to said statutes, as
they now exist and as they may from time to time hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
§ 34.50 CREATION, DUTIES, OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   There is hereby created the City of Wahoo Emergency Medical Services
Department. It shall be the duty of the Emergency Medical Services Department
to provide for the transportation of sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated persons needing emergency medical attention. The Emergency
Medical Services Department shall perform its duties subject to the
requirements of state statutes regarding an emergency medical service and shall
not carry out any of its duties until such requirements are met. The direct
management and control of the Emergency Medical Services Department shall be
vested in the Emergency Medical Services Department Head. The Emergency Medical
Services Department Head shall be appointed by the Mayor for his or her term,
subject to the approval of the City Council. The Emergency Medical Services
Department shall be composed of such paid and volunteer pre-hospital emergency
medical service providers approved from time to time by the City Council. Prior
to responding to a medical call, all proposed new volunteer members of the
department shall be added to a list for approval, and approved by, the City
Council.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Medical Services Practice Act, see Neb. RS 38-1201 et. seq.
§ 34.51 OFFICERS GENERALLY; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of the Emergency Medical Services
Department Head.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.52 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT HEAD; POWERS AND DUTIES
GENERALLY. 
   (A)   The Emergency Medical Services Department Head shall have such powers
and authority and shall perform such duties as are provided by this Code and by
state law. The general duties hereunder are, at the direction of the City
Administrator, to command the Department and control the property, implements
and apparatus used by the department.
   (B)   The Emergency Medical Services Department Head shall:
      (1)   Have the immediate superintendence of all pre-hospital emergency
medical service providers;
      (2)   Develop merit-based standards, subject to the approval of the City
Council, for all volunteer positions within the Department to ensure the
ability to perform the essential functions of the position.;
      (3)   Establish and regularly update, in cooperation with the City's
Physician Medical Director, rules and regulations for qualification as a
volunteer member of the Department. Each member of the Emergency Medical
Services Department shall be furnished with a copy of the rules and regulations
and sign an acknowledgment of the receipt thereof, and shall thereafter comply
with said rules and regulations in the Emergency Medical Services Department
Head's management of the Emergency Medical Services Department;
      (4)   Make recommendations to the City Administrator for hiring and
removal of additional paid staff;
      (5)   Maintain the Emergency Medical Services Department in a state of
readiness to promptly respond to any emergency, manmade or natural disaster,
traffic or other accident, or other calls for service or assistance;
      (6)   Ensure that the emergency medical service providers are competent
and maintain currency with their level of licensing, and that they are well-
informed and trained in the modern methods of emergency medical services;
      (7)   Ensure that the Emergency Medical Services Department provides
community relations programs from time to time as are necessary or appropriate
to develop or maintain positive relationships between the Emergency Medical
Services Department and the community (particularly partners like the Saunders
Medical Center);
      (8)   Execute orders of the City Administrator;
      (9)   Cause the repair, improvement or maintenance of the equipment and
personally supervise and approve of the same;
      (10)   Report to the City Council at regularly scheduled meetings each
year;
      (11)   Each year cause to be filed with the City Clerk and the Clerk of
the District Court of Saunders County a certified copy of the rolls of all
members in good standing in their respective companies in order to obtain the
exemptions provided by law;
      (12)   Review and recommend approval of all expenditures of the Emergency
Medical Services Department;
      (13)   Keep, or cause to be kept, in books for these purposes, a record
of all meetings of the Emergency Medical Services Department; an attendance
record of all members at said meetings; a record of all training sessions and a
list of attendees; a record of all calls which shall include the name of the
party transported, the location of the place where the squad responded, the
address and location where the party was taken, why such transportation was
needed all other information the Department Head deems relevant and necessary
for the good and protection of the Department and the City; a full report of
all transactions of the department; a detailed report of all complaints against
members and the judgment of the Emergency Medical Services Department Head
thereupon; and such other books and records as the Emergency Medical Services
Department Head deems necessary and advisable to keep related to the business
of the department, all of which shall be placed on file with the City Clerk on
a monthly basis;
      (14)   Examine and investigate charges against any member of the
Emergency Medical Services Department and request the assistance of law
enforcement in the investigation;
      (15)   Establish an advisory committee of volunteers from the Emergency
Medical Services Department to offer insight and recommendation to the
Department Head pertaining to issues involving the Department with this
committee serving the dual purpose of providing a way for volunteers to express
concerns they may have relating to the Department and/or city.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Medical Services Practice Act, see Neb. RS 38-1201 et. seq.
§ 34.53 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Emergency Medical Services Department shall consist of as many
paid and volunteer members as may be decided by the City Council.
      (1)   All proposed volunteer members shall be identified by the Emergency
Medical Services Department Head and approved by the City Council prior to
gaining membership status. To qualify for such recommendation by the Department
Head, proposed members shall have satisfied prior to advancement to the City
Council the criteria for qualification as a volunteer member.
      (2)   To remain in active volunteer membership status, members must
actively and faithfully perform the duties of their position and continue to
meet the criteria for qualification as a volunteer member.
      (3)   Members shall be considered employees of the city for the purpose
of worker's compensation.
      (4)   The city shall purchase a life insurance policy (or group policy)
to cover each active volunteer emergency medical service providers in the
amount and with terms required by state law.
   (B)   The members may hold meetings and engage in social activities with the
approval of the City Council. A record of all meetings shall be kept and filed
on a monthly basis with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Members shall be subject to such rules and regulations and shall
perform such duties as may be prescribed or required of them by this code.
Volunteer members of the Emergency Medical Services Department when testifying
as a witness in connection with his or her officially assigned duties in that
capacity alone shall not be deemed an employee of the State of Nebraska or of
the city.
   (D)   All members of the Emergency Medical Services Department may be
required to submit to a physical examination and/or random drug testing at any
time as required by the Emergency Medical Services Department Head or by the
City Council.
   (E)   All members of the Emergency Medical Services Department shall, when
possible, wear an appropriate uniform by which they may be known to the public
during the performance of their duties. The city shall furnish said uniforms;
provided, however, that any member who shall lose or destroy the same (not
while in the line of duty) shall be required to pay the cost of replacing it;
and when any member shall leave the department, he or she shall immediately
deliver the all property belonging to the city, to an officer of the Emergency
Medical Services Department.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Group life insurance, see Neb. RS 35-108
   Employee defined, see Neb. RS 48-115
§ 34.54 SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION OF VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.
   During the pendency of any charges against any volunteer member of the
Department, the Emergency Medical Services Department Head may suspend from
duty any such volunteer member until such charges can be examined and
investigated. Following the examination and investigation of any such charges,
any volunteer member may be removed by the City Council from membership in the
Emergency Medical Services Department upon recommendation of the Emergency
Medical Services Department Head. If the Emergency Medical Services Department
Head does not recommend removal, upon the recommendation of the Mayor and a
vote of three-fourths of the City Council as a whole, the City Council may
remove any such volunteer member from membership following such examination and
investigation.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.55 DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF PAID STAFF.
   All paid staff are subject to the city’s Employee Handbook.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.56 SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The Emergency Medical Services Department is authorized to remove
equipment from the city limits to provide mutual aid to fire and medical
districts with whom the city has a mutual aid agreement.
   (B)   The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in order to render aid
in the event of a disaster or civil defense emergency or in connection with any
program of practice or training for such disaster or civil defense emergency
when such program is conducted or participated in by the civil defense agency
of this state. Such movement may be to any point in this state, or may be into
any adjoining state when mutual aid arrangements have been entered into on
behalf of this state and such other state as authorized by statute.
   (C)   The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city for limited periods of
time for the purpose of honoring fallen firefighters and emergency medical
service providers from other fire and medical districts and for the purpose of
participating in parades and similar events in other cities.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency related definitions, see Neb. RS 81-829.39
   Interjurisdictional emergency management agreements, see Neb. RS 81-829.48
§ 34.57 CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in accordance with
contracts entered into between the city and county hospitals, business
establishments, industries, other political subdivisions or government
agencies.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council are authorized to enter into contracts with
county hospitals, business establishments, industries, other political
subdivisions or government agencies for the purpose of providing emergency
medical services outside the limits of the city.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.58 APPROVED MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The city previously has, and hereby affirms, an agreement with the Wahoo
Volunteer Fire Department as well as the Wahoo Rural Fire District to provide
emergency medical services thereunder. The city previously has, and hereby
affirms, its current mutual aid agreements. All such agreements shall be
approved by the City Council and thereafter placed on file at the office of the
City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency related definitions, see Neb. RS 81-829.39
   Interjurisdictional emergency management agreements, see Neb. RS 81-829.48
   Provision of services outside limits of municipality, see Neb. RS 18-1706 et
seq.
§ 34.59 INTERFERENCE WITH PRE-HOSPITAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDERS AND
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.
   Any person who shall willfully offer any hindrance to, or interfere with,
any emergency medical services provider in the performance of his/her duty, or
shall in any manner willfully injure any medical squad, apparatus or other
equipment for providing medical services, or shall give any false medical alarm
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.60 DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES.
   No obligations, except in emergencies and with regard to minor expenditures,
shall be incurred on behalf of the Emergency Medical Services Department unless
authorized pursuant to municipal ordinance or approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.61 EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except for members of the Emergency
Medical Services Department, to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the medical squads and other
apparatus belonging to the city and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see Neb. RS 28-519
§ 34.62 FALSE CALL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm for emergency medical services and upon
conviction shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   False reporting, see Neb. RS 28-907
§ 34.63 DONATIONS TRUST FUND.
   (A)   (1)   The Department may maintain a trust fund pursuant to Neb. RS 35-
901.
      (2)   If the Department maintains such a fund, it shall, except as
provided in division (C) of this section, deposit all general donations or
contributions, bequests, or annuities made to the Volunteer Department and all
money raised by or for the Volunteer Department in the trust fund. The trust
fund shall be under the control of the Volunteer Department, and the Volunteer
Department may make expenditures from the trust fund as it deems necessary. The
Volunteer Department shall appoint a treasurer of the Volunteer Department who
shall be the custodian of the trust fund.
   (B)   The trust fund shall not be considered public funds or funds of the
City of Wahoo for any purpose, including the Nebraska Budget Act, nor shall the
city incur any liability solely by reason of any expenditure from such fund
except liability for property when the city receives title to property acquired
with money from such fund.
   (C)   (1)   If the total amount of expenditures and receipts in the trust
fund exceeds $100,000 in any 12-month period, the Volunteer Department shall
inform the city and the city may examine or cause to be examined all books,
accounts, vouchers, records, and expenditures with regard to the trust fund.
      (2)   Funds, fees, or charges solicited, collected, or received by the
Volunteer Department that are:
         (a)   In consequence of the performance of fire or rescue services by
the Volunteer Department at a given place and time;
         (b)   Accomplished through the use by the Volunteer Department of
equipment owned by the city and provided to the Volunteer Department for that
purpose; and
         (c)   Paid by or on behalf of the recipient of those services shall
not be deposited in a trust fund authorized by this section.
      (3)   Such funds are public funds of the city supporting the Volunteer
Department and are deemed to have been collected by the Volunteer Department as
the agent of the city and are held by the Volunteer Department on the city's
behalf. If such funds are in the possession of a Volunteer Department, the city
shall cause all the books, accounts, records, vouchers, expenditures, and
statements regarding such funds to be examined and independently audited at the
city's expense by a qualified professional auditor or the Auditor of Public
Accounts for the immediately preceding five years.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed or deemed to permit a
violation of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
   (E)   All expenditures of public funds as defined in the Nebraska Budget Act
for support of the Volunteer Department or its purposes shall be submitted as
claims, and approved by the city and published as required by law. All such
claims shall be properly itemized for proposed expenditure or reimbursement for
costs already incurred and paid except as may be otherwise permitted pursuant
to Neb. RS 35-106.
   (F)   All money raised pursuant to the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska
Lottery and Raffle Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, and the Nebraska
Small Lottery and Raffle Act shall be subject to such acts with respect to the
deposit and expenditure of such money.
   (G)   The Volunteer Department shall not solicit, charge, or collect any
funds, fees, or charges as described in division (C)(2) of this section without
the express authorization of the City Council supporting the Volunteer
Department by vote of a majority of the members of the City Council. Such
authorization shall not extend beyond a 12-month period but may be renewed at
the City Council's discretion in the same manner in which it was initially
granted. Upon collection or receipt, such funds, fees, or charges shall be
remitted to the designated officer of the city for deposit to the city's
account. The City Council may appropriate and expend some or all of such funds
for the support of a service award benefit program adopted and conducted
pursuant to the Volunteer Emergency Responders Recruitment and Retention Act.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
§ 34.64 CITY PHYSICIAN MEDICAL DIRECTOR.
   The Department shall contract with a qualified physician who shall serve as
the Physician Medical Director pursuant to the standards set forth in the
Emergency Medical Services Practice Act. The Physician Medical Director shall
be responsible for the medical supervision of out-of-hospital emergency care
providers and verification of skill proficiency of out-of-hospital emergency
care providers. The Emergency Medical Services Department Head shall make
recommendation to the City Administrator and Mayor prior to contracting with
ainew qualified physician or at the time of renewal of an existing contract.
Provided, however, that all contracts with a Physician Medical Director are
ultimately subject to review and approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 2219, passed 8-25-16)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Medical Services Practice Act, see Neb. RS 38-1201 et. seq.
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
35.02   Annual audit; financial statements
   
35.03   Claims
   
35.04   Expenditures
   
35.05   Warrants
   
35.06   Collection of special assessments; procedure
   
35.07   Special assessment fund
   
35.08   Sinking funds
   
35.09   Deposit of funds
   
35.10   Certificates of deposit; time deposits; conditions
   
35.11   Bond issues
   
35.12   Motor vehicle tax
   
35.13   Investment of funds
   
35.14   Credit cards; authority to accept
   
35.15   Sales and use tax
   
35.16   Park Fund
Electrical, Water and Sewer Systems
   
35.30   Fiscal year
   
35.31   Budget statement
   
35.32   Budget hearing
   
35.33   Expenditures
Annual Budget
   
35.50   Fiscal year
   
35.51   Expenditures prior to adoption of budget
   
35.52   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction
   
35.53   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification of tax
amount
   
35.54   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of amount of tax
   
35.55   Public funds defined
   
35.56   Budget procedure
   
35.57   Appropriation bill
   
35.58   Property tax request; increase by more than allowable growth
percentage; procedure for setting
Tax Levies
   
35.70   All purpose levy; allocation; abandonment; extraordinary levies
   
35.71   Property tax; certification of amount
   
35.72   Property tax levy; maximum; authority to exceed
   
35.73   Property tax levy and request; authority to set
   
35.74   Property tax request; procedure for setting
   
35.75   Property tax request; increase by more than allowable growth
percentage; procedure for setting
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS; LOWEST
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a public
power district to operate, renew, replace, or add to the electric distribution,
transmission, or generation system of the city, no contract for enlargement or
general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system,
bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of
such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, costing over
$30,000, shall be made unless it is first approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the City Council makes
any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general improvements, such
as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets,
or any other work or improvement when the cost of such enlargement or
improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost shall be made
by the City Engineer and submitted to the City Council. In advertising for bids
as provided in divisions (C) and (E) of this section, the City Council may
publish the amount of the estimate.
   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing
over $30,000 entered into:
      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or
improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property; or
      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of such
enlargement or general improvements.
   (D)   A city electric utility may enter into a contract for the enlargement
or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of equipment used for
such enlargement or improvement without advertising for bids if the price is:
      (1)   $30,000 or less;
      (2)   $60,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;
      (3)   $90,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000;
      (4)   $120,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000.
   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) of this section shall
be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper
published in or of general circulation in the city. In case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or
unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health, or property, estimates of
costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance
authorized by Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a three-quarters vote of the City
Council and entered of record.
   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the City
Council receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids received by
the City Council contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost, the City
Council may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the proposed
enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the estimate
given.
   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the City Council, or Board of Public
Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been manufactured or
assembled to the specific qualifications of the purchasing city, the City
Council or Board of Public Works may authorize the manufacture and assemblage
of such materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure
when it is provided by the manufacturer.
   (H)   Any city bidding procedure may be waived by the City Council or Board
of Public Works:
      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and
from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been
obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145 to 81-162;
      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503;
      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan, or program.
   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule
charter, a city which has established, by an interlocal agreement with any
county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal property
without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been established
by the federal General Services Administration or the materiel division of the
Department of Administrative Services.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (I), the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
         PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes but is not limited to supplies, materials,
and equipment used by or furnished to any officer, office, department,
institution, board, or other agency.
         PURCHASING or PURCHASE. The obtaining of personal property by sale,
lease, or other contractual means.
(’72 Code, § 1-809) (Am. Ord. 1201, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 7-23-
98; Am. Ord. 1749, passed 12-28-00; Am. Ord. 2480, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Cost estimates; procedure, see Neb. RS 17-568.01
   Municipal bidding procedure; waiver, see Neb. RS 17-568.02
   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.
§ 35.02 ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city accounts to be made
by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of
the fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the
discretion of the City Council. The audit shall be completed and the annual
audit report made not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year.
The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three copies of the
audit report to the City Council. All public utilities or other enterprises
which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited separately, and
the results of such audits shall appear separately in the annual audit report,
and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and
materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit
report shall set forth the financial position and results of financial
operations for each fund or group of accounts of the city as well as an opinion
by the accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two copies of the
annual audit report shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall become a part
of the public records of the City Clerk's office, and will at all times
thereafter be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed with the
auditor of public accounts.
   (B)   The City Council shall provide and file with the City Clerk not later
than August 1 of each year financial statements showing its actual and budgeted
figures for the most recently completed fiscal year. (Neb. RS 13-606)
('72 Code, § 1-810)
Statutory reference:
   State municipal auditing regulations; similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-
2901 through 19-2909
§ 35.03 CLAIMS.
   (A)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable against
the city shall:
      (1)   Be presented in writing;
      (2)   State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
      (3)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed, or the time, place, nature and circumstances giving rise to
the claim.
   (B)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim, other
than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file such
claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or
attorney by letter mailed to the claimant's address within five days if the
claim is disallowed by the City Council.
   (D)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action brought
against it for any claim, or for any claim allowed in part which has not been
presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is for a
greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.
(Neb. RS 17-714)
   (E)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order for their
payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which they
are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no order or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn, unless there shall be sufficient money in the treasury at
the credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided, that in the event
there exists at the time such warrant is drawn obligated funds from the federal
government or the state, or both from the federal government and the state, for
the general purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn
in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn to
the additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal or state funds. No
claim shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant for the payment
thereof may be legally drawn.
(Neb. RS 17-715)
§ 35.04 EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   No city official shall have the power to appropriate, issue, or draw
any order or warrant on the city treasury for money, unless the same has been
appropriated or ordered by ordinance.
(Neb. RS 17-708)
   (B)   No expenditure for any improvement to be paid for out of the general
fund of the city shall exceed in any one year the amount provided for that
improvement in the adopted budget statement.
('72 Code, § 1-808)
§ 35.05 WARRANTS.
   All warrants drawn upon the city treasury must be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to which the
warrant is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular
object. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon warrants so drawn. Each
warrant shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget statement for
the fund upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended of such fund.
(Neb. RS 17-711) ('72 Code, § 1-812)
§ 35.06 COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The city shall have the authority to collect the special assessments
which it levies and perform all other necessary functions related thereto
including foreclosure.
   (B)   Notice that special assessments are due shall be mailed or otherwise
delivered to the last known address of the person against whom such special
assessments are assessed or to the lending institution or other party
responsible for paying such special assessments. Failure to receive such notice
shall not relieve the taxpayer from any liability to pay such special
assessments and any interest or penalties accrued thereon.
   (C)   The city shall:
      (1)   File notice of the assessments and the amount of assessment being
levied for each lot or tract of land to the Register of Deeds; and
      (2)   File a release of assessment upon final payment of each assessment
with the Register of Deeds.
(Neb. RS 18-1216) ('72 Code, § 1-825) (Ord. 1604, passed 9-25-97)
§ 35.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
   All money received on special tax assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any such
improvement.
(Neb. RS 17-710) ('72 Code, § 1-814)
§ 35.08 SINKING FUNDS.
   (A)   The City Council, subject to the limitations set forth herein, shall
have the power to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by state law upon
the taxable value of all taxable property within the city for a term not to
exceed that prescribed by state law in addition to the amount of tax which may
be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement of the
city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the construction,
purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment, or repair, not including
maintenance, of the approved uses as authorized by state law.
(Neb. RS 19-1302)
   (B)   To initiate the sinking fund, the City Council shall declare its
purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the city the
proposition to provide the improvement at the next general city election. The
resolution shall set forth a clear description of the improvement, the
estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, over a definite period of years
(not exceeding ten years) required to pay such cost, and the specific name or
designation for the sinking fund sought to be established to carry out the
planned improvement, together with a statement of the proposition for placement
upon the ballot at such election. Notice of the proposition shall be published
in its entirety three times on successive weeks before the day of the election
in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the city. The sinking fund may
be established after the election if a majority or more of the legal votes were
in favor of the establishment of the fund. The City Council may then proceed to
establish the fund in conformity with the provisions of the proposition and
applicable state law. The funds received by the City Treasurer shall, as they
accumulate, be immediately invested with the written approval of the City
Council in the manner provided by state law. No sinking fund so established
shall be used for any purpose or purposes contrary to the purpose as it
appeared on the ballot unless the City Council is authorized to do so by 60% of
the qualified electors of the city voting at a general election favoring such a
change in the use of the sinking fund.
('72 Code, § 1-815)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1301 through 19-1304
   Investment of funds, see Neb. RS 77-2337 and 77-2339
§ 35.09 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit,
for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying
mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing, all money
collected, received, or held by him or her as City Treasurer. Such deposits
shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City
Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a stockholder,
director, or other officer of such bank, capital stock financial institution,
or qualifying mutual financial institution is also serving as Mayor, as a
member of the City Council, as a member of the Board of Public Works, or as any
other officer of the city shall not disqualify such bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution from acting
as a depository for such municipal funds.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions:
         (a)   A bond in such penal sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit
at any time less the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or, in lieu thereof,
         (b)   Security given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit Security
Act to secure the payment of all such deposits and accretions.
      (2)   The City Council shall approve such bond or giving of security. The
City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by
reason of the failure of any such depository so designated and approved.
(Neb. RS 17-607)
   (C)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock financial
institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be a surety bond
to the extent that the deposits are insured or guaranteed by such corporation,
and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no other surety bond or other
security shall be required.
(Neb. RS 77-2362)
   (D)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual
financial institutions.
(Neb. RS 17-607, 77-2362)
('72 Code, § 1-817) (Am. Ord. 1645, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-
04)
§ 35.10 CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS; CONDITIONS.
   The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and City Council
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
deposits in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual
financial institution in the State of Nebraska to the extent that such
certificates of deposit or time deposits are insured or guaranteed by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Deposits may be made in excess of the
amounts so secured by the corporation, and the amount of the excess deposit
shall be secured by a bond or by security given in the same manner as is
provided for cities of the first class in Neb. RS 16-714 to 16-716. Neb. RS 77-
2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. RS
77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.
(Neb. RS 17-720) (Ord. 1646, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
Statutory Reference:
   Applicability of Neb. RS 16-714 to 16-716, see Neb. RS 17-720
   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. RS 77-2386 through 77-23,106
§ 35.11 BOND ISSUES.
   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law, issue
bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted by
state law. The City Council shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on such bonds and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.
('72 Code, § 1-819)
Statutory reference:
   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805
   Boundary bridge bonds, see Neb. RS 39-835 through 39-842.01
   Cemetery bonds, see Neb. RS 17-939
   Cold storage plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-958
   Compromise of indebtedness, see Neb. RS 10-301 through 10-305
   Dikes, see Neb. RS 17-529.01
   Flood control project bonds, see Neb. RS 17-529.08
   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. RS 10-606 through 10-614
   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143
   Internal improvement bonds, see Neb. RS 10-401 through 10-411
   Joint power plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-911
   Library bonds, see Neb. RS 17-968
   Medical and multiunit facility bonds, see Neb. RS 23-3513
   Municipal cemetery; issuance of bonds, see Neb. RS 12-1001 through 12-1004
and RS 17-939
   Power plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-908
   Public safety bonds, see Neb. RS 18-1201 through 18-1202
   Uniform registration and cancellation of bonds, see Neb. RS 10-201 through
10-209
   Utilities bonds, see Neb. RS 17-905
   Waterworks bonds, see Neb. RS 17-534
§ 35.12 MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.
   The City Council of the city may levy a tax on all motor vehicles owned or
used in the city. Until the implementation date designated by the Director of
Motor Vehicles under Neb. RS 23-186 the tax shall be paid to the County
Treasurer of the county in which the city is located when the registration fees
as provided in the Motor Vehicle Registration Act are paid. Such taxes shall be
credited by the County Treasurer to the road fund of the city. On and after the
implementation date designated under Neb. RS 23-186, the tax shall be paid to
the County Treasurer for credit to such road fund. Such funds shall be used by
the city for constructing, resurfacing, maintaining, or improving streets,
roads alleys, public ways, or parts thereof or for the amortization of bonded
indebtedness when created for such purposes.
(Neb. RS 18-1214) ('72 Code, § 1-820) (Ord. 1323, passed 12-28-89)
§ 35.13 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   When the City Treasurer holds funds of the city in excess of the
amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and improvements,
the Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and authorize the
Treasurer to invest the surplus funds in the outstanding bonds or registered
warrants of the city, bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively
by any of the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit banks, or the
13 banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit
Administration, or in interest-bearing bonds or the obligations of the United
States. The interest on such bonds or warrants shall be credited to the fund
out of which the bonds or warrants were purchased.
   (B)   All income received by the city from public utilities and from the
payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall be
applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money borrowed
and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there be any
surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the payment of
public utility bonds or for improvements of the works, or into the general fund
as the Council may direct. The surplus remaining, if any, may, if the Council
so directs, be invested in interest-bearing bonds or obligations of the United
States.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and authorize
the Treasurer to dispose of the surplus electric light, water, or gas funds, or
the funds arising from the sale of electric light, water, or natural gas
distribution properties, by the payment of outstanding electric light, water,
or gas distribution bonds or water warrants then due. The excess, if any, after
such payments may be transferred to the general fund of the city.
   (D)   Any surplus funds arising out of the operation of any system of
waterworks, power plant, ice plant, gas plant, sewerage, heating or lighting
plant, or distribution system by the Board of Public Works, or by the City
Council where any of such utilities are not being operated by such a Board, may
be invested, if not invested pursuant to the provisions of any other law upon
the subject, in like manner and subject to the same conditions as the
investment of similar funds of cities of the first class, as provided in Neb.
RS 16-691.01.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever the city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in
excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment
of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to
pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the
current year, the City Council may invest any such surplus in excess of current
needs or such excess in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit, in time
deposits, and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer is
authorized to invest pursuant to the State Capital Expansion Act, Neb. RS 17-
1269 et seq., and the State Funds Investment Act, Neb. RS 17-1237 et seq., and
as provided in the authorized investment guidelines of the State Investment
Council in effect on the date the investment is made. The State Investment
Officer shall, upon request, furnish a copy of current authorized investment
guidelines of the State Investment Council.
      (2)   Nothing in division (E)(1) above shall be construed to authorize
investments in venture capital or to expand the investment authority of a local
government investment pool under the Public Entities Pooled Investment Act,
Neb. RS 77-23,109 et seq.
(’72 Code, § 1-818) (Am. Ord. 1322, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 2480, passed - -
25)
Statutory reference:
   Investment in bonds, see Neb. RS 17-608 and 17-609
§ 35.14 CREDIT CARDS; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT.
   (A)   (1)   If authorized by the City Council any city officials may accept
credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards whether presented in person or
electronically, or electronic funds transfers as a method of cash payment of
any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine, license,
fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, as
provided by Neb. RS 77-1702.
      (2)   A county treasurer, county official, or political subdivision
official shall not accept a central bank digital currency as a method of cash
payment of any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine,
license, fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature.
   (B)   The total amount of the taxes, levies, excises, duties, customs,
tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees, or assessments of whatever
kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card shall be
collected by the city official.
   (C)   With respect to a facility which it operates in propriety capacity the
city may choose to accept credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards, whether
presented in person or electronically, or electronic funds transfers as a means
of cash payment and may adjust the price for services to reflect the handling
and payment costs.
   (D)   The city official shall obtain, for each transaction, authorization
for use of any credit card, charge card, or debit card used pursuant to this
section from the financial institution, vending service company, credit card or
charge card company, or third-party merchant bank providing that service.
   (E)   (1)   The types of credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards accepted
and the payment services provided shall be determined by the State Treasurer
and the Director of Administrative Services, with the advice of a committee
convened by the State Treasurer and the Director. The committee shall consist
of the State Treasurer, the Tax Commissioner, the Director, and representatives
from counties, cities, and other political subdivisions as may be appropriate.
      (2)   The committee shall develop recommendations for the contracting of
such services. The State Treasurer and the Director shall contract with one or
more credit card, charge card, or debit card companies or third-party merchant
banks for services on behalf of the state and those counties, cities, and
political subdivisions that choose to participate in the state contract for
such services. The State Treasurer and the Director shall consider, for the
purpose of this section, any negotiated discount, processing, or transaction
fee imposed by a credit card, charge card, or debit card company or third-party
merchant bank as an administrative expense.
      (3)   If the City Council chooses not to participate in the state
contract, it may choose the types of credit cards, charge cards, and debit
cards and may negotiate and contract independently or collectively as a
governmental entity with one or more financial institutions, vending service
companies, credit card, charge card, or debit card companies, or third-party
merchant banks for the provision of these services.
   (F)   Subject to the direction of the City Council, a city official
authorizing the acceptance of credit card or charge card payments shall be
authorized but not required to impose a surcharge or convenience fee upon the
person making a payment by credit card or charge card so as to wholly or
partially offset the amount of any discount or administrative fees charged to
the city, but the surcharge or convenience fee shall not exceed the surcharge
or convenience fee imposed by the credit card or charge card companies or
third-party merchant banks which have contracted under division (E) above. The
surcharge or convenience fee shall be applied only when allowed by the
operating rules and regulations of the credit card or charge card involved or
when authorized in writing by the credit card or charge card company involved.
When a person elects to make a payment to the city by credit card or charge
card and such a surcharge or convenience fee is imposed, the payment of the
surcharge or convenience fee shall be deemed voluntary by that person and shall
be in no case refundable. If a payment is made electronically by credit card,
charge card, debit card, or electronic funds transfer as part of a system for
providing or retrieving information electronically, the city official shall be
authorized but not required to impose an additional surcharge or convenience
fee upon the person making a payment.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY. A digital medium of exchange, token, or
monetary unit of account issued by the United States Federal Reserve System or
any analogous federal agency that is made directly available to the consumer by
such federal entities. CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY includes a digital medium
of exchange, token, or monetary unit of account so issued that is processed or
validated directly by such federal entities.
      ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER. The movement of funds by nonpaper means,
usually through a payment system, including, but not limited to, an automated
clearinghouse or the Federal Reserve’s Fedwire System.
(Ord. 1648, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2480, passed
- -25)
§ 35.15 SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a sales and use tax of 1% upon the same
transactions within the city, which the state of Nebraska is authorized to
impose a sales and use tax pursuant to the Local Option Revenue Act of the
State of Nebraska, as amended from time to time. Said tax shall take effect for
all transactions occurring after December 31, 1998. The revenue received from
said tax will be allocated by the Mayor and Council of the city, to the general
fund of the city for police and fire protection, street maintenance and
improvements, city buildings maintenance and improvements, and parks and
recreation.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby imposed an additional sales and use tax of 0.50%
upon the same transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose
a tax, which additional sales and use tax shall commence April 1, 2005, for the
purpose of paying:
         (a)   The principal of and the interest on Aquatic Center bonds in the
principal amount of not to exceed $2,000,000, to be issued by the city, and
         (b)   The annual operational costs of the city's aquatic facilities
after application of such aquatic facilities revenues.
      (2)   Said tax to remain in effect only so long as any of the
indebtedness evidenced by said bonds (including any refunding bonds issued to
refund such indebtedness) shall remain outstanding and unpaid.
   (C)   That at the sunset of the additional sales and use tax of 0.50% set
forth in division (B), when the outstanding bonded indebtedness set forth in
said division is paid in full, then said additional sales and use tax of 0.50%
shall continue and be used to provide funds for city capital projects
principally consisting of the improvement, development, and maintenance of
parks and recreation facilities, each of which capital projects shall be
approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   There is hereby imposed an additional sales and use tax of 0.50% upon
the same transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a
tax, which additional sales and use tax shall commence January 1, 2019, and be
used for public infrastructure improvements, including the Chestnut Street
Project. Said additional sales and use tax shall remain in effect for a period
of ten years, unless bonds are issued with some or all of the additional
revenues pledged for payment of such bonds, in which case the increased sales
and use tax rate will remain in effect and additional revenues will be
collected until payment in full of such bonds and any refunding bonds.
(Ord. 1670, passed 11-23-98; Am. Ord. 1878, passed 11-23-04; Am. Ord. 2174,
passed 1-22-15; Am. Ord. 2281, passed 6-14-18)
§ 35.16 PARK FUND.
   The city owns the city parks and other recreational areas. The Mayor and
Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and
maintenance of the city parks and recreational facilities may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits
that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as
the Park Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City Treasurer. The Park
and Recreation Commission shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient management of the city parks and other
recreational areas of the city. The Park and Recreation Commission shall not
enter into a contract of any nature which involves an expenditure of funds,
except for ordinary operating expenses, unless the contract has been approved
by resolution of the majority of the members of the Council prior to the
contractual agreement.
(Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-952) ('72 Code, § 3-401) (Am. Ord. 1937, passed 7-
27-06)
ELECTRICAL, WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
§ 35.30 FISCAL YEAR.
   There shall be and is established a separate fiscal year for the proprietary
functions of the city; that said fiscal year shall commence on January 1 and
end with the last day of December, commencing with January 1, 1994.
('72 Code, § 1-821) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)
Cross reference:
   Fiscal year, see §
35.50
§ 35.31 BUDGET STATEMENT.
   With respect to the proprietary functions of the city, the following
procedures shall apply:
   (A)   At least 30 days prior to the start of the fiscal year of each
proprietary function, a proposed proprietary budget statement shall be prepared
in writing and filled with the City Clerk containing the following information:
      (1)   For the immediate two prior fiscal years, the revenue from all
sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year,
the amount received by taxation, and the amount of actual expenditure;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from all
sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual unencumbered cash
balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount received from
taxation, and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure, whichever is
applicable;
      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue
from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual or
estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be available
at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended during the
fiscal year, and the amount of cash reserve based on actual experience of prior
years; and
      (4)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which shall
include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary function.
   (B)   The statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for each fiscal
year and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years.
   (C)   Within three years after the effective date of this act, each
proprietary budget statement shall be filed on forms prescribed and furnished
by the Auditor of Public Accounts following consultation with representatives
of such governing bodies as operate proprietary functions subject to the
provisions of the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
('72 Code, § 1-822) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)
§ 35.32 BUDGET HEARING.
   (A)   After a proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with the City
Clerk, the Mayor and Council shall conduct a public hearing on such statement.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the proposed
proprietary budget statement, and notice that the full proposed proprietary
budget statement is available for public review with the City Clerk during
normal business hours shall be published one time at least five days prior to
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Council's
jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Council's jurisdiction.
   (B)   After such hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement shall be
adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept
of such hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget statement reflects a change
from the proposed proprietary budget statement presented at the hearing, a copy
of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be filed with the City Clerk
within 20 days after its adoption and published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident
with the Council's jurisdiction.
('72 Code, § 1-823) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)
§ 35.33 EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed the
estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its fiscal
year, the Council shall adopt a proprietary function reconciliation statement
within 90 days after the end of such fiscal year which reflects any difference
between the adopted proprietary budget statement for the previous fiscal year
and the actual expenditures and revenue for such fiscal year. After adoption of
a proprietary function reconciliation statement, it shall be filed with the
City Clerk and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Council's
jurisdiction. If the difference between the adopted proprietary budget for the
previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures and revenue for such fiscal
year is greater than 10%, the proprietary function reconciliation statement
shall only be adopted following a public hearing.
   (B)   If the budget of a proprietary function is included in the city budget
statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act, the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act need not be followed for that proprietary function.
Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the general fund
of the city shall be shown as a source of revenue in the city budget statement
created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act.
('72 Code, § 1-824) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)
ANNUAL BUDGET
§ 35.50 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city, except for the proprietary functions of the
city, commences on October 1 and extends through the following September 30.
('72 Code, § 1-801) (Am. Ord. 1515, passed 1-25-96)
Cross reference:
   Fiscal year for proprietary functions of the city, see §
35.30
§ 35.51 EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of each
succeeding year and until the adoption of the budget by the City Council in
September, the City Council may expend any balance of cash on hand for the
current expenses of the city. Except as provided in division (B) of this
section, such expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the total
amount expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the prior
budget year. Such expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for
each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.
(Neb. RS 13-509.01)
   (B)   The restriction on expenditures in division (A) of this section may be
exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that expenditures beyond
the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to meet its statutory
duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of the expenditures in
excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by the City Council in
open public session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged
against appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the
budget when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that authorized by any other
statutory provision.
('72 Code, § 1-804.01) (Ord. 1484, passed 3-9-95)
§ 35.52 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.
   (A)   The City Council shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to § 35.29. A proposed budget statement shall contain the
following information, except as provided by state law:
      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the unencumbered cash balance at the
beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by
taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and
estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the
amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement
shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and
shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or
biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget
adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
       (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an
estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than
revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately
stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated unencumbered cash
balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year
or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year or
biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of
prior years or biennial period, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters of
the political subdivision; and
         (b)   For all other purposes.
      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each
proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, and a grand total
of all funds maintained by the City Council; and
      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a separate budget
statement which is approved by the City Council as provided in the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act.
   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer for
the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.
   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget statement
detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.
   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and less
the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to be
received from taxes, and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required
cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.
(’72 Code, § 1-802) (Am. Ord. 1459, passed 7-28-94; Am. Ord. 1602, passed 9-25-
97; Am. Ord. 1637, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord.
1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2419, passed 2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-504 and 13-505
§ 35.53 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.
   (A)   The City Council shall each year or biennial period conduct a public
hearing on its proposed budget statement. Such hearing shall be held separately
from any regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body and shall not be
limited by time. Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a
summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published at least four
calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city's jurisdiction. For purposes of such notice, the
four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the day of
hearing. When the total operating budget, not including reserves, does not
exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget
summary may be posted at the City Council's principal headquarters. At such
hearing, the governing body shall make at least three copies of the proposed
budget statement available to the public and shall make a presentation
outlining key provisions of the proposed budget statement, including, but not
limited to, a comparison with the prior year's budget. Any member of the public
desiring to speak on the proposed budget statement shall be allowed to address
the governing body at the hearing and shall be given a reasonable amount of
time to do so.
   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of the
hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation
shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is
adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount
to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify
separately the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters
of the political subdivision and the amount to be received for all other
purposes.
   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes shall be
published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner provided in
this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.
   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with the
Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors in
mathematics, improper accounting, and noncompliance with the Nebraska Budget
Act or Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522. If the Auditor detects such errors, he or she
shall immediately notify the Council of such errors. The Council shall correct
any such error as provided in § 35.34. Warrants for the payment of expenditures
provided in the budget adopted under this section shall be valid
notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance for which the Auditor has notified
the Council.
   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.
(’72 Code, § 1-803) (Am. Ord. 1638, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-
04; Am. Ord. 2420 passed 2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-506 and 13-507
§ 35.54 ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with and
certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 30 of each year
or September 30 of the final year of a biennial period and file with the
Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget statement which
complies with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, together with the amount of the tax
required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:
         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest
on bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal
voters of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.
      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.
   (B)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board is 10% or
more at the time of the filing and certification required under this section,
the City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make allowance for
delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or biennial period
and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated
litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or
can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action being
filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the preceding year
or biennial period which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser than
the amount determined under Neb. RS 13-505.
   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as provided by
the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year in setting
or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of its members to
perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by this section.
(’72 Code, § 1-804) (Am. Ord. 1516, passed 1-25-96; Am. Ord. 1603, passed 9-25-
97; Am. Ord. 1639, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 2421, passed 2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-508
§ 35.55 PUBLIC FUNDS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC FUNDS. All money, including non-tax money, used in the operation and
functions of governing bodies. For purposes of a county, city, or village which
has a lottery established under the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, only
those net proceeds which are actually received by the county, city, or village
from a licensed lottery operator shall be considered PUBLIC FUNDS, and PUBLIC
FUNDS shall not include amounts awarded as prizes.
(Neb. RS 13-503(7)) ('72 Code, § 1-801.01) (Ord. 1483, passed 3-9-95)
§ 35.56 BUDGET PROCEDURE.
   The Manual of Instructions for City/Village: Budgets, prepared by the
Auditor of Public Accounts, State Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska 68509 is
incorporated herein by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
('72 Code, § 1-805)
§ 35.57 APPROPRIATION BILL.
   The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the Nebraska
Budget Act, to be termed "The Annual Appropriation Bill," in which are
appropriated such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all
necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-706) ('72 Code, § 1-806) (Am. Ord. 1461, passed 7-28-94; Am. Ord.
1517, passed 1-25-96)
§ 35.58 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; INCREASE BY MORE THAN ALLOWABLE GROWTH
PERCENTAGE; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, “political subdivision” means any
county, city, school district, or community college.
   (B)   If any political subdivision seeks to increase its property tax
request by more than the allowable growth percentage, such political
subdivision may do so, subject to the limitations provided in the School
District Property Tax Limitation Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq., and the Property
Tax Growth Limitation Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq. if the:
      (1)   A public hearing is held and notice of such hearing is provided in
compliance with division (C) of this section; and
      (2)   The governing body of such political subdivision passes a
resolution or an ordinance that complies with division (D) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   Each political subdivision within a county that seeks to
increase its property tax request by more than the allowable growth percentage
shall participate in a joint public hearing. Each such political subdivision
shall designate one representative to attend the joint public hearing on behalf
of the political subdivision. If a political subdivision includes area in more
than one county, the political subdivision shall be deemed to be within the
county in which the political subdivision’s principal headquarters are located.
At such hearing, there shall be no items on the agenda other than discussion of
each political subdivision’s intent to increase its property tax request by
more than the allowable growth percentage.
      (2)   At least one elected official from each participating political
subdivision shall attend the joint public hearing. An elected official may be
the designated representative from a participating political subdivision. The
presence of a quorum or the participation of elected officials at the joint
public hearing does not constitute a meeting as defined by Neb. RS 84-1409 of
the Open Meeting Act.
      (3)   The joint public hearing shall be held on or after September 14 and
prior to September 24 and before any of the participating political
subdivisions file their adopted budget statement pursuant to Neb. RS 13-508.
      (4)   The joint public hearing shall be held after 6:00 p.m. local time
on the relevant date.
      (5)   (a)   The joint public hearing shall be organized by the County
Clerk or his or her designee. At the joint public hearing, the representative
of each political subdivision shall give a brief presentation on the political
subdivision’s intent to increase its property tax request by more than the
allowable growth percentage and the effect of such request on the political
subdivision’s budget.
         (b)   The presentation shall include:
            1.   The name of the political subdivision;
            2.   The amount of the property tax request; and
            3.   The following statements:
               a.   The total assessed value of property differs from last
year’s total assessed value by ___ percent;
               b.   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property
taxes as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of
property, would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
               c.   The (name of political subdivision) proposes to adopt a
property tax request that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of
assessed value;
               d.   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in
other revenue, the total operating budget of (name of political subdivision)
will exceed last year’s by ___ percent; and
               e.   To obtain more information regarding the increase in the
property tax request, citizens may contact the (name of political subdivision)
at (telephone number and email address of political subdivision).
      (6)   Any member of the public shall be allowed to speak at the joint
public hearing and shall be given a reasonable amount of time to do so.
      (7)   Notice of the joint public hearing shall be provided:
         (a)   By sending a postcard to all affected property taxpayers. The
postcard shall be sent to the name and address to which the property tax
statement is mailed;
         (b)   By posting notice of the hearing on the home page of the
relevant county’s website, except that this requirement shall only apply if the
county has a population of more than 10,000 inhabitants; and
         (c)   By publishing notice of the hearing in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the relevant county.
      (8)   Each political subdivision that participates in the joint public
hearing shall electronically send the information prescribed in division (C)(9)
below to the County Assessor by September 4. The County Clerk shall notify the
County Assessor of the date, time, and location of the joint public hearing not
later than September 4. The County Clerk shall notify each participating
political subdivision of the date, time, and location of the joint public
hearing. The County Assessor shall send the information required to be included
on the postcards pursuant to division (C)(9) below to a printing service
designated by the County Board. The initial cost for printing the postcards
shall be paid from the county’s general fund. Such postcards shall be mailed at
least seven calendar days before the joint public hearing. The cost of creating
and mailing the postcards, including staff time, materials, and postage, shall
be charged proportionately to the political subdivisions participating in the
joint public hearing based on the total number of parcels in each participating
political subdivision. Each participating political subdivision shall also
maintain a prominently displayed and easily accessible link on the home page of
the political subdivision’s website to the political subdivision’s proposed
budget, except that this requirement shall not apply if the political
subdivision is a county with a population of less than 10,000 inhabitants, a
(city/village) with a population of less than 1,000 inhabitants, or, for joint
public hearings prior to January 1, 2024, a school district.
      (9)   (a)   The postcard sent under this division and the notice posted
on the county’s website, if required under division (C)(7)(b) of this section,
and published in the newspaper shall include the date, time, and location for
the joint public hearing, a listing of and telephone number for each political
subdivision that will be participating in the joint public hearing, and the
amount of each participating political subdivision’s property tax request.
         (b)   The postcard shall also contain the following information:
            1.   The following words in capitalized type at the top of the
postcard: NOTICE OF PROPOSED TAX INCREASE;
            2.   The name of the county that will hold the joint public
hearing, which shall appear directly underneath the capitalized words described
in division (C)(9)(b) of this section;
            3.   The following statement: The following political subdivisions
are proposing a revenue increase which would result in an overall increase in
property taxes in (insert current tax year). THE ACTUAL TAX ON YOUR PROPERTY
MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE. This notice contains estimates of the tax on your
property as a result of this revenue increase. These estimates are calculated
on the basis of the proposed (insert current tax year) data. The actual tax on
your property may vary from these estimates;
            4.   The parcel number for the property;
            5.   The name of the property owner and the address of the
property;
            6.   The property’s assessed value in the previous tax year;
            7.   The amount of property taxes due in the previous tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
            8.   The property’s assessed value for the current tax year;
            9.   The amount of property taxes due for the current tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
            10.   The change in the amount of property taxes due for each
participating political subdivision from the previous tax year to the current
tax year; and
            11.   The following statement: To obtain more information regarding
the tax increase, citizens may contact the political subdivision at the
telephone number provided in this notice.
   (D)   (1)   After the joint public hearing required in division (C) of this
section, the governing body of each participating political subdivision shall
pass an ordinance or resolution to set such political subdivision’s property
tax request.
      (2)   If the political subdivision is increasing its property tax request
over the amount from the prior year, including any increase in excess of the
allowable growth percentage, then such ordinance or resolution shall include,
but not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   The name of the political subdivision;
         (b)   The amount of the property tax request;
         (c)   The following statements:
            1.   The total assessed value of property differs from last year’s
total assessed value by ___ percent;
            2.   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property
taxes as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of
property, would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
            3.   The (name of political subdivision) proposes to adopt a
property tax request that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of
assessed value; and
            4.   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in
other revenue, the total operating budget of (name of political subdivision)
will exceed last year’s by ___ percent;
         (d)   The record vote of the governing body in passing such resolution
or ordinance.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
   (F)   (1)   The County Clerk, or his or her designee, shall prepare a report
which shall include:
         (a)   The names of the representatives of the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing;
         (b)   The name and address of each individual who spoke at the joint
public hearing, unless the address requirement is waived to protect the
security of the individual, and the name of any organization represented by
each such individual;
         (c)   The name of each political subdivision that participates in the
joint public hearing;
         (d)   The real growth value and real growth percentage for each
participating political subdivision;
         (e)   The amount each participating political subdivision seeks to
increase its property tax request in excess of the allowable growth percentage;
and
         (f)   The number of individuals who signed in to attend the joint
public hearing.
      (2)   Such report shall be delivered to the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing within ten days after such hearing.
(Ord. 2422, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord. 2480, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 77-1633
TAX LEVIES
§ 35.70 ALL-PURPOSE LEVY; ALLOCATION; ABANDONMENT; EXTRAORDINARY LEVIES.
   (A)   The City Council has decided to certify to the County Clerk for
collection one all-purpose levy required to be raised by taxation for all city
purposes instead of certifying a schedule of levies for specific purposes added
together. Subject to the limits in Neb. RS 77-3442, the all-purpose levy shall
not exceed the annual levy specified in Neb. RS 19-1309 to be levied upon the
taxable valuation of all taxable property in the city.
   (B)   (1)   The amount of the all-purpose levy shall be certified as a
single amount for general fund purposes.
      (2)   The City Council shall allocate the amount raised by the all-
purpose levy to the several departments of the city in its annual budget and
appropriation ordinance, or in other legal manner, as the City Council deems
wisest and best.
   (C)   The city shall be bound by its election to follow the all-purpose levy
method during the ensuing fiscal year but may abandon such method in succeeding
fiscal years.
   (D)   Otherwise authorized extraordinary levies to service and pay bonded
indebtedness of the city may be made by the city in addition to the all-purpose
levy.
(Ord. 1643, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state laws, see Neb. RS 19-1309 through 19-1312
§ 35.71 PROPERTY TAX; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT.
   The City Council shall, at the time and in the manner provided by law, cause
to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon the
taxable value of all the taxable property of the city which the city requires
for the purposes of the adopted budget statement for the ensuing year,
including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise provided.
Subject to Neb. RS 77-3442, the maximum amount of tax which may be so
certified, assessed, and collected shall not require a tax levy in excess of
the amounts specified in Neb. RS 17-702.
(Neb. RS 17-702) ('72 Code, § 1-807) (Am. Ord. 1640, passed 7-23-98)
§ 35.72 PROPERTY TAX LEVY; MAXIMUM; AUTHORITY TO EXCEED.
   (A)   Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal years
beginning on or after July 1, 1998, shall be limited to the amounts set forth
in this division (A), except as provided in division (C). The city may levy a
maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable valuation of property subject to the
levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100 of taxable valuation to provide
financing for the city's share of revenue required under an agreement or
agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint
Public Agency Act. The maximum levy shall include amounts levied to pay for
sums to support a library pursuant to Neb. RS 51-201, museum pursuant to Neb.
RS 51-501, visiting community nurse, home health nurse, or home health agency
pursuant to Neb. RS 71-1637, or statue, memorial, or monument pursuant to Neb.
RS 80-202. Property tax levies for judgments, except judgments or orders from
the Commission of Industrial Relations, obtained against the city which require
or obligate the city to pay that judgment, to the extent the judgment is not
paid by liability insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease-
purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness
approved according to law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments
by a public airport to retire interest-free loans from the Division of
Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public
airport are not included in the levy limits established by this division (A).
The limitations on tax levies provided in this division (A) are to include all
other general or special levies provided by law. Notwithstanding other
provisions of law, the only exceptions to the limits in this division (A) are
those provided by or authorized by this section. Tax levies in excess of the
limitations in this section shall be considered unauthorized levies under Neb.
RS 77-1606 unless approved under division (C).
   (B)   (1)   All city airport authorities established under the Cities
Airport Authorities Act, community redevelopment authorities established under
the Community Development Law, and off-street parking districts established
under the Offstreet Parking District Act may be allocated property taxes as
authorized by law which are authorized by the city and are counted in the
municipal levy limit provided by division (A), except that such limitation
shall not apply to property tax levies for preexisting lease-purchase contracts
approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved according to
law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a public airport to
retire interest-free loans from the Division of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded
indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport. For off-street parking
districts established under the Offstreet Parking District Act, the tax shall
be counted in the allocation by the city proportionately, by dividing the total
taxable valuation of the taxable property within the district by the total
taxable valuation of the taxable property within the city multiplied by the
levy of the district. The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove
the levy request of the political subdivisions subject to this division (B).
The City Council may approve all or a portion of the levy request and may
approve a levy request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by
law. The levy allocated by the city may be exceeded as provided in division
(C).
      (2)   On or before August 1, all political subdivisions subject to city
levy authority under this division (B) shall submit a preliminary request for
levy allocation to the City Council. The preliminary request of the political
subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution adopted by a majority vote of
members present of the political subdivision's governing body. The failure of a
political subdivision to make a preliminary request shall preclude that
political subdivision from using procedures set forth in Neb. RS 77-3444 to
exceed the final levy allocation as determined in this division (B).
      (3)   (a)   The City Council shall:
            1.   Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of members present which
determines a final allocation of levy authority to its political subdivisions;
and
            2.   Forward a copy of that resolution to the chairperson of the
governing body of each of its political subdivisions.
         (b)   No final levy allocation shall be changed after September 1
except by agreement between both the City Council and the governing body of the
political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at issue.
   (C)   (1)   The city may exceed the limits provided in division (A) by an
amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by a majority of registered voters
voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the
issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to exceed the limits must
be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year which is to be the first to
exceed the limits.
      (2)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the
voters:
         (a)   By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the limits by a
vote of at least 2/3 of the members of the City Council and delivering a copy
of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county
which contains all or part of the city; or
         (b)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
      (3)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount of levy which
would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in division (A) and the
duration of the excess levy authority. The excess levy authority shall not have
a duration greater than five years. Any resolution or petition calling for a
special election shall be filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
on or before the fifth Friday prior to the election, and the time of
publication and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. RS
32-802 shall be no later than 20 days prior to the election.
      (4)   The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on
the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is
at least 31 days after receipt of the resolution or petition. The election
shall be held pursuant to the Election Act. For petitions filed with the County
Clerk or Election Commissioner on or after May 1, 1998, the petition shall be
in the form as provided in Neb. RS 32-628 through 32-631.
      (5)   Any excess levy authority approved under this division (C) shall
terminate pursuant to its terms, on a vote of the City Council to terminate the
authority to levy more than the limits, at the end of the fourth fiscal year
following the first year in which the levy exceeded the limit, or as provided
in division (C)(8), whichever is earliest.
      (6)   The City Council may pass no more than one resolution calling for
an election pursuant to this division (C) during any one calendar year. Only
one election may be held in any one calendar year pursuant to a petition
initiated under this division (C). The ballot question may include any terms
and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and shall include the
language specified in Neb. RS 77-3444.
      (7)   If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question are in
favor of the tax, the county board shall authorize a tax in excess of the
limits in division (A), but the tax shall not exceed the amount stated in the
ballot question. If a majority of those voting on the ballot question are
opposed to the tax, the City Council shall not impose the tax.
      (8)   (a)   The city may rescind or modify a previously approved excess
levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of registered voters
voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the
issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to rescind or modify must
be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year for which it is to be
effective.
         (b)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the
voters:
            1.   By passing a resolution calling for the rescission or
modification by a vote of at least 2/3 of the members of the City Council and
delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or
            2.   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
         (c)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount and the
duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and a statement that
either the excess levy authority will be rescinded or the excess levy authority
will be modified. If the excess levy authority will be modified, the amount and
duration of the modification shall be stated. The modification shall not have a
duration greater than five years. The County Clerk or Election Commissioner
shall place the issue on the ballot at an election as called for in the
resolution or petition which is at least 31 days after receipt of the
resolution or petition, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the
notice of election required in Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days
prior to the election. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act.
(Ord. 1641, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2423, passed
2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 77-3442 through 77-3444
§ 35.73 PROPERTY TAX LEVY AND REQUEST; AUTHORITY TO SET.
   (A)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement and
within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with the levying
board on or before October 14 of each year and file with the Auditor of Public
Accounts a certified copy of any resolution passed setting a tax levy which
shall not exceed the maximum levy prescribed by state law and a statement
reconciling the levy set by the City Council with the adopted budget statement
filed as otherwise required by law. The levy shall be set to fund property tax
requirements in the adopted budget to four to eight places to the right of the
decimal point. The City Council shall use the final adjusted values as provided
by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year in
setting or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of its
members to perform any duty or responsibility required of such body by this
division (A).
   (B)   (1)   The property tax request for the prior year shall be the
property tax request for the current year for purposes of the levy set by the
County Board of Equalization in Neb. RS 77-1601 unless the City Council passes
by a majority vote a resolution or ordinance setting the tax request at a
different amount. Such resolution or ordinance shall only be passed after a
special public hearing called for such purpose is held and after notice is
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the city at
least five days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   The hearing notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The dollar amount of the prior year's tax request and the
property tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;
         (b)   The property tax rate that would be necessary to fund last
year's tax request if applied to the current year's valuation; and
         (c)   The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for the current
year and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund that tax request.
      (3)   Any resolution setting a tax request under this division (B) shall
be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk prior to October 14 of the year
for which the tax request is to apply. Any tax levy which is not in compliance
with this subsection and Neb. RS 77-1601 shall be construed as an unauthorized
levy under Neb. RS 77-1606.
('72 Code, § 1-826) (Ord. 1605, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1642, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-508 and 77-1601.02
§ 35.74 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   If the annual assessment of property would result in an increase in
the total property taxes levied by a county, municipality, school district,
learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural resources
district, educational service unit, or community college, as determined using
the previous year’s rate of levy, the city’s property tax request for the
current year shall be not more than its property tax request in the prior year,
and the city’s rate of levy for the current year shall be decreased accordingly
when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization pursuant to Neb. RS
77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or ordinance to set the
amount of its property tax request after holding the public hearing required in
division (C) of this section. If the City Council seeks to set its property tax
request at an amount that exceeds its property tax request in the prior year,
it may do so, subject to the limitations provided in the School District
Property Tax Limitations Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq., and the Property Tax
Growth Limitation Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq., after holding a public hearing
required in division (C) below and by passing a resolution or ordinance that
complies with division (E) of this section. If any county, city, school
district, or community college seeks to increase its property tax request by
more than the allowable growth percentage, such political subdivision shall
comply with the requirements of Neb. RS 77-1633 in lieu of the requirements in
divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (B)   If the annual assessment of property would result in no change or a
decrease in the total property taxes levied by a county, city, village, school
district, learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural
resources district, educational service unit, or community college, as
determined using the previous year’s rate of levy, the city’s property tax
request for the current year shall be no more than its property tax request in
the prior year, and the city’s rate of levy for the current year shall be
adjusted accordingly when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization
pursuant to Neb. RS 77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or
ordinance to set the amount of its property tax request after holding the
public hearing required in division (C) of this section. If the City Council
seeks to set its property tax request at an amount that exceeds its property
tax request in the prior year, it may do so subject to the limitations provided
in the School District Property Tax Limitation Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq.,
and the Property Tax Growth Limitation Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq., after
holding the public hearing required in division (C) of this section and by
passing a resolution or ordinance that complies with division (E) of this
section. If any county, city, school district, or community college seeks to
increase its property tax request by more than the allowable growth percentage,
such political subdivision shall comply with the requirements of Neb. RS 77-
1633 in lieu of the requirements in divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (C)   The resolution or ordinance required under this section shall only be
passed after a special public hearing called for the purpose is held and after
notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
city at least four calendar days prior to the hearing. For purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of hearing. If the city’s total operating budget, not including reserves,
does not exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the notice may
be posted at the City Council’s principal headquarters.
   (D)   The hearing notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the prior
year, the certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the current
year, and the percentage increase or decrease in such valuations from the prior
year to the current year;
      (2)   The dollar amount of the prior year’s tax request and the property
tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;
      (3)   The property tax rate that would be necessary to fund last year’s
tax request if applied to the current year’s valuation;
      (4)   The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for the current year
and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund that tax request;
      (5)   The percentage increase or decrease in the property tax rate from
the prior year to the current year; and
      (6)   The percentage increase or decrease in the total operating budget
from the prior year to the current year.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a city’s property tax request
under Neb. RS 77-1632 at an amount that exceeds the city’s property tax request
in the prior year shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the city;
      (2)   The amount of the property tax request;
      (3)   The following statements:
         (a)   The total assessed value of property differs from last year’s
total assessed value by ___ percent;
         (b)   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property taxes
as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of property,
would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
         (c)   The City of Wahoo proposes to adopt a property tax request that
will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of assessed value; and
         (d)   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in other
revenue, the total operating budget of the City of Wahoo will exceed last
year’s by ___ percent;
      (4)   The record vote of the City Council in passing such resolution or
ordinance.
   (F)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
(Ord. 2449, passed 1-23-24; Am. Ord. 2480, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 77-1632
§ 35.75 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; INCREASE BY MORE THAN ALLOWABLE GROWTH
PERCENTAGE; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION means any county,
city, school district, or community college.
   (B)   If any political subdivision seeks to increase its property tax
request by more than the allowable growth percentage, such political
subdivision may do so to the extent allowed by law if:
      (1)   A public hearing is held and notice of such hearing is provided in
compliance with division (C) of this section; and
      (2)   The governing body of such political subdivision passes a
resolution or an ordinance that complies with division (D) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   Each political subdivision within a county that seeks to
increase its property tax request by more than the allowable growth percentage
shall participate in a joint public hearing. Each such political subdivision
shall designate one representative to attend the joint public hearing on behalf
of the political subdivision. If a political subdivision includes area in more
than one county, the political subdivision shall be deemed to be within the
county in which the political subdivision's principal headquarters are located.
At such hearing, there shall be no items on the agenda other than discussion of
each political subdivision's intent to increase its property tax request by
more than the allowable growth percentage.
      (2)   At least one elected official from each participating political
subdivision shall attend the joint public hearing. An elected official may be
the designated representative from a participating political subdivision. The
presence of a quorum or the participation of elected officials at the joint
public hearing does not constitute a meeting as defined by Neb. RS 84-1409 of
the Open Meetings Act.
      (3)   The joint public hearing shall be held on or after September 14 and
prior to September 24 and before any of the participating political
subdivisions file their adopted budget statement pursuant to Neb. RS 13-508.
      (4)   The joint public hearing shall be held after 6:00 p.m. local time
on the relevant date.
      (5)   The joint public hearing shall be organized by the County Clerk or
his or her designee. At the joint public hearing, the designated representative
of each political subdivision shall give a brief presentation on the political
subdivision's intent to increase its property tax request by more than the
allowable growth percentage and the effect of such request on the political
subdivision's budget. The presentation shall include:
         (a)   The name of the political subdivision;
         (b)   The amount of the property tax request; and
         (c)   The following statements:
            1.   The total assessed value of property differs from last year’s
total assessed value by ___ percent;
            2.   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property
taxes as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of
property, would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
            3.   The (name of political subdivision) proposes to adopt a
property tax request that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of
assessed value;
            4.   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in
other revenue, the total operating budget of (name of political subdivision)
will exceed last year's by ___ percent; and
            5.   To obtain more information regarding the increase in the
property tax request, citizens may contact the (name of political subdivision)
at (telephone number and email address of political subdivision).
      (6)   Any member of the public shall be allowed to speak at the joint
public hearing and shall be given a reasonable amount of time to do so.
      (7)   Notice of the joint public hearing shall be provided:
         (a)   By sending a postcard to all affected property taxpayers. The
postcard shall be sent to the name and address to which the property tax
statement is mailed;
         (b)   By posting notice of the hearing on the home page of the
relevant county's website, except that this requirement shall only apply if the
county has a population of more than 10,000 inhabitants; and
         (c)   By publishing notice of the hearing in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the relevant county.
      (8)   Each political subdivision that participates in the joint public
hearing shall electronically send the information prescribed in division (C)(9)
of this section to the County Assessor by September 4. The County Clerk shall
notify the County Assessor of the date, time, and location of the joint public
hearing no later than September 4. The County Clerk shall notify each
participating political subdivision of the date, time, and location of the
joint public hearing. The County Assessor shall send the information required
to be included on the postcards pursuant to division (C)(9) of this section to
a printing service designated by the county board. The initial cost for
printing the postcards shall be paid from the county general fund. Such
postcards shall be mailed at least seven calendar days before the joint public
hearing. The cost of creating and mailing the postcards, including staff time,
materials, and postage, shall be charged proportionately to the political
subdivisions participating in the joint public hearing based on the total
number of parcels in each participating political subdivision. Each
participating political subdivision shall also maintain a prominently displayed
and easily accessible link on the home page of the political subdivision's
website to the political subdivision's proposed budget, except that this
requirement shall not apply if the political subdivision is a county with a
population of less than 10,000 inhabitants, a city with a population of less
than 1,000 inhabitants, or, for joint public hearings prior to January 1, 2024,
a school district.
      (9)   The postcard sent under this section and the notice posted on the
county's website, if required under division (C)(7)(b) of this section, and
published in the newspaper shall include the date, time, and location for the
joint public hearing, a listing of and telephone number for each political
subdivision that will be participating in the joint public hearing, and the
amount of each participating political subdivision's property tax request. The
postcard shall also contain the following information:
         (a)   The following words in capitalized type at the top of the
postcard: NOTICE OF PROPOSED TAX INCREASE;
         (b)   The name of the county that will hold the joint public hearing,
which shall appear directly underneath the capitalized words described in
subdivision (C)(9)(a) of this section;
         (c)   The following statement: The following political subdivisions
are proposing a revenue increase which would result in an overall increase in
property taxes in (insert current tax year). THE ACTUAL TAX ON YOUR PROPERTY
MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE. This notice contains estimates of the tax on your
property as a result of this revenue increase. These estimates are calculated
on the basis of the proposed (insert current tax year) data. The actual tax on
your property may vary from these estimates.
         (d)   The parcel number for the property;
         (e)   The name of the property owner and the address of the property;
         (f)   The property's assessed value in the previous tax year;
         (g)   The amount of property taxes due in the previous tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
         (h)   The property's assessed value for the current tax year;
         (i)   The amount of property taxes due for the current tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
         (j)   The change in the amount of property taxes due for each
participating political subdivision from the previous tax year to the current
tax year; and
         (k)   The following statement: To obtain more information regarding
the tax increase, citizens may contact the political subdivision at the
telephone number provided in this notice.
   (D)   After the joint public hearing required in division (C) of this
section, the governing body of each participating political subdivision shall
pass an ordinance or resolution to set such political subdivision's property
tax request. If the political subdivision is increasing its property tax
request over the amount from the prior year, including any increase in excess
of the allowable growth percentage, then such ordinance or resolution shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The name of the political subdivision;
      (2)   The amount of the property tax request;
      (3)   The following statements:
         (a)   The total assessed value of property differs from last year's
total assessed value by ___ percent;
         (b)   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property taxes
as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of property,
would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
         (c)   The (name of political subdivision) proposes to adopt a property
tax request that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
and
         (d)   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in other
revenue, the total operating budget of (name of political subdivision) will
exceed last year's by ___ percent; and
      (4)   The record vote of the governing body in passing such resolution or
ordinance.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
   (F)   The County Clerk, or his or her designee, shall prepare a report which
shall include:
      (1)   The names of the representatives of the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing;
      (2)   The name and address of each individual who spoke at the joint
public hearing, unless the address requirement is waived to protect the
security of the individual, and the name of any organization represented by
each such individual;
      (3)   The name of each political subdivision that participated in the
joint public hearing;
      (4)   The real growth value and real growth percentage for each
participating political subdivision;
      (5)   The amount each participating political subdivision seeks to
increase its property tax request in excess of the allowable growth percentage;
and
      (6)   The number of individuals who signed in to attend the joint public
hearing. Such report shall be delivered to the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing within ten days after such hearing.
(Ord. 2450, passed 1-23-24)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 77-1633
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
Section
General Election Provisions
   
36.01   Generally
   
36.02   Primary election
   
36.03   Tie votes
   
36.04   General election; preparation of ballot
   
36.05   Election to terms
   
36.06   Filing fee
   
36.07   Special elections
   
36.08   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer; special election
requirements
   
36.09   Petition, write-in, and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
36.10   (Reserved)
   
36.11   Registered voters; qualifications
   
36.12   Wards
   
36.13   Recall procedure
   
36.14   Officers; terms; qualifications
Initiative and Referendum
   
36.30   Definitions
   
36.31   Petitions; ballots
   
36.32   Petition form
   
36.321   Declaratory judgment
   
36.33   Signature sheets
   
36.34   Petition affidavit
   
36.35   Petition notification; verification
   
36.36   Frequency of occurrence
   
36.37   Direct vote
   
36.38   Elections
   
36.39   Ballots
   
36.40   Initiative
   
36.41   Referendum limitations
   
36.42   Referendum passage
   
36.43   Applicability
GENERAL ELECTION PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   All city issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide
primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of
separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if city offices or
issues can reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan ballot and state law
does not require otherwise.
      (2)   All city elections involving the election of officers shall be held
in accordance with the Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101 et seq., and in conjunction
with the statewide primary or general election.
   (B)   When the city holds an election in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided in the
Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. Any other election held by the city shall
be held as provided in the Election Act unless otherwise provided by the
charter, code, or bylaws of the city.
   (C)   The city shall furnish to the Secretary of State and Election
Commissioner or County Clerk any maps and additional information which the
Secretary of State and Election Commissioner or County Clerk may require in the
proper performance of their duties in the conduct of elections and the
certification of results.
(’72 Code, § 1-701) (Am. Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 4779, passed - -
25)
Statutory reference:
   Statewide primary election, see Neb. RS 32-401
   Statewide general election, see Neb. RS 32-404
   Conformance to Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-404(1)
   Applicability of Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-556
   Notice, publication, and printing of ballots, see Neb. RS 32-801 through 32-
822
   Election costs, see Neb. RS 32-1201 through 32-1208
§ 36.02 PRIMARY ELECTION.
   (A)   Number of candidates filing. If the names of candidates properly filed
for nomination at the primary election for officers of the city do not exceed
two candidates for each position to be filled, any such candidates shall be
declared nominated and their names shall not appear on any primary election
ballots.
(Neb. RS 32-811) ('72 Code, § 1-703)
   (B)   Write-in candidates. When the name of a candidate who did not file or
become a petition candidate for nomination is written in and voted for as a
candidate for a Council member, such person shall not be entitled to a
certificate of nomination at the statewide primary election nor have his or her
name placed on the general election ballot unless he or she shall have received
not less than 20% of the total votes cast for the candidate receiving the
greatest number of votes in the precinct or ward of the candidate receiving the
greatest number of votes of the at-large candidates, whichever the case may be,
at the preceding election in which candidates were elected to serve the ward,
or of the at-large candidates if the election was held at large.
('72 Code, § 1-704)
(Ord. 1052, 12-11-75)
§ 36.03 TIE VOTES.
   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or
general election, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall notify such
candidates by certified mail to appear at his or her office on a given day and
hour to determine the same before the canvassing board, and the certificate of
nomination or election shall be delivered accordingly.
(Neb. RS 32-1122) ('72 Code, § 1-705) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)
§ 36.04 GENERAL ELECTION; PREPARATION OF BALLOT.
   (A)   When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition, or
write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the County Clerk, in
preparing the official ballot for the general election shall place thereon the
names of the persons who received the greatest number of votes in the primary,
but in no event shall the names on the general election ballot be more than
twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general election.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the
general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes
received at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the name of
the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in the order of
their filing.
('72 Code, § 1-706) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)
§ 36.05 ELECTION TO TERMS.
   The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot and the
candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms of
the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number of votes
shall be elected to the remaining term or terms. The County Clerk shall place
the names of the candidates on the general election ballot in the direct order
according to the number of votes received at the primary election. The term of
office of all such members shall commence on the first regular meeting of the
Council in December following their election. Any vacancy on the Council
resulting from causes other than expiration of the term shall be filled by vote
of the remaining members as provided in §
30.18.
('72 Code, § 1-707) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)
§ 36.06 FILING FEE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (C) or (D) of this section, a filing
fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each candidate prior
to filing for office. The filing fee shall be a sum equal to 1% of the annual
salary such candidate will receive if he or she is elected and qualifies for
the office for which he or she files as a candidate. The fee shall be placed in
the general fund of the city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed until
the proper receipt showing payment of such filing fee is presented to the
filing officer.
   (B)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees that are
required for the office at the time that they present the write-in affidavit to
the filing officer. Any undeclared write-in candidate who is nominated or
elected by write-in votes shall pay the filing fee required for the office
within ten days after the canvass of votes by the county canvassing board and
shall file the receipt with the person issuing the certificate of nomination or
the certificate of election prior to the certificate being issued.
   (C)   No filing fee shall be required on any candidate filing for an office
in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there is a salary
of less than $500 per year.
   (D)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate completing an
affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma pauperis. A pauper
shall mean a person whose income and other resources for maintenance are found
under assistance standards to be insufficient for meeting the cost of his or
her requirements and whose reserve of cash or other available resources does
not exceed the maximum available resources that an eligible individual may own.
Available resources shall include every type of property or interest in
property that an individual owns and may convert into cash except:
      (1)   Real property used as a home;
      (2)   Household goods of a moderate value used in the home; and
      (3)   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a recipient in a
planned effort directed towards self-support.
   (E)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.
('72 Code, § 1-708) (Am. Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)
Statutory reference:
   Filing fee, see Neb. RS 32-608
§ 36.07 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to be submitted
to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall be certified
by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk on or before the
eighth Friday prior to the election. A special election may be held by mail as
provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959. Any other special election under
this section shall be subject to division (B) below.
      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the city may
submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled
county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide
election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be submitted has been
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by
March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for the general election.
      (3)   (a)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received
the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible
for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered
voters, except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or
posting of any required special notice of the submission of the issue other
than the notice required to be given of the statewide election issues. The
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue
ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the issue,
including the receiving and counting of ballots on the issue.
         (b)   The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same time
and in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of
the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council. The canvass by
the County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made by
the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   A city that has submitted an issue for a special election under
division (A)(1) above may cancel the special election if the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by
the political subdivision canceling the special election on or before the
fourth Thursday prior to the election. No cancellation shall be effective after
such date. If a special election is canceled in such manner, the city shall be
responsible for the costs incurred that are related to the canceled election.
Such costs shall include all chargeable costs as provided in Neb. RS 32-1202
that are associated with preparing for and conducting a special election.
      (2)   A city that has submitted an issue at a statewide primary or
general election or at any scheduled county election under division (A)(2)
above may withdraw the issue from the ballot if the Secretary of State,
Election Commissioner, or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by the
city withdrawing the issue from the ballot not later than March 1 prior to a
statewide primary election or September 1 prior to a statewide general
election. No withdrawal shall be effective after such date. Any issue withdrawn
in this manner shall not be printed on the ballot.
   (C)   Any special election under the Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.,
shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected
month unless otherwise specifically provided. Except as otherwise specifically
provided, no special election shall be held under the Election Act in April,
May, June, October, November, or December of an even-numbered year unless it is
held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election. No special
election shall be held under the Election Act in September of an even-numbered
year except as provided in Neb. RS 32-564 and except for a special election by
a political subdivision pursuant to Neb. RS 13-519 or 77-3444 to approve a
property tax levy or exceed a property tax levy limitation.
(’72 Code, § 1-709) (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1601, passed 9-
25-97; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2425, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord.
4779, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-405 and 32-559
§ 36.08 CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER; SPECIAL ELECTION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the primary election ballot
by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as
provided in division (B) below. If a candidate is an incumbent of any elective
office, the filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall be between
January 5 and February 15 prior to the date of the primary election. No
incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to the expiration of his or
her term shall file for any office after February 15 of that election year. All
other candidates shall file for office between January 5 and March 1 prior to
the date of the general election.
   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 32-564, any candidate in a special
election to fill a vacancy for an office of a political subdivision may have
his or her name placed on the special election ballot by filing a candidate
filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as provided in Neb. RS 32-607
and this division (C).
      (2)   The filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall be:
         (a)   On or before March 1 for a special election to be held in
conjunction with the statewide primary election;
         (b)   On or before August 1 for a special election to be held in
conjunction with the statewide general election; and
         (c)   Between the eighth Friday prior to the election and the fifth
Friday prior to the election for all other elections.
      (3)   A candidate filing form for such special election shall meet the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-607, except that the form shall contain the
following statement: “I hereby swear that I will abide by the laws of the State
of Nebraska regarding the results of the special election, that I am a
registered voter and qualified to be elected, and that I will serve if
elected.”
      (4)   A candidate filing form for such special election shall be filed
with the filing officer specified in Neb. RS 32-607(2).
(Ord. 4779, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Candidate filing form; filing period, see Neb. RS 32-606
   Candidate filing form; filing officers, see Neb. RS 32-607
§ 36.09 PETITION, WRITE-IN, AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of the
general election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot
for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this section and
Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or committee
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate:
         (a)   Files for the office by petition as prescribed in divisions (B)
and (C) below;
         (b)   Files as a write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615;
or
         (c)   Is nominated by political party convention or committee pursuant
to Neb. RS 32-710.
   (B)   (1)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and
address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the
party affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be
filed with the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed
by registered voters residing in the city, if candidates are chosen at large,
or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen
by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as
provided for candidate filing forms in § 36.08. Petition signers and petition
circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.
      (2)   No petition for nomination shall be filed unless there is attached
thereto a receipt showing the payment of the filing fee required pursuant to §
36.06. The petitions shall be filed by September 1 in the year of the general
election, and all signed petitions not filed with the Secretary of State by
such date shall become invalid.
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, not
to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of the entire state, at least 4,000, and at least 750 signatures shall be
obtained in each congressional district in the state;
         (b)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a county, at least 20% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election within the county, not to exceed 2,000, except that the number of
signatures shall not be required to exceed 25% of the total number of
registered voters voting for the office at the immediately preceding general
election; and
         (c)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a political subdivision other than a county, at least 20% of the total
number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United
States at the immediately preceding general election within the political
subdivision, not to exceed 2,000.
(’72 Code, § 1-711) (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86: Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-
04; Am. Ord. 4779, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-616 through 32-618
§ 36.10 (RESERVED).
§ 36.11 REGISTERED VOTERS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, REGISTERED VOTER shall mean an elector
who has a current voter registration record on file with the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-115)
   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the city
on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city elections.
(Neb. RS 17-602) ('72 Code, § 1-713)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of elector, see Neb. RS 32-110
§ 36.12 WARDS.
The territory now embraced in the city, without any further ordinance or
resolution shall be, and hereby is, divided into three Wards as follows:
FIRST WARD
All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying west and
north of a line starting at the north corporate limits on Chestnut Street to
16th Street, west to Sycamore Street, south to 8th Street, east to Walnut
Street, south to 6th Street, extended west to the corporate limits of the City
fo Wahoo, Nebraska, shall be and is hereby constituted “First Ward,” which said
Ward shall have a polling place or places to be selected as provided by law.
SECOND WARD
All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying south of a
line starting at the east corporate limits at 6th Street to Elm Street, then
north to 7th Street, then west to Walnut Street, then south to 6th Street,
extended west to the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska shall be
and is hereby constituted “Second Ward,” which said Ward shall have a polling
place or places to be selected as provided by law.
THIRD WARD
All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying east of a
line starting starting at the north corporate limit line on North Chestnut
south to 16th Street, then west to Sycamore Street, then south to 8th Street,
then east to Walnut Street, then south to 7th Street, then east to Elm Street,
then south to 6th Street extended east to the corporate limits ofthe City of
Wahoo, Nebraska shall be and is hereby constituted “Third Ward,” which said
Ward shall have a polling place or places to be selected as provided by law.
(’72 Code, § 1-714) (Am. Ord. 1163, 12-11-80; Am. Ord. 2077, passed 11-22-11;
Am. Ord. 2378, passed 11-23-21)
§ 36.13 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FILING OFFICER. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council, and any other elected
official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to this
section.
      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of this
section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward.
Only registered voters of such member’s ward may sign a recall petition or vote
at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member’s
ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary
election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions
shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.
   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council, or any other elected official be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election,
except that for City Council office for which more than one candidate is
chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes
for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed
to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32-630.
      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing officer.
Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, a recall petition filing form
shall be signed and filed with the filing officer by at least one registered
voter. Such voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or
circulators of the recall petition. The filing form shall state the name and
office of the official sought to be removed, shall include in concise language
of 60 words or less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall
request that the filing officer issue initial petition papers to the principal
circulator for circulation.
      (4)   After receiving the filing form, the filing officer shall notify
the official sought to be removed by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01
or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the
methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the filing form at
the official’s usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail
to the official’s last known address. If the official chooses, he or she may
submit a defense statement in concise language of 60 words or less for
inclusion on the petition. Any such defense statement shall be submitted to the
filing officer within 20 days after the official receives the copy of the
filing form. The filing officer shall prepare the petition papers within five
business days after receipt of the defense statement. The principal circulator
or circulators shall gather the petition papers within 20 days after being
notified by the filing officer that the petition papers are available. The
filing officer shall notify the principal circulator or circulators that the
necessary signatures must be gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing
the petitions.
      (5)   The filing officer, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her
office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers
were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers issued. The filing
officer shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or
circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions
from the filing officer may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as
circulators of such petitions.
      (6)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a registered voter
and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the office in
question.
   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1304.
   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one
instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing officer within 30 days after the filing officer
issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators
as provided in division (C) above.
      (2)   Within 15 business days after the filing of the petition, the
filing officer shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the
initial filing of the petition papers. Any person may remove his or her name
from a petition as provided in Neb. RS 32-632. If the petition is found to be
sufficient, the filing officer shall attach to the petition a certificate
showing the result of such examination. If the requisite number of signatures
has not been gathered, the filing officer shall file the petition in his or her
office without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
officer shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council
that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the official
sought to be removed shall be by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or,
if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods
specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the official’s usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official’s
last known address.
      (2)   The City Council shall, within 21 days after receipt of the
notification from the filing officer pursuant to division (F)(1) above, order
an election. The date of the election shall be the first available date that
complies with Neb. RS 32-405 and that can be certified to the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk at least 50 days prior to the election, except
that if any other election is to be held in the city within 90 days after such
notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day.
      (3)   All resignations shall be tendered as provided in Neb. RS 32-562.
If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall election is
held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if the City Council
notifies the Election Commissioner or County Clerk of the cancellation on or
before the fourth Thursday prior to the election; otherwise, the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.
      (4)   If a filing officer is subject to a recall election, the Secretary
of State shall conduct the recall election.
   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held pursuant to
division (F) above shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-1307.
   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against
the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a
tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term
but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in division (I)
below.
      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the
removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless
a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall
result in a vacancy in the office, which shall be filled as otherwise provided
in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 through 32-570, 32-574, and 32-606.01.
      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a recount of the
votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement
with the filing officer that he or she does not want a recount.
      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council or any other governing body at one time due to the
recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner, or County Clerk. Candidates for the special election shall file a
candidate filing form pursuant to § 36.08(C).
      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns
after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
   (I)   No recall petition filing form shall be filed against an elected
official within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or
her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of
office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the
office.
(’72 Code, § 1-715) (Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04;
Am. Ord. 2426, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord. 4779, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-1301 through 32-1303, 32-1305, 32-1306,
32-1308, and 32- 1309
§ 36.14 OFFICERS; TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Commencing with the primary election in 1976 and every two years
thereafter, all elected officers of the city shall be nominated at the
statewide primary election and elected at the statewide general election. All
elected officers of the city shall serve for terms of four years or until their
successors are elected and qualified.
(Neb. RS 32-533)
   (B)   The Mayor and Council members shall be residents and registered voters
of the city.
   (C)   The members of the City Council shall be elected from the city by
wards, as defined in §
36.12 of this code, unless the registered voters of the city vote to elect its
Council members at large. Each ward of the city shall have two Council members
elected in the manner provided in the Election Act. The term of office shall
begin on the first regular meeting of the City Council in December following
the statewide general election. No person shall be eligible to the office of
Council member who is not at the time of the election an actual resident of the
ward for which he or she is elected and a registered voter.
('72 Code, § 1-716) (Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86)
Statutory reference:
   City Council, members, terms, qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-103 and 17-104
   Mayor, qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-107
   Merger of elective and appointive offices, see Neb. RS 17-108.02
   Change from or to ward or at-large election, see Neb. RS 32-554
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§ 36.30 DEFINITIONS.
   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the city by state law. This subchapter shall govern the use of
initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal measures
affecting the governance of the city. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   CIRCULATOR. Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.
   CLERK. The City Clerk or the city official in charge of elections.
   MEASURE. An ordinance, charter provision, or resolution which is within the
legislative authority of the Council to pass, and which is not excluded from
the operation of referendum by the exceptions in §
36.41.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Wahoo.
   PETITION. A document authorized for circulation pursuant to §
36.31 or any copy of such document.
   PLACE OF RESIDENCE. The street and number of the residence. If there is no
street and number for the residence, PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall mean the mailing
address.
   PROSPECTIVE PETITION. A sample document containing the information necessary
for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which has not yet
been authorized for circulation.
   QUALIFIED ELECTORS. All persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative or altered or repealed by
referendum.
   RESIDENCE. That place at which a person has established his or her home,
where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she departs, he
or she intends to return.
   SIGNATURE SHEET. A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and which is
signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.
(Neb. RS 18-2503 through 18-2511) ('72 Code, § 1-1201) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-
83)
Statutory reference:
   Power reserved to qualified electors, see Neb. RS 18-2501
§ 36.31 PETITIONS; BALLOTS.
   (A)   Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the
petitioner shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall
date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall
verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a
ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as described below. If
the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the
circulation of the petition, and such authorization shall be given within three
working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If the form of
the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within three working
days from the date the prospective petition was filed, inform the petitioner of
necessary changes and request that those changes be made. When the requested
changes have been made and the revised prospective petition has been submitted
to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the
petition, and such authorization shall be given within two working days from
the receipt of the properly revised petition. Verification by the Clerk that
the prospective petition is in proper form does not constitute an admission by
the Clerk, City Council, or city that the measure is subject to referendum or
limited referendum or that the measure may be enacted by initiative.
(Neb. RS 18-2512)
   (B)   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall
consist of:
      (1)   A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is commonly known or
which accurately summarizes the measure;
      (2)   A briefly-worded question which plainly states the purpose of the
measure and which is phrased so that an affirmative response to the question
corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and
      (3)   A concise and impartial statement, of not more than 75 words, of
the chief purpose of the measure.
(Neb. RS 18-2513)
   (C)   The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum proposal
shall contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and referendum
shall be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall be printed in
lower case, ten-point type, except that the caption shall be in bold face type.
All initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in a nonpartisan
manner without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that they have or have
not been approved or endorsed by any political party or organization.
(Neb. RS 18-2513) ('72 Code, § 1-1202) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.32 PETITION FORM.
   (A)   The forms designed by the Secretary of State to be used for initiative
and referendum petitions shall be made available to the public by the City
Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for individuals preparing prospective
petitions. Substantial compliance with initiative and referendum forms is
required before authorization to circulate such petition shall be granted by
the City Clerk. Chief petitioners or circulators preparing prospective
petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the petition for
circulation after authorization for circulation has been granted.
(Neb. RS 18-2514)
   (B)   Each petition presented for signature must be identical to the
petition authorized for circulation by the City Clerk. Every petition shall
contain the name and place of residence of not more than three persons as chief
petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The chief petitioners or sponsors shall
be qualified electors of the municipality potentially affected by the
initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition shall contain the caption and
the statement specified to be part of the ballot title. When a special election
is being requested, such fact shall be stated on every petition.
(Neb. RS 18-2515)
('72 Code, § 1-1203) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed 11-13-
86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
Statutory reference:
   Service of summons on political subdivisions, see Neb. RS 25-510.02
§ 36.321 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   The city or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory judgment
regarding any questions arising under this subchapter, as it may be from time
to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether a measure
is subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure may be
enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner seeks a declaratory judgment, the
city shall be served by personal, residence, or certified mail service upon the
chief executive officer or City Clerk. If the city seeks a declaratory
judgment, only the chief petitioner or chief petitioners shall be required to
be served.
   (B)   Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes of
determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum,
or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be filed in the district
court at any time after the filing of a referendum or initiative petition with
the City Clerk for signature verification until 40 days from the date the City
Council received notification from the verifying official that the necessary
signatures have been obtained. If the city does not bring an action for
declaratory judgment to determine whether the measure is subject to limited
referendum or referendum, or whether the measure may be enacted by initiative,
until after it has received such notification, it shall be required to proceed
with the initiative or referendum election in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter. If the city does file such an action prior to receiving such
notification, it shall not be required to proceed to hold such election until a
final decision has been rendered in the action.
   (C)   Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed generally by
Neb. RS 25-21,149 through 25-21,164, except that only the city and each chief
petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The city, City Clerk, City
Council, or any of the city's officers shall be entitled to rely on any order
rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action brought for
declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given priority in
scheduling hearings and in disposition as determined by the court. When an
action is brought to determine whether the measure is subject to limited
referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, a
decision shall be rendered by the court no later than five days prior to the
election.
   (D)   The provisions of this section relating to declaratory judgments shall
not be construed as limiting, but construed as supplemental and additional to
other rights and remedies conferred by law.
(Neb. RS 18-2538) (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
§ 36.33 SIGNATURE SHEETS.
   (A)   Every signature sheet shall:
      (1)   Contain the caption required in §
36.31(B)(1)(a);
      (2)   Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to
potential signatories;
      (3)   Provide space for signatories to write their names, places of
residence, and the date of signing;
(Neb. RS 18-2516)
      (4)   Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information on a
signature sheet shall be subject to penalties provided by law.
   (B)   No more than 25 signatures on each signature sheet shall be counted.
In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual registered to
vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed by
the measure addressed in the petition. A signature shall include the
signatory's full name, his or her place of residence, and the date of signing.
No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing his or her place of
residence or date on any petition. A woman shall not use her husband's forename
or given name when she signs a petition, and she shall sign her own forename or
given name along with her surname.
('72 Code, § 1-1204) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed 11-13-
86)
§ 36.34 PETITION AFFIDAVIT.
   Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to be
signed by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the
circulator is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition did
so in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated, and that the
circulator believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the affected
jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition, and that the circulator
believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and place of residence
correctly.
('72 Code, § 1-1205) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed 11-13-
86)
Statutory reference:
   Petition requirements, see Neb. RS 18-2517
§ 36.35 PETITION NOTIFICATION; VERIFICATION.
   (A)   Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature
verification. Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the
City Council, the city and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of the
county in which such city is located may by mutual agreement provide that the
County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether the petition is
signed by the requisite number of voters. The city shall reimburse the County
for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election Commissioner. When the
verifying official has determined that 100% of the necessary signatures
required by this subchapter have been obtained, he or she shall notify the City
Council of that fact and shall immediately forward to the City Council a copy
of the petition.
   (B)   In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to
the City Council and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file with
the Clerk within six months from the date the prospective petition was
authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not obtained by
such date, the petition shall be void.
(Neb. RS 18-2518) ('72 Code, § 1-1206) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)
§ 36.36 FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE.
   The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two years. No attempt to repeal or alter
an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition may be
made within two years from the last attempt to do the same. Such prohibition
shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter is designed to
accomplish the same, or essentially the same purpose as the previous attempt.
(Neb. RS 18-2519) ('72 Code, § 1-1207) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)
§ 36.37 DIRECT VOTE.
   The executive officer and City Council of the city may at any time, by
resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the electors of any
measure pending before it, passed by it, including an override of any veto, if
necessary, or enacted by the electors under this subchapter and may provide in
such resolution that such measure shall be submitted at a special election or
the next regularly scheduled primary or general election. Immediately upon the
passage of any such resolution for submission, the Clerk shall cause such
measure to be submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at the time specified
in such resolution and in the manner provided in this subchapter for submission
of measures upon proposals and petitions filed by voters. Such matter shall
become law if approved by a majority of the votes cast.
(Neb. RS 18-2520) ('72 Code, § 1-1208) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.38 ELECTIONS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall call elections under this subchapter, either at a
special election or regularly scheduled primary or general election. He or she
shall cause notice of every such election to be printed in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in such city at least once not less than 30
days prior to such election and also posted in the office of the Clerk and in
at least three conspicuous places in such city at least 30 days prior to such
election. The notice shall be substantially as follows:
"Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the __________ day of
__________________, 20 _____, at _____________________________(identify polling
place or precinct) of the municipality of ___________________________,
Nebraska, an election will be held at which there will be submitted to the
electors of the municipality for their approval or rejection, the following
measures, propositions, or issues:
   (naming measures, propositions, or issues)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
which election will be open at 8:00 a.m. and will continue open until 8:00
p.m., of the same day.
Dated this _______ day of _____________________, 20_____.
_______________________________________
Clerk of the City of ___________________, Nebraska."
   (B)   The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in pamphlet
form of measures initiated or referred. Such notice provided in this section
shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be obtained.
(Neb. RS 18-2521) ('72 Code, § 1-1209) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.39 BALLOTS.
   All ballots for use in special elections under this subchapter shall be
prepared by the Clerk and furnished by the City Council, unless the City
Council contracts with the county for such service, and shall be in form the
same as provided by law for election of the executive officer and City Council.
When ordinances under such sections are submitted to the electors at a
regularly scheduled primary or general election, they shall be placed upon the
official ballots as provided in this subchapter.
(Neb. RS 18-2522) ('72 Code, § 1-1210) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.40 INITIATIVE.
   (A)   (1)   The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact
measures affecting the governance of the city. An initiative proposal shall not
have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of existing law
except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and necessary for the
adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.
      (2)   An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect
effect of the passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an
existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject
only to limited referendum pursuant to §
36.41.
(Neb. RS 18-2523)
   (B)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed with the
Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the City Council to consider
passage of the measure contained in the petition, including an override of any
veto, if necessary. If the City Council fails to pass the measure without
amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from
the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the city. If the City Council desires to submit
the measure to a vote of the people at a special election prior to the next
regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the city, the City
Council shall by resolution direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be
submitted at a special election. Such resolution shall not be subject to
referendum or limited referendum.
(Neb. RS 18-2524)
   (C)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified electors which requests that a special election
be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the people has been
filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to §
36.35, it shall be the duty of the City Council to consider passage of the
measure contained in the petition, including an override of any veto, if
necessary. If the City Council fails to pass the measure, without amendment,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from the date
it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to
a vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose. The date of
such election shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the date the
City Council received notification pursuant to §
36.36.
(Neb. RS 18-2525)
   (D)   If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in
favor of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of the city
30 days after certification of the election results, unless the City Council by
resolution orders an earlier effective date or the measure itself provides for
a later effective date, which resolution shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum. A measure passed by such method shall not be amended or
repealed except by 2/3 majority of the members of the City Council. No such
attempt to amend or repeal shall be made within one year from the passage of
the measure by the electors.
(Neb. RS 18-2526) ('72 Code, § 1-1211) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.41 REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend
existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the
municipality.
(Neb. RS 18-2527)
   (B)   The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum:
      (1)   Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations including,
but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided for in bonds,
notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, for projects previously
approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to referendum or limited
referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted prior to July 17, 1982;
      (2)   Measures relating to any industrial development projects,
subsequent to measures giving initial approval to such projects;
      (3)   Measures adopting proposed budget statements following compliance
with procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;
      (4)   Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, or safety which have been designated as urgent measures by
unanimous vote of those present and voting of the governing body and approved
by its Executive Officer;
      (5)   Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as
provided for in division (E) of this section for which a sufficient referendum
petition was not filed within the time limit stated in such notice or which
received voter approval after the filing of such petition;
      (6)   Resolutions directing the Municipal Clerk to cause measures to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special election as provided in Neb. RS
18-2524 and 18-2529;
      (7)   Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted
by initiative as provided in Neb. RS 18-2526;
      (8)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the Municipality and
which are necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in
previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness;
      (9)   Measures that amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal a zoning
regulation, restriction, or boundary and are subject to protest as provided in
Neb. RS 19-905;
      (10)    Measures relating to personnel issues, including, but not limited
to, establishment, modification, or elimination of any personnel position,
policy, salary, or benefit and any hiring, promotion, demotion, or termination
of personnel; and
      (11)    Measures relating to matters subject to the provisions of the
Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation Act.
   (C)   The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
      (1)   Measures in furtherance of a policy of the Municipality or relating
to projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to referendum or
which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the voters at an
election, except that such measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum for a period of one year after any such policy or project
was approved at a referendum election, enacted by initiative, or approved by
the voters at an election;
      (2)   Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement, or enlargement, including the financing or refinancing of the
costs of public ways, public property, utility systems, and other capital
projects and measures giving initial approval for industrial development
projects;
      (3)   Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for
measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in
previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness,
and pay rates and salaries for municipal employees other than the members of
the governing body and the Executive Officer; and
      (4)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the municipality
except for measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for
in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness.
   (D)   Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect 30
days after their passage by the Governing Body, including an override of any
veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures subject to
limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification pursuant to Neb.
RS 18-2518 within 30 days after such measure's passage by the governing body,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, or after notice is first
published pursuant to subdivision (E)(3) of this section. If the necessary
number of signatures as provided in Neb. RS 18-2529 or 18-2530 has been
obtained within the time limitation, the effectiveness of the measure shall be
suspended unless approved by the voters.
   (E)   For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement, or enlargement of public ways, public property,
utility systems, or other capital projects or any measure relating to any
facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste
Management Act, the municipality may exempt all subsequent measures relating to
the same project from the referendum and limited referendum procedures provided
for in this subchapter by the following procedure:
      (1)   By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place of
such hearing being published at least once not less than five days prior to the
date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality;
      (2)   By passage of a measure approving the project, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent to
the date of hearing; and
      (3)   After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, by giving notice as follows:
         (a)   For those projects for which applicable statutes require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district or otherwise
establishing the project, notice shall be given for such project by including
either as part of such ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized
notice concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that the project as
described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice and that, after
such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject
to any further right of referendum; and
         (b)   For projects for which applicable statutes do not require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by publication of a
notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the nature of the
project and the engineer's estimate of costs of such project and stating that
the project described in the notice is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice and that, after
such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject
to any further right of referendum. The notice required by this subdivision
shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the
Municipality and shall be published not later than 15 days after passage by the
Governing Body, including an override of a veto, if necessary, of a measure
approving the project.
      The right of the Municipality to hold such a hearing prior to the passage
of the measure by the Governing Body and give such notice after passage of such
measure by the Governing Body to obtain exemption for any particular project in
a manner described in this division is optional, and the Municipality shall not
be required to hold such a hearing or give such notice for any particular
project.
   (F)   Nothing in divisions (C) and (E) of this section shall be construed as
subjecting to limited referendum any measure related to matters subject to the
provisions of the Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation Act.
   (G)   All measures, except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and (E) of
this section, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after
such measure has been passed by the Governing Body, including an override of a
veto, if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.
(Neb. RS 18-2528)
('72 Code, § 1-1212) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed 11-13-
86; Am. Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
§ 36.42 REFERENDUM PASSAGE.
   (A)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed with the
Clerk and verified pursuant to §
36.35, it shall be the duty of the City Council to reconsider the measure or
portion of such measure which is the object of the referendum. If the City
Council fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner
proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
within 30 days from the date the City Council receives notification pursuant to
§
36.35, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the
people at the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within
the city. If the City Council desires to submit the measure to a vote of the
people at a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the city, the City Council shall, by resolution,
direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election.
Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
(Neb. RS 18-2529)
   (B)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified voters of the city which requests that a special
election be called to submit the referendum measure to a vote of the people,
has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the City
Council to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is the
object of the referendum. If the City Council fails to repeal or amend the
measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the referendum, including
an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose
within 30 days from the date the City Council received notification. The date
of such special election shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60 days from
the date the City Council received notification.
(Neb. RS 18-2530)
   (C)   If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall
vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall be
repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not be
reenacted or returned to its original form except by a 2/3 majority of the
members of the City Council. No such attempt to reenact or return the measure
to its original form shall be made within one year of the repeal or amendment
of the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not receive a
majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective or remain in
effect.
(Neb. RS 18-2531) ('72 Code, § 1-1213) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)
§ 36.43 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of the statutes of the State of Nebraska relating to
election officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation
and form of ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots, calling of
elections, conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes, records
and certificates of election, and recounts of votes, so far as applicable,
shall apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to this
subchapter.
(Neb. RS 18-2536)
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to procedures for initiatives
or referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02 relating to city light
and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504 and 70-650.01 relating to public power
districts, and Neb. RS 80-203 to 80-205 relating to soldiers and sailors
monuments.
(Neb. RS 18-2537) ('72 Code, § 1-1215) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory penalties for violation of state election laws, see Neb. RS 18-
2532 to 18-2535
CHAPTER 37: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
   
37.01   Organization
   
37.02   Mayor's duties
   
37.03   Disaster control plan
   
37.04   Emergency Succession Act
§ 37.01 ORGANIZATION.
   A civil defense organization is hereby created utilizing to the fullest
extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and agencies. The
Mayor shall be responsible for its organization, administration, and operation.
The organization shall consist of the following:
   (A)   A Department of Civil Defense within the executive department of the
city government. There shall be an executive head of the Department of Civil
Defense, appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the Council who
shall be known as the Director of Civil Defense, and such assistants, clerical
help, other employees, and civil defense volunteers as are deemed necessary to
the proper functioning of the organization.
   (B)   Five deputy directors with responsibility for financial services, law
enforcement, fire control, engineering services, and health and medical
services appointed by the Mayor. These shall, so far as possible, be additional
duty assignments to existing personnel, and it is the intent of this chapter
that civil defense and disaster assignments shall be as nearly consistent with
normal duty assignment as possible.
   (C)   The employees, equipment, and facilities of all city departments and
agencies suitable for or adaptable to civil defense and designated by the Mayor
to participate in the civil defense activity.
   (D)   Civil defense volunteers, including persons and private agencies or
governmental units offering services to the organization.
('72 Code, § 1-1101)
§ 37.02 MAYOR'S DUTIES.
   (A)   The powers and duties of the Mayor pertaining to civil defense in time
of normal city operation are to maintain general supervision over the planning
and administration for the civil defense organization and the execution of the
civil defense duties and civil defense forces in order to meet situations not
covered in the normal duties of such forces. The Mayor may take all seemingly
necessary action to conduct tests of the civil defense and natural disaster
plans. In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack or natural disaster,
the Mayor, or in his or her absence or inability to serve the President of the
Council, as conservator of the peace shall have authority to:
      (1)   Declare a state of emergency within the city thereby placing in
effect the civil defense and disaster control plan.
      (2)   Convene the City Council to perform its legislative and
administrative functions as the situation may demand. The Council shall have
the power to terminate the state of emergency.
      (3)   Assemble and utilize civil defense forces and prescribe the manner
and conditions of their use.
      (4)   Request the state, its agencies or political subdivisions to send
aid if the situation is beyond the control of the regular and emergency city
forces.
      (5)   Command the services and the use of equipment and facilities for
such work and duties as the city may require to aid the regular and volunteer
city forces in time of emergency.
      (6)   Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed necessary to
protect life and property and conserve critical resources and such regulations
may be invoked when necessary for tests of civil defense and disaster plans.
All such regulations shall be subject to approval of the Council as soon as
practicable subsequent to promulgation.
   (B)   The Mayor shall designate a line of succession among the department
heads to exercise the powers and duties of the Director of Civil Defense in
event of the absence or inability of the Director to serve. The Mayor, or in
his or her absence or inability to serve the President of the Council, shall
have the power to order civil defense forces to aid the state or political
subdivisions thereof subject to Council review as soon as practicable.
('72 Code, § 1-1102)
§ 37.03 DISASTER CONTROL PLAN.
   A comprehensive Civil Defense and Disaster Control Plan shall be adopted by
resolution of the Council upon the recommendation of the Mayor. In the
preparation of this Plan, as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent
that the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing
departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all city departments and agencies to perform
the functions and duties assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of
the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. All officers and
employees of the city shall cooperate with and give active support to the Mayor
and Director of Civil Defense in all civil defense operations, and they shall
comply with all orders of the Mayor and Director of Civil Defense issued
pursuant to this chapter.
('72 Code, § 1-1103)
§ 37.04 EMERGENCY SUCCESSION ACT.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council has invoked the provisions of the Emergency
Succession Act as passed by the state of Nebraska. All the provisions of the
said act are invoked in this code as though fully set out herein as it now
exists or may hereafter be amended to provide. In compliance with the said act,
the following officers of the city shall appoint emergency interim successors
to the powers and duties of their respective offices:
      (1)   Each member of the City Council.
      (2)   The Sewage Plant Operator.
      (3)   The Chief of Police.
      (4)   The Chief of the Fire Department.
      (5)   The City Attorney.
      (6)   The City Clerk.
      (7)   The City Treasurer.
      (8)   The City Engineer.
      (9)   The Utilities General Manager.
      (10)   The Streets Superintendent.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section are not exclusive,
however, and shall not be construed in such a manner as to prohibit the
appointment of alternates by any other duly, elected or appointed officers of
this city, including but not limited to the head of any department or section,
or the members of any board or other agency of the city government; or as to
excuse the failure on the part of any such officer to make such appointments,
when clearly required by the act.
('72 Code, § 1-1104)
CHAPTER 38: UTILITY RATES
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Utility rate setting
Electric Department Rates
   
38.10   Electric Department rates
   
38.11   Definitions (Electric Department)
   
38.12   Municipal service electrical rates
   
38.13   Residential service electrical rates
   
38.14   Small general service electric rates
   
38.15   Large general demand service electric rates
   
38.16   Wholesale service electrical rates
   
38.17   Irrigation service electrical rates
   
38.18   Large power primary voltage service electric rates
   
38.19   Street lighting electric rates
   
38.20   Net metering
   
38.21   Customer owned generation excess power rate
Natural Gas Department Rates
   
38.30   Natural Gas Department rates
   
38.31   Residential general service natural gas rates
   
38.32   Nonresidential general service natural gas rates
   
38.33   Nebraska Public Power District natural gas rates
   
38.34   Natural gas market price and transportation rate
Sewer Department Rates
   
38.40   Sewer Department rates
   
38.41   Definitions (Sewer Department)
   
38.42   Residential service sewer rates
   
38.43   Commercial service sewer rates
   
38.44   Municipal service sewer rates
Water Department Rates
   
38.50   Water Department rates
   
38.51   Definitions (Water Department)
   
38.52   Residential service water rates (minimum)
   
38.53   Commercial service water rates (minimum)
   
38.54   Wholesale service water rates
   
38.55   Municipal service water rates (minimum)
   
38.56   Water rate schedule in excess of minimum
   
38.57   Per person service contract rate
   
Appendix A:   Utility Rate Schedules
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 UTILITY RATE SETTING.
   The Mayor and Council shall set the utility rates to be charged to customers
of the Electric Department, Natural Gas Department, Sewer Department and Water
Department of the city. All such utility rates shall be set by ordinance and on
file in the office of the City Clerk. The Council may classify customers of the
city for the purpose of providing more equitable utility rates. No utility
rates shall be discriminatory against any other customer of the same class. All
other provisions relative to said utility rates, such as, but not limited to,
the calculation of utility usage, the generation of a statement, the terms of
payment, the collection thereof, the commencement of utility service, tap fees,
deposit amounts, and termination of utility service, shall be as determined by
the Wahoo Board of Public Works and as codified in the Wahoo Board of Public
Works Code Book.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386,
passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413, passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RATES
§ 38.10 ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RATES.
   The Mayor and Council of city have established the rates to be charged all
customers of the Electric Department of city as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.11 DEFINITIONS (ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT).
   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply to the
Electric Department unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   CUSTOMER. Any and all users typically connected via one or more billing
meters of the electrical system of the Electric Department, including all
persons, firms or corporations whose premises are served thereby and all owners
and tenants of real estate connected to said electrical system of the Electric
Department.
   DEMAND CHARGE. Non-coincident Peak kW and Coincident Peak (CP) kW with
system peak hour will be determined by metering in the current billing period.
Demands shall be determined by interval recording metering using 30 consecutive
minutes of consumption or with other industry accepted billing equipment, at
the option of the utility.
   IRRIGATION SERVICE. Applicable at three-phase services for motor loads of
greater than 10 HP used for pumping non-potable water and applied to the land.
   LARGE GENERAL SERVICE. Applicable to three-phase non-residential accounts
consuming more than 15,000 kWh monthly or 50 kW demand for four months billing
during any 12 month period. All services shall be at the available Electric
Department electric system standards.
   LARGE POWER SERVICE. Applicable at services for loads with any monthly
demand greater than 500 kW. LARGE POWER SERVICE is master metered three-phase
primary voltage. The minimum bill shall be the customer charge plus 500 kW
times the Winter Coincident Peak demand charge. The Power Factor shall be
maintained greater than 92% lagging or leading for the kW coincident with the
Power Generation Service Natural Gas billing period.
   LOAD FACTOR. Percentage ratio of measured kilowatt hours (kWh) to the
product of the maximum demand in kW times the hours during the specific billing
period.
   MUNICIPAL SERVICE. Applicable to facilities owned and/or operated by the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
   POWER FACTOR. Customer with demand meters are responsible for maintaining a
minimum power factor of 92% leading or lagging on a system coincident basis as
determined at intervals defined in the then current Power Generation Service
Natural Gas GFPS Rate. When power factor is less than 92% the metered
Coincident (CP) Demand will be adjusted my multiplying such CP Demand by the
difference of 92% minus the metered Power Factor percentage, (i.e CP kW * (92%
- metered power factor %)). In order to allow the customer appropriate time to
correct a low power factor, a customer transferred to or new to power factor
charges will not be billed for power factor adjustments on the first three
bills rendered to the customer after power factor metering has been installed.
   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. Applicable to all separately metered single-family
living facilities which include cooking, bath and sleeping accommodations, to
include separately metered apartments, mobile  home parks, motel units and
rental units. Residential service shall not be applicable to structures/houses
where commercial business or income generating activity is conducted in the
major part of the premise. All residential service shall be single-phase
electricity. When units are individually metered for some services and other
services are supplied in different metering configurations, the various
services shall be billed in accordance with their individual load
characteristics.
   SMALL GENERAL SERVICE. Applicable to any single-phase or three-phase non-
residential customer with less than 15,000 kWh monthly consumption and less
than 50 kW demand. All services shall be provided at the available Electric
Department electric system standards.
   STREET LIGHTING. Applicable to all municipal street lights.
   WHOLESALE SERVICE. Applicable to any user of the electric system of the
Electric Department pursuant to a contract entered into between the city and
said user. Said contract to be entered into at the discretion of the Wahoo
Board of Public Works, subject to the approval by the Mayor and Council of
city, when said user desires service in excess of normal Electric Department
standards for retail purposes.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.12 MUNICIPAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.13 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.14 SMALL GENERAL SERVICE ELECTRIC RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.15 LARGE GENERAL DEMAND SERVICE ELECTRIC RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.16 WHOLESALE SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.17 IRRIGATION SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.18 LARGE POWER PRIMARY VOLTAGE SERVICE ELECTRIC RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.19 STREET LIGHTING ELECTRIC RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.20 NET METERING.
   (A)   Available. To a customer with less than 25 kW of qualifying generation
that qualifies for service under Neb. RS 70-1012,2, and provided that the
Electric Department does not have net metering customers that provide in
aggregate more than 1% capacity necessary to meet the local distribution
utility’s average aggregate customer monthly peak demand forecast for that
calendar year.
   (B)   Character of service. Unless otherwise provided by in the
Interconnection Agreement, the character of purchased power will be single or
three-phase alternating electric current of 60 hertz. Voltage shall be
determined by the voltage of the Electric Department’s distribution system in
the vicinity unless otherwise agreed.
   (C)   Measurement of energy. The amount of energy billed under the
applicable retail rate schedule will equal the net amount of energy used at the
customer meter. If there is excess energy produced in a given billing period,
it will be reimbursed at the avoided cost rates in § 38.21.
(Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.21 CUSTOMER OWNED GENERATION EXCESS POWER RATE.
   (A)   Available. To a customer signing an Interconnection Agreement with the
Electric Department and who owns and operates cogeneration and small power
production facilities with production capacity of 100 kW and less that qualify
under the guidelines for implementing PURPA Sections 201 and 210 and as
outlined in the Electric Department’s Policy and Guideline for Customer Owned
Generation. Also, this section applies to any customer that would otherwise
qualify for §
38.20 where the Electric Department has exceeded the 1% capacity threshold in
this division.
   (B)   Character of service. Unless otherwise provided by in the
Interconnection Agreement, the character of purchased power will be single or
three-phase alternating electric current of 60 hertz. Voltage shall be
determined by the voltage of the Electric Department’s distribution system in
the vicinity unless otherwise agreed.
   (C)   Purchase of output from qualifying facilities. Owners of qualifying
facilities will be allowed the option to either (1) sell the entire electrical
output to their qualifying facilities to the Electric Department, or (2) use
the electrical output of their qualifying facilities to instantaneously supply
all or a portion of their own load and sell the instantaneous surplus to the
Electric Department.
   (D)   Purchase price avoided cost. Energy from qualifying facilities and
excess energy from net metering customers under §
38.20 will be paid for on the following basis:
      (1)   For Qualifying Facilities of 100 kW and less without time of day
metering, payment on a monthly basis of an amount as follows based on
generation technology:
         (a)   Photo-voltaic. $0.0295053 per kilowatt hour for the summer
season and $0.0216039 per kilowatt hour for the winter season.
         (b)   Wind. $0.032 per kilowatt hour for the summer season and $0.036
per kilowatt hour for the winter season.
         (c)   Baseload. $0.042 per kilowatt hour for all for all power and/or
energy delivered to the Electric Department.
      (2)   The purchase price shall be adjusted up or down to reflect the
savings or costs resulting from variations in losses compared to if the
Electric Department had generated or purchased elsewhere an equivalent amount
of energy. Such an adjustment factor shall be identified in the Interconnection
Agreement.
   (E)   Accounting charge. The owner of the qualifying facility will pay to
the Electric Department the following monthly charges for additional energy
accounting expenses incurred by the Electric Department. This accounting charge
is not applicable to customers that qualify under §
38.20:
      (1)   kWh Meter $4 per meter; and
      (2)   Interval Meter $20 per meter.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2433, passed 4-25-23; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
NATURAL GAS DEPARTMENT RATES
§ 38.30 NATURAL GAS DEPARTMENT RATES.
   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be charged
all customers of the Natural Gas Department of the city as set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.31 RESIDENTIAL GENERAL SERVICE NATURAL GAS RATES.
   (A)   Availability and priority of service. Natural gas shall be furnished,
subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the city’s existing
gas distribution facilities supplied at one point of delivery whose maximum
monthly requirement has not exceeded 3,000 DTH during the most recent 12-month
period. This service shall have the second highest priority regarding
availability.
   (B)   Character of service. Natural gas will be supplied at the standard
pressures and quality.
   (C)   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
   (D)   Minimum bill. The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2026, passed 9-24-09; Am. Ord. 2030,
passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10;
Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12; Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339,
passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.32 NONRESIDENTIAL GENERAL SERVICE NATURAL GAS RATES.
   (A)   Availability and priority of service. Natural gas shall be furnished,
subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the city’s existing
gas distribution facilities supplied at one point of delivery whose maximum
monthly requirement has not exceeded 3,000 DTH during the most recent 12-month
period. This service shall have the second highest priority regarding
availability.
   (B)   Character of service. Natural gas will be supplied at the standard
pressures and quality.
   (C)   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
   (D)   Minimum bill. The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.33 POWER GENERATION SERVICE NATURAL GAS RATES.
   (A)   Availability and priority of service. Natural gas may be furnished,
subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the city’s existing
gas distribution system supplied at one point of delivery whose maximum monthly
requirement has not exceeded 3,000 DTH during the most recent 12-month period.
This service shall have the second highest priority regarding availability.
   (B)   Character of service. Natural gas will be supplied at the standard
pressures and quality.
   (C)   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
   (D)   Minimum bill. The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.34 NATURAL GAS MARKET PRICE AND TRANSPORTATION RATE.
   (A)   Availability and priority of service. Natural gas may be furnished,
subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the city’s existing
gas distribution system supplied at one point of delivery. This service shall
have the second highest priority regarding availability.
   (B)   Character of service. Natural gas will be supplied at the 5-psi
pressure.
   (C)   Rate schedule. See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
      (1)   Customer charge/per month $475.
      (2)   Charges for gas delivered shall be the cost of spot consumption as
purchased by Clayton Energy for the customer and in accordance with normal
purchase practices on the daily market, plus 2% system loss, plus transport
cost on the Northern Natural Gas Pipeline System to the Wahoo Town Border
Station.
      (3)   Any additional cost of commodity purchase or transport created by
any customer consumption shall be the liability of such customer taking service
hereunder.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
SEWER DEPARTMENT RATES
§ 38.40 SEWER DEPARTMENT RATES.
   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be charged
all customers of the Sewer Department of the city as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.41 DEFINITIONS (SEWER DEPARTMENT).
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE. Applicable to use by any consumer which is not a
residential consumer and for water meters that service sewer-able loads. Meters
determined by the utility that service loads where the water does not enter the
sanitary sewer system may not be charged for sewer fees. All services shall be
provided at the available Sewer Department system standards. High strength or
excessive volume requires special contracts with appropriate rates.
   CONSUMER. Any and all users of the sewer system of the Sewer Department,
including all persons, firms or corporations whose premises are served thereby,
and all owners and tenants of real estate connected to said sewer system.
   MUNICIPAL SERVICE. Applicable to facilities owned by the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska.
   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. Shall be supplied to single family living facilities
which include cooking, bath and sleeping accommodations. Separately water
metered apartments, mobile home parks, motel units and rental units are
applicable to this schedule. Residential service shall not be applicable to
structures/houses where commercial business or income generating activity is
conducted in the major part of the premise. When units are individually metered
for some services and other services are supplied under different metering
configuration, the various services shall be billed in accordance with their
individual characteristics.
   VOLUME RATE CHARGE. Rate multiplied per 1,000 gallon units of potable water
metered each month for all services except residential. Residential rates are
multiplied by the averaged 1,000 gallons of potable water metered in January,
February, and March or an amount estimated by the utility. This is an annual
charge recalculated in April of each year.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447,
passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.42 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.43 COMMERCIAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.44 MUNICIPAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
WATER DEPARTMENT RATES
§ 38.50 WATER DEPARTMENT RATES.
   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be charged
all customers of the Water Department of the city as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386,
passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413, passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.51 DEFINITIONS (WATER DEPARTMENT).
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE. Applicable to any consumer which is not a residential
service or a municipal service consumer. All services shall be provided at the
available Water Department system standards.
   CONSUMER. Any and all users of the water system of the Water Department,
including all persons, firms or corporations whose premises are served thereby,
and all owners and tenants of real estate connected to said water system.
   MINIMUM CHARGE SCHEDULE. There shall be a minimum water use charge per month
to each consumer located within the corporate limits of the city which shall be
determined by the size of the consumer’s meter.
   MUNICIPAL SERVICE. Applicable to facilities owned and/or operated by the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
   
   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. Shall be supplied to separately metered single family
living facilities which include cooking, bath and sleeping accommodations and
includes separately metered apartments, mobile home parks, motel units and
rental units are applicable to this schedule. Residential service shall not be
applicable to structures/houses where commercial business or income generating
activity is conducted in the major part of the premise.
   WHOLESALE SERVICE. Applicable to any user of water of the water system of
the Water Department pursuant to a contract entered into the city and said
user, said contract to be entered into at the discretion of the Wahoo Board of
Public Works when said user desires service in excess of normal water system
standards for retail purposes, subject to approval by the Mayor and Council of
city.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386,
passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413, passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.52 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413,
passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.53 COMMERCIAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413,
passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.54 WHOLESALE SERVICE WATER RATES.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413,
passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.55 MUNICIPAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413,
passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.56 WATER RATE SCHEDULE IN EXCESS OF MINIMUM.
   See
Appendix A for rates and effective dates.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413,
passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
§ 38.57 PER PERSON SERVICE CONTRACT RATE.
   The Utilities General Manager shall be responsible for determining sales and
charges of bulk water from hydrants or wells.
(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 1-26-12;
Am. Ord. 2121, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19; Am. Ord. 2386,
passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 2413, passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-9-24)
APPENDIX A: UTILITY RATE SCHEDULES
ELECTRIC SERVICES
 Municipal Rates Rates Effective 1/1/2020 Rates Effective 1/1/2021
ELECTRIC SERVICES
                                                   Rates        Rates
     Municipal Rates                               Effective 1/ Effective 1/1/
                                                   1/2020       2021
CC   1 Phase (per month)                           $ 18.50      $ 20.00
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           35.00        38.00
ENG  October thru May                              .06145/kwh   .0623/kwh
ENG  June thru September                           .09145/kwh   .0973/kwh
     Residential Rates
CC   1 Phase (per month)                           $ 15.00      $ 17.25
     October thru May                              .0747/kwh    .0747/kwh
ENG  First 825 kwh                                 .0597/kwh    .0597/kwh
     Over 825 kwh
     June thru September                           .0797/kWh    .0797/kWh
ENG  First 825 kwh                                 .0797/kWh    .0797/kWh
     Over 825 kwh
     Small General Rates
CC   1 Phase (per month)                           $ 18.50      $ 20.00
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           35.00        38.00
     October thru May                              .0919/kwh    .0941/kwh
ENG  First 1900 kwh                                .0619/kwh    .0641/kwh
     Over 1900 kwh
     June thru September                           .0919/kwh    .0941/kwh
ENG  First 1900 kwh                                .0919/kwh    .0941/kwh
     Over 1900 kwh
     Large General Demand Rates
CC   1 Phase (per month)                           $ 51.25      $ 51.25
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           $ 70.00      $ 100.00
ENG  October thru May                              .03320/kwh   .03595/kwh
ENG  June thru September                           .04120/kwh   .04095/kwh
     October thru May                              11.00/kwh    11.00/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               10.00/kwh    10.00/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     June thru September                           12.00/kwh    12.00/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               10.00/kwh    10.00/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     Primary Line Delivery, KW per month for       .40/kwh      .40/kwh
     meters served from 12 KV distribution lines
     Wholesale Rates
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           340.00       350.00
ENG  October thru May                              .0380/kwh    .03885/kwh
     June thru September                           .0430/kwh    .04385
     October thru May                              13.00/kwh    13.00/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               13.00/kwh    13.00/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     June thru September                           18.60/kwh    18.60/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               16.60/kwh    16.60/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     Irrigation Rates
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           25.00        30.00
     October thru May                              .0656/kwh    .0722/kwh
ENG  First 1900 kwh                                .0656/kwh    .0656/kwh
     Over 1900 kwh
     June thru September                           .0656/kwh    .0722/kwh
ENG  First 1900 kwh                                .0656/kwh    .0656/kwh
     Over 1900 kwh
     Annual Horse Power Charge
Firm Service (per horse power)                     78.00/hsp    80.00/hsp
Interruptible Service (per horse power)            16.00/hsp    16.50/hsp
     Large Power Primary Voltage Rates
CC   3 Phase (per month)                           430.00       430.00
ENG  October thru May                              .0315/kwh    .0319/kwh
ENG  June thru September                           .0345/kwh    .0369/kwh
     October thru May                              10.00/kwh    10.00/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               10.00/kwh    10.00/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     June thru September                           12.00/kwh    12.00/kwh
DEM  Coincident Peak                               9.00/kwh     9.00/kwh
     Non-Coincident Peak
     Primary Line Delivery, KW per month for       .40/kwh      .40/kwh
     meters served from 12 KV distribution lines
     Street Lighting
CC   1 Phase (per month)                           18.50        20.00
ENG  October thru May                              .06575/kwh   .0676/kwh
ENG  June thru September                           .06575/kwh   .0676/kwh
                                                   Rates        Rates
WATER SERVICE                                      Effective 1/ Effective 1/1/
                                                   1/2020       2021
   Residential
   Minimum monthly charge schedule (up to 1,000
gallons)
3/4 inch meter                                     $ 9.00       $ 12.75
1 inch meter                                       13.00        17.00
1 ½ inch meter                                    23.75        25.45
2 inch meter                                       32.65        34.00
   Usage charge
   Rates (per 1,000 gallons) over the minimum   1.533        1.017
charges
   Commercial and Municipal
Minimum monthly charge schedule (up to 1,000
gallons)
3/4 inch meter                                     9.00         12.75
1 inch meter                                       13.00        17.00
1 ½ inch meter                                    23.75        25.45
2 inch meter                                       32.65        34.00
3 inch meter                                       36.00        37.45
4 inch meter                                       48.00        50.00
   Usage charge
   Rates (per 1,000 gallons) over the minimum   1.846        1.780
charges
   Whole Sale Water Rates
6 inch meter                                       85.00        85.00
   Usage charge
   Rates (per 1,000 gallons) over the minimum   1.920        1.990
charges
                                                   Rates        Rates
SEWER SERVICES                                     Effective 1/ Effective 1/1/
                                                   1/2020       2021
   Residential Sewer Rates
Residential sewer rates based on average water
usage in Jan., Feb. and March. Recalculated for
April billing.
Customer charge                                    $ 22.95      $ 24.50
Volume rate (per 1,000 gallons of water)           3.30         3.05
   Commercial and Municipal Sewer Rate Schedule
   Customer Service Monthly Charge:
3/4 inch meter                                     23.05        28.31
1 inch meter                                       23.05        28.31
1 ½ inch meter                                    31.05        36.31
2 inch meter                                       40.55        45.81
3 inch meter                                       52.05        57.31
4 inch meter                                       75.05        80.31
   Volume Rate                                  3.30         3.05
   (per 1,000 gallons of water)
GAS SERVICE                                        Rates        Rates
                                                  Effective 1/ Effective 1/1/
                                                   1/2020       2021
   Residential
CC   Residential                                   $12.65       $12.65
BASE 0 - 15 ccf                                    .319/ccf     .319/ccf
     Over 15 ccf                                .132/ccf     .132/ccf
   Commercial
CC   Commercial                                    13.90        13.90
BASE 0 - 55 ccf                                    .649/ccf     .649/ccf
     Over 55 ccf                                   .130/ccf     .130/ccf
   Power Gen. Service Nat. Gas
CC   Power Gen.                                    475.00       475.00
BASE 0 - 1500 ccf                                  .640/ccf     .640/ccf
     Over 1500 ccf                                 .130/ccf     .130/ccf
PGA  Residential                                   set monthly  set monthly
PGA  Commercial                                    set monthly  set monthly
PGA  Power Gen. Market Price                       set monthly  set monthly
 
PGA Formula:
Step 1. Sum the previous month's future purchase of market purchased costs
minus the proceeds of any resale credits and divide by the ccf delivered for
that billing period to the power plant meter.
Step 2. Sum the previous month's transmission service, surcharges and service
fees and divide by the ccf delivered for that billing period to the power plant
meter.
Step 3. Sum the gas and transmission costs and multiply by the system average
loss of 4.8% (or other value that may be estimated from time to time) and add
to average costs, then add .001.
Step 4. The resulting sum will be used as the PGA for the next monthly billing
period.
 
Natural Gas Market Price and Transaction Rate
CC Market Price $ 475.00 $ 475.00
 
Step 1. Sum the previous month's future purchase of market purchased costs
minus the proceeds of any resale credits and divide by the ccf delivered for
that billing period to the power plant meter.
Step 2. Sum the previous month's transmission service, surcharges and service
fees and divide by the ccf delivered for that billing period to the power plant
meter.
Step 3. Sum the gas and transmission costs and multiply by the system average
loss of 2.0% and add to average costs.
Step 4. The resulting sum will be used as the PGA for the next monthly billing
period.
(Ord. 2339, passed 12-26-19)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Title
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Mandatory removal and disposal
   
50.04   Supervision
   
50.05   Exclusive right to collect; exceptions
   
50.06   Unlawful disposal and transportation
   
50.07   Receptacles; specifications
   
50.08   Group dwelling and commercial units
   
50.09   Containers or receptacles for city use
   
50.10   Recycling
   
50.11   Limited landfills
   
50.12   Specifications for company granted non-exclusive collection right and
privilege
   
50.13   Rate regulation
   
50.14   Collection service
   
50.15   Complaints regarding service
   
50.16   Vehicles; requirements
   
50.17   Conduct of employees
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Board of Public Works, see §
33.07
§ 50.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Solid Waste Ordinance of the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULKY WASTE. Large appliances, pieces of furniture or waste materials other
than demolition debris or hazardous waste, with a weight or volume greater than
that allowed for residential type containers.
   CITY. The City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT. All those entities that are commercial in nature and
located generally in the commercially zoned areas of the city, and shall
include also schools, hospitals, governmental facilities, except the city,
religious establishments, charitable institutions, hotels and motels, and other
like entities, residential apartments located within commercial buildings, and
the business offices of industrial units.
   COMPANY. Any entity that collects and transports solid waste for hire,
whether hired by a singular source/generator of solid waste, or multiple
sources/generators, and whether collection and transportation is on a daily,
weekly, or other periodic or irregular basis within the city.
   DEMOLITION DEBRIS. That portion of solid waste which includes all discarded
or unwanted material, or waste material from construction, remodeling, and
repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, and other structures,
including, but not limited to excavated earth, stones, brick, plaster, lumber,
concrete, and waste parts occasioned by installations and repairs, and all
combustible and noncombustible waste material resulting from the demolition of
structures, roadways, or other paved surfaces, but excluding garbage, refuse
and hazardous wastes.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit,
or vegetables, and dead animals rejected by rendering plants.
   GROUP DWELLING UNIT. Any boarding or lodging houses, or apartment buildings
which have living quarters for four or more family units, but shall not mean a
hotel or motel.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  That portion of solid waste which because of quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality, or
an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating irreversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human or animal
health, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   INDUSTRIAL UNIT. All those entities that are industrial in nature and
located in industrially zoned areas of the city.
   JUNK. Old scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts
thereof, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
   LIMITED LANDFILL. A type of operation in which only demolition debris, tree
branches, yard waste, and street cleanings may be disposed of on a specified
parcel of land and operated and maintained in such a manner as to present no
danger to the health and safety and welfare of human beings.
   MAYOR and COUNCIL. The chief executive officer and the governing body of the
city.
   MUNICIPAL UNIT. The city and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following locations of city: City Hall, City Library, City Fire Hall, Street
Department Building, Sunrise Cemetery, Wastewater Treatment Facility, Power
Plant, Distribution Building, Civic Center, Senior Center, Smith Park, Westside
(Hackberry) Park, Placek Park, Aquatic Center, during its season, Sam Crawford
Field, during its season, and the central business district public trash
containers.
   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company or organization of any kind.
   REFUSE.  Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, and
solid market and industrial waste.
   REFUSE VEHICLE. Any vehicle with or without a packing unit or mechanism used
to collect, haul, or convey solid waste.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A building or portion thereof, including a mobile home
used as living quarters for at least one family unit, but not more than three
family units.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
waste, wood, cut trees and/or tree branches and shrubbery, glass, bedding,
crockery, or litter of any kind that will be a detriment to the public health
and safety.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, or sludge from an air pollution control
facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or
contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, and mining
operations, and from community activities, but SOLID WASTE shall not include
solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., or source, special
nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, 68 Stat. 923.
   SOLID WASTE FACILITY. Any site owned and operated or utilized by any person
for the collection, source preparation, storage, transportation, transfer,
processing, treatment, or disposal of solid waste, operated pursuant to
requirements of the State of Nebraska and any department or agency thereof.
   SOLID WASTE SYSTEM.  Any equipment, vehicles, facilities, personnel, or
contractors utilized for the purpose of collection, source separation, storage,
transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid wastes.
   STREET/ALLEY.  The surface of any public street, right of way, road,
highway, freeway, bridge, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, now or
hereafter existing as such within the city.
   YARD WASTE. Grass and leaves.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.03 MANDATORY REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL.
   The removal and disposal of solid waste within the city, under the
provisions of this chapter, is hereby made compulsory and universal for the
maintenance, health, and sanitation of the city and its inhabitants.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 SUPERVISION.
   The Mayor of the city shall have supervision and control over the collection
of all solid waste within city and shall have supervision and control of the
manner of the disposal thereof as established by the city. The Mayor may
delegate this responsibility to the appropriate department of the city.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.05 EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO COLLECT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The city, in order to more effectively promote and protect the public
health and welfare, hereby reserves unto itself the exclusive right to collect
all solid waste, or any portion thereof, in the city at such times and for such
periods as in its judgment is in the best interest of the city, provided,
however, the city may grant to one or more companies the non-exclusive right
and privilege to collect, for hire, solid waste, or any portion thereof, within
the city, pursuant to terms and conditions as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or dispose of their
solid waste, or any portion thereof, except said prohibition shall not apply to
the following:
      (1)   The city; or
      (2)   The holder of a right and privilege hereunder; or
      (3)   Any person who lawfully collects and hauls their own solid waste,
or any portion thereof, or yard waste of their own, or of other persons within
the corporate limits of the city, to:
         (a)   A solid waste facility with which the city has a written
contract; or
         (b)   An entity that recycles or reuses any portion of the person's
solid waste; or
         (c)   A limited landfill maintained by the city; or
         (d)   Meets the criteria established by Mayor and Council of the city
pursuant to Neb. RS 13-2020(4).
   (C)   All solid waste collected within the city shall be disposed of in a
solid waste facility with which the city maintains or with which the city has a
written contract or with which company and/or companies has a written contract.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.06 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL AND TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or suffer any solid waste
to be discharged out of or flow from any premises owned or occupied by said
person, or to let any solid waste generated in or upon said premises owned by
said person to be left in or thrown into, deposited or placed upon any street,
public grounds, vacant lot, or other place within the city, other than on the
designated day for the collection of solid waste from said premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport solid waste, or any
portion thereof, from any private premise and deposit the same in any public
receptacle, provided for the deposit of solid waste, or any portion thereof,
which is located on any street, park, or other publicly owned property.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 RECEPTACLES; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or manager of a
residential unit to provide and maintain one or more of the following
receptacles or containers for the holding of all garbage and/or refuse
generated from said residential unit:
      (1)   Garbage can.  A container or receptacle constructed of a metal
treated to prevent rusting, or heavy duty plastic, of substantial construction
with a matching overhanging, tight-fitting lid and provided with handles
sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles or containers
shall be water-tight and fly-tight, having a capacity of not more than 35
gallons, a loaded weight of no more than 50 pounds, and shall be kept in
serviceable conditions at all times.
      (2)   Toter. A container or receptacle with a capacity not to exceed 100
gallons which shall have a lid so constructed so as to prevent insect and
rodent entry. It shall have a wheel or wheels and a handle for easy and safe
mobility and shall be water-tight.
   (B)   A sufficient number of containers shall be provided to store garbage
and/or refuse prior to removal from the residential unit. Such containers or
receptacles shall be kept on the premises in a place accessible and convenient
for the collection thereof and kept in a sanitary and serviceable condition.
All containers used for garbage and/or refuse shall be kept covered or closed
to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents. The location of the containers
or receptacle shall be kept clean and well-maintained.
   (C)   In addition to the aforenoted containers, the city may require every
owner, agent, or manager of a residential unit, to provide yard waste
containers or other container of suitable, two-ply moisture resistant materials
that will not adversely impact composting. Yard waste may also be contained in
separate garbage cans, or toters, provided that such containers shall have
suitable tight-fitting lids, be water-tight and fly-tight, and be kept in
serviceable condition at all times.
   (D)   Any company may provide one or more containers for garbage and/or
refuse for its customers. Each container so furnished shall have thereon the
name and telephone number of the company furnishing said container.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 GROUP DWELLING AND COMMERCIAL UNITS.
   (A)   The owner, agent, or manager having charge of a group dwelling unit
and/or commercial unit shall furnish the same with containers or receptacles
for solid waste for the purpose of receiving such wastes from their place of
business. Such receptacles or containers shall comply with all the
specifications set forth in §
50.07.
   (B)   If the group dwelling unit and/or commercial unit disposes of
infectious solid waste materials, the waste receptacle shall be provided with a
locking assembly so as to maintain controlled access to the container for
depositing and removing the infectious solid waste.
   (C)   Solid waste accumulated by a group dwelling unit and/or commercial
unit shall be removed from the group dwelling unit and/or commercial unit's
premises at intervals necessary to maintain proper sanitary conditions but not
less than once a week.
   (D)   Any company may provide one or more containers for solid waste for its
group dwelling unit and/or commercial unit and/or industrial unit customers.
Each container so furnished shall have thereon the name and telephone number of
the company furnishing said container.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 CONTAINERS OR RECEPTACLES FOR CITY USE.
   The city shall furnish containers or receptacles for its own solid waste, or
any portion thereof. In addition thereto, any company may provide one or more
containers for solid waste for the city. Each container so furnished shall have
thereon the name and telephone number of the company furnishing said container.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.10 RECYCLING.
   Any company that collects garbage and/or refuse from residential units,
group dwelling units, and/or commercial units may provide hereunder a system
for the collection of the following items for recycling purposes:
   (A)   Newspaper;
   (B)   Corrugated cardboard, pasteboard:
   (C)   Steel;
   (D)   Copper and brass;
   (E)   Scrap tin;
   (F)   Appliances;
   (G)   Aluminum scrap, including aluminum cans;
   (H)   Yard waste;
   (I)   Unregulated hazardous waste, except household hazardous waste, which
are exempt from the regulations under the Environmental Protection Act;
   (J)   Discarded tires;
   (K)   Waste oil;
   (L)   Lead-acid batteries;
   (M)   Bulky waste.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.11 LIMITED LANDFILLS.
   The city may provide one or more limited landfills for the disposal of the
following solid waste only:
   (A)   Clean brick, rock, stone, soil, concrete and street cleanings, all
having been generated from within the city;
   (B)   Tree limbs, brush, clean lumber and untreated wood, all having been
accumulated from within the city;
   (C)   Yard waste having been generated from within the city.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.12 SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMPANY GRANTED NON-EXCLUSIVE COLLECTION RIGHT AND
PRIVILEGE.
   (A)   Compliance with terms of chapter. Any company to which the city has
granted a non-exclusive right and privilege to collect, for hire, solid waste,
or any portion thereof, from one or more persons located within the city,
pursuant to this chapter, in accepting said non-exclusive right and privilege,
agrees to comply with all the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance with statutes. Said company shall operate and maintain its
business in full compliance with all applicable statutes of the State of
Nebraska, federal statutes, and all rules and regulations of any agency having
regulatory authority over company or its business.
   (C)   Business office. Each company shall maintain a business office or
agent to which its customers may telephone during regular business hours
without incurring added message or toll charges so that solid waste service
shall be promptly available. Should a customer have an unresolved complaint
regarding solid waste service, the customer shall be entitled to meet jointly
with a representative of the city and a representative of said company within
30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters.
   (D)   Application; rate schedule. Prior to beginning operations in the city,
each company that desires to collects solid waste from within the corporate
limits of the city shall:
      (1)   File with the city an application, to include a non-refundable
application processing fee of $200, said application to include information as
may be required pursuant to this chapter and a schedule of tariffs to include
all fees, charges and rates to be charged to its customers. The application and
the schedule of tariffs shall be on forms as provided by the city. Thereafter,
said application shall be reviewed by the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor
and Council. After approval by the Mayor and Council, the City Clerk shall
issue to the company a permit to haul. All permits shall commence on October 1
and terminate on the last day of September of the following year. If a company
submits an application at any time after October 1, the permit shall become
effective the day following approval by the City Council and shall terminate on
the last day of September, and the fee shall remain $200 for the partial year.
      (2)   If any of said fees, charges or rates, as set forth in a company's
schedule of tariffs are changed during the term of the company's permit to
haul, said company shall notify the city of said changes in writing at least 30
days before said changes take effect.
   (E)   Knowledge and understanding of chapter requirements. As a condition of
the permit to haul, the owner of vehicles operated or utilized to provide for
the transport for hire of solid waste, or any portion thereof, shall be
required to certify his/her knowledge and understanding of the provisions of
this chapter and of the provisions of Neb. RS 13-2001 et seq. as it relates to
the handling, transportation, and disposal of solid waste, or any portion
thereof. Information shall be provided on each vehicle used for the transport
for hire of solid waste, such as, but not limited to, license information, make
and year and D.O.T. required information.
   (F)   Customer list. Any company that collects garbage and refuse, or any
portion thereof, from residential units, group dwelling units, and commercial
units, shall, within the first 15 days of each month, present to the City Clerk
an itemized listing of all customers of company in the city and an itemized
listing of all changes made to the listing of customers since the previous
report indicating changes to date for which said company has provided solid
waste removal services during the preceding month. Said list shall include the
charge to each customer for which company is entitled to payment. Company shall
pay to the city the occupation tax as set forth in §
112.01 of this code based upon said itemized listing of its customers.
   (G)   Discrimination. Neither any company nor any officer, employee, agent,
or any person acting on said company's behalf shall discriminate against any
person because of race, sex, age, creed, color, religion, or national origin.
   (H)   Indemnification. Each company shall indemnify and save harmless the
city, its officers, agents, servants and employees from and against any and all
suits, actions, legal proceedings, claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses
and attorney fees resulting from a willful or negligent act or omission of said
company, its officers, agents, servants and employees in the performance of
this franchise, provided, however, that said company shall not be liable for
any suits, actions, legal proceedings, claims, demands, damages, costs,
expenses and attorney fees due to the willful or negligent act or omission of
the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees.
   (I)   Insurance.
      (1)   Each company shall maintain in full force and effect the following
types of insurance in at least the limits specified below:
         Coverages            Minimum Limits of Liability
         Workmen's Compensation      Statutory requirement
         General Liability:
            Bodily Injury         $1,000,000 each person
                        $1,000,000 aggregate
            Property Damage      $1,000,000 each person
                        $1,000,000 aggregate
         Automobile Liability:
            Bodily Injury         $1,000,000 each person
                        $1,000,000 aggregate
            Property Damage      $1,000,000 each person
                        $1,000,000 aggregate
      (2)   All insurance will be by insurers acceptable to the city and
authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska. At the time of application,
each company shall furnish the city with Certificates of Insurance or other
satisfactory evidence that such insurance has been produced and is in force.
Said policies shall not thereafter be canceled, permitted to expire, or be
changed without 30 days advance written notice to the city. To the extent
permitted by law, all or any part of required insurance coverage(s) may be
provided under a plan of self-insurance, subject to approval by the city.
   (J)   Records. Each company shall maintain records of the number of tons of
solid waste collected by the company in the city, the number of loads of solid
waste taken from the city to a facility by said company, specified by facility
and gate fees paid to the facility, specified by facility, on a calendar year
basis. Each company shall report this information to the city by March 1
annually thereafter. The calculation of tonnage shall be based upon number of
truckloads and weight of loads. Weight of loads may be estimated, provided that
estimates are based on actual weighing of no less than 10% of loads collected
in the city. Weighing of loads shall be distributed throughout the calendar
year and provide a representative sample of total loads collected in the city.
All scale records shall be kept and submitted as a part of the report.
   (K)   Assignment. Any company shall not assign its rights granted by the
city to said company under this chapter to any other person, in whole or in
part, without the express written consent of the city, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld, except the city shall be entitled to a 60-day notice
of said assignment.
   (L)   Waiver. A waiver by either the city or any company of any breach of
any provision hereof shall not be taken or held to be a waiver of any
succeeding breach of such provision or as a waiver of any provision itself.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2208, passed 12-22-2015) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.13 RATE REGULATION.
   (A)   At the time of the adoption of this chapter, the city chooses not to
become involved in the rate making process believing that supply and demand
will be an effective rate control. However, the city reserves the right, at any
future date, to become involved in the rate making process and to approve or
disapprove proposed rates.
   (B)   Each company shall not as to their rates, charges, service facilities,
rules, regulations or in any other respect make or grant any preference or
advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage, provided that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit
the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules
to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled, and
provided further, that said rates and charges may be waived or modified during
promotional campaigns of any company.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.14 COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   Any company that collects garbage and refuse from residential units
shall provide curb side collection service for the collection of garbage and
refuse from residential units at least once every other week. It is the
responsibility of the resident of a residential unit to arrange that the
garbage cans or toters are placed within five feet of the curb or street, or as
close as practicable to collection vehicle routes by 6:00 a.m. on the
designated collection day. Any company may decline to collect any garbage can
or toter not so placed, any garbage can or toter that contains sharp objects or
liquids, or any garbage and refuse not properly contained. Where any company
has reason to leave solid waste uncollected at a residential unit, said company
or said company's agents shall inform the resident, owner, manager, or agent,
within one day by written notice, mailing, or telephone as to why the solid
waste was not collected, i.e., non-residential solid waste, hazardous waste,
unapproved garbage can or toter, improper placement, or such other valid
reason. Collection of bulky waste will be made upon request of the customer.
The fee for collection of bulky waste shall be negotiated between each company
and its customers on an individual basis.
   (B)   Normal hours of collection are to be from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday, except for the collection of garbage and refuse from
residential units and/or group dwelling units which shall be from 6:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., either Monday, Tuesday, or Friday of each week. Exceptions may be
made only when any company has reasonably determined that an exception is
necessary to complete collection of an existing route due to unusual
circumstances and upon the mutual agreement of the city and the company.
   (C)   In the event that a regularly scheduled collection is missed and a
complaint received by either the city or any company, and where no fault can be
found on the generator's part, a special collection of the solid waste shall be
required of said company within eight hours of receipt of the complaint by said
company from either the generator or the city. The city shall notify said
company of any complaints it receives regarding said company within one normal
business day of the city.
   (D)   The following holidays, if any, are optional as to whether or not a
company chooses to observe them as non-collection days; New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. The
suspension of collection service on any such holiday in no way relieves a
company of its obligation to provide collection service during the week of the
holiday period at least once per week. Extending the hours of service to meet
this obligation is subject to the city's approval.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.15 COMPLAINTS REGARDING SERVICE.
   (A)   Each company shall receive and respond to all complaints regarding
services provided under the grant of franchise. Any complaints received by the
city will be directed to said company's office. A written record shall be made
by the city of any complaint received by it regarding any company, which shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Name of complainant;
      (2)   Date and time of complaint;
      (3)   Nature of complaint;
      (4)   Date reported to company.
   (B)   Each company, shall within two working days thereafter, inform the
city of said company's response to the complaint, the date and means of
resolution of the complaint, or an explanation of non-resolution of the
complaint.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.16 VEHICLES; REQUIREMENTS.
   An adequate number of vehicles shall be provided by each company to collect
solid waste in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The vehicles shall be
licensed in the State of Nebraska and shall operate in compliance with all
applicable state, federal and municipal regulations. All vehicles shall be
manufactured and maintained to conform with the applicable standards of the
American National Standards Institute. All vehicles and equipment shall be kept
in proper repair and sanitary condition. Each vehicle shall bear, as a minimum,
the name and phone number of its company plainly visible on both cab doors in
numbers and letters at least three inches high. All vehicles shall be
sufficiently secure as to prevent any littering of solid waste and/or leakage
of fluid. No vehicles shall be willfully overloaded.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES.
   Each company shall require its employees to be courteous at all times, to
work quietly and not to use loud or profane language. Each company's employees
shall follow the regular walks for pedestrians while on private property, shall
not trespass or loiter on private property, shall not cross property to
adjoining property, and shall not meddle or tamper with property which does not
or should not concern them. Each employee assigned to drive a vehicle shall, at
all times, carry a valid driver's license for the type of vehicle he or she is
driving. The city shall have the right to make a complaint regarding any
employee of any company who violates any provision hereof or who is wanton,
negligent, or discourteous in the performance of his or her duties. The city
may suggest action to be taken in its complaint but it shall not be binding on
said company.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or any company who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as set
forth in §
10.99 of this code, as amended from time to time hereafter. The city may
further penalize licensed haulers the following amounts as liquidated damages
as follows:
      (1)   For overloading any conveyance used in collection and removal: a
minimum of $200 for each occurrence;
      (2)   For failure to clean up spilled refuse from the provided
containers: a minimum of $50 for each occurrence;
      (3)   For permitting conveyances used in the collection and removal of
refuse to stand in the City no longer than 24 hours: a minimum of $50 for each
occurrence;
      (4)   For failure to keep conveyances in sanitary condition: a minimum of
$50 for each occurrence;
      (5)   For failure to dispose of refuse, garbage, trash and rubbish only
by means of a sanitary landfill, and in accordance with the codes of the city:
a minimum of $200 for each occurrence.
   (B)   If any company should violate any of the terms, conditions or
provisions of this chapter or if any company should fail to comply with any
reasonable provisions of any ordinance of the city regulating the use by any
company of the streets, alleys, easements or public ways of the city, or if any
company should fail to comply with any material representation of fact in its
application, and should said company further continue to violate or fail to
comply with the same for a period of 30 days after said company shall have been
notified in writing by the city to cease and desist from any such violation or
failure to comply so specified, then said company may be deemed to have
forfeited and annulled and shall thereby forfeit and annul all the rights and
privileges granted hereunder to said company; provided, however, that such
forfeiture shall be declared only by written decision of the Mayor and Council
after an appropriate public proceeding before the Mayor and Council affording
said company due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any
such notice of violation or failure to comply; and provided further that the
Mayor and Council may, in its discretion, and upon a finding of violation or
failure to comply, impose a lesser penalty than forfeiture or excuse the
violation of failure to comply upon a showing by said company of mitigating
circumstances. Said company shall have the right to appeal any finding of
violation of failure to comply and any resultant penalty to any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
         Chapter
            
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
            
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   State law adopted
   
70.02   Negligent driving
   
70.03   Off-road designed vehicles
   
70.04   Off street parking
   
70.05   Definitions
   
70.06   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited; exceptions
   
70.07   Parking regulations; signs; control by governing body
   
70.08   All-terrain vehicles (ATV) and utility-type vehicles (UTV)
   
70.09   Golf carts
Parking; Administration and Enforcement
   
70.20   Bureau of Violations
   
70.21   Presumption of control by owner
   
70.22   Citations, duty of police
   
70.23   Closing streets and alleys to parking
   
70.24   Removal of illegally parked vehicles
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   All portions of the Nebraska Rules of the Road, as now found in the statutes
of the state, are incorporated by reference, as they now exist and as they may
from time to time be amended, except as specifically indicated otherwise by
ordinance.
§ 70.02 NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a
want of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use
under like circumstances shall be deemed guilty of negligent driving.
(Neb. RS 60-4,182) (’72 Code, § 5-714.02) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-73) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 70.03 OFF-ROAD DESIGNED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). Pursuant to Neb. RS 60-103 means any
motorized off-highway vehicle which:
         (a)   Is 50inches or less in width;
         (b)   Has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less;
         (c)   Travels on four or more non-highway tires; and
         (d)   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specially designed by the original manufacture for the operator and one
passenger.
   ATVs are declared to be motor vehicles subject to Nebraska Rules of the Road
and traffic laws in addition to this chapter.
      (2)   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE (UTV). Pursuant to Neb. RS 60-135.01 means any
motorized off-highway device which:
         (a)   Is 74 inches in width or less;
         (b)   Is not more than 180 inches, including the bumper, in length;
         (c)   Has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and
         (d)   Travels on four or more non-highway tires.
   UTV does not include ATVs, golf car vehicles, or low-speed vehicles as the
same are defined by Nebraska law. UTVs are declared to be motor vehicles
subject to Nebraska Rules of the Road and traffic laws in addition to this
chapter.
   (B)   ATVs and UTVs; prohibited operation and exceptions. 
      (1)   ATVs and UTVs may not be operated upon any city streets, sidewalks,
public right-of-ways and highways within the corporate limits of the city
except as follows:
         (a)   By an employee of the city in their official capacity for the
city and while operating a city owned ATV or UTV;
         (b)   A contractor or other authorized representative of the city may
also use such vehicles in furtherance of a city contracted purpose if expressly
allowed to do so by the City Administrator or supervising Department manager;
         (c)   During parades which have been authorized by the state or the
city;
         (d)   If the operator is removing snow from the road or sidewalk from
commencement of storm to up to 48 hours after cessation of a snow storm;
         (e)   If the operator is addressing storm damage within 48 hours after
an emergency event as declared by the Mayor; or
         (f)   On public trails, sidewalks or public right-of-ways while
engaged by the city for snow removal.
      (2)   Any person operating a ATV or UTV as authorized by this code
section shall:
         (a)   Be at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Have a valid Class O operator's license or a farm permit as
provided for in Neb. RS 60-4,126;
         (c)   Have liability insurance coverage for the ATV or UTV while in
operation upon a street or highway and provide such insurance proof of coverage
upon the demand of any peace officer requesting such proof within five days of
such request; such insurance shall be within the limits stated in Neb. RS 60-
509, as amended from time to time;
         (d)   If operating or riding on an ATV or UTV, utilize manufacturer
installed seat belts or wear a helmet approved for lawful operation of a
motorcycle in the State of Nebraska; and
         (e)   Only operate such ATV or UTV between sunrise and sunset.
   (C)   ATVs and UTVs; equipment. Every ATV and UTV shall be equipped with:
      (1)   A braking system maintained in good operating condition;
      (2)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition and without a
cutout, bypass or similar device, or any modifications to the muffler system
which increases the volume of the noise of the exhaust system. No portion of
the system shall be permitted to contact the ground when weighted by its
operator;
      (3)   A United States Forest Service-qualified spark arrester;
      (4)   Headlights and taillights;
      (5)   A reflective sign must be affixed to the rear of the vehicle; and,
      (6)   Equipped with a safety flag which extends no less than five feet
above the ground and is attached to the rear of such vehicle. The flag shall be
day-glow in color, triangular in shape, and of a size with an area of not less
than 30 square inches.
   (D)   ATVs and UTVs; prohibition against operation on and crossing of
control led-access highways. An ATV or UTV shall not be operated on any
controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes, and the
crossing of any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic
lanes shall not be permitted.
   (E)   ATVs and UTVs; crossing highways other than controlled-access
highways. For the purpose of this section, the crossing of a non-controlled
access highway shall be permitted only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees
perpendicular to the direction of travel being made on such highway and at a
place where no obstruction prevents a timely and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of said highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right of way to all traffic which
constitutes an immediate or potential hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a highway, the crossing shall only be made at an
intersection of another roadway; and, both the headlights and taillights must
be on when the crossing is made.
   (F)   ATV and UTVs; accident; report required. If an accident involving an
ATV or UTV results an injury to any person resulting in the examination or
treatment of the injured person by a physician, or results in the death of any
person, then the operator of each ATV or UTV involved in the accident shall
give notice of the accident in the same manner as provided in Neb. RS 60-699.
   (G)   ATV and UTVs; penalty; impoundment. Any person who violates any
provision of this section or violates the provisions defined by Chapter 39 or
Chapter 60 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska while operating an ATV or UTV
shall be subject to the penalties under the provisions of Chapter 39 and
Chapter 60 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska and additionally impoundment of
the vehicle is hereby authorized and all city-issued registrations for all of
the operator's and the owner's ATVs and UTVs shall be revoked as follows:
      (1)   For the operator's first offense, the operator shall be prohibited
from operating ATVs and UTVs within the city for a period of one year from the
date of offense; all city-issued registrations of both the operator and the
owner shall be revoked for a period of one year from the date of the offense;
and the vehicle shall be impounded until it is validly registered or for 14
days, whichever is less, in a privately operated garage or other place
designated by or maintained by the city with all costs payable by the owner.
The individual shall also be charged with a Class III misdemeanor which carries
a possible maximum penalty of a $500 fine and/or three months in jail or both;
      (2)   For the operator's second offense occurring within ten years of the
first offense, the operator shall be prohibited from operating UTVs within the
city for a period of five years from the date of offense; all city-issued
registrations of both the operator and the owner shall be revoked for a period
of five years from the date of offense; and the vehicle shall be impounded
until it is validly registered or for 30 days, whichever is less, in a
privately operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the
city with all costs payable by the owner. The individual shall also be charged
with a Class II misdemeanor which carries a possible maximum penalty of a
$1,000 fine and/or six months in jail or both.
(Ord. 2282, passed 8-9-18)
§ 70.04 OFF STREET PARKING.
   (A)   VEHICLE shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved
solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts.
   (B)   All residents of the city, during the hours specified herein, shall
provide facilities on the real estate upon which they reside, to include that
portion of the street adjacent thereto between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines, denoted as SIDEWALK SPACE, and as defined in §
95.030, for parking of vehicles which they own and/or operate and/or control,
without parking said vehicle on a sidewalk in violation of Neb. RS 60-6,166(1)
(a)(ii).
   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle on the traveled portion of streets in
the city, between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m., Sunday through Saturday,
inclusive, except for the following areas in which parking shall be prohibited
between the hours as indicated, Sunday through Saturday, inclusive:
      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
         (a)   Broadway Street from the intersection of 4th Street to the
intersection of 7th Street;
         (b)   Linden Avenue from the intersection of 4th Street to the
intersection of 7th Street;
         (c)   4th Street from the intersection of Beech Street to the
intersection of Maple Street;
         (d)   5th Street from the intersection of Beech Street to the
intersection of Chestnut Street;
         (e)   South side of 5th Street from the intersection of Chestnut
Street to the intersection of Walnut Street;
         (f)   6th Street from the intersection of Beech Street to the
intersection of Maple Street;
         (g)   7th Street from the intersection of Linden Avenue to the
intersection of
Broadway Street.
      (2)   Between midnight and 6:00 a.m.:
         (a)   4th Street from the intersection of Orange Street to the
intersection of Beech Street;
         (b)   Beech Street from the intersection of 4th Street to the
intersection of 5th Street;
         (c)   Elm Street from the intersection of 4th Street to the
intersection of 5th Street.
   (D)   Residents and/or non-residents of the city may obtain permission for,
utilize on-street parking, as an exception to this section, in the following
instances:
      (1)   At any location within the city limits of Wahoo, except as
expressly prohibited in §
70.06 for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours as an exception to this
section, with permission to be obtained in advance from the Police Department;
      (2)   In public parking stalls located either within or adjacent to the
downtown area as determined appropriate by the City Administrator, provided the
necessary permit, as described in division (E), has been obtained from the City
of Wahoo City Clerk’s Office;
   (E)   The City Clerk’s office shall issue annual parking permits granting
permission to park in the areas as described in division (D)(2) based on the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Parking permits (downtown residential parking permit) shall be made
available to the property owners of residential units (as permitted by City of
Wahoo zoning regulations) located in the downtown area, with one permit
available per sleeping unit of each residential unit. Property owners shall
provide the City of Wahoo Police Department with information on each user of a
permit, including changes to the user of any permit as may occur from time-to-
time. Information to be provided shall include name and address of the permit
users, vehicle make, model and license plate of each vehicle to be parked in
the designated area; and contact information for each user to contact vehicle
owners in the event of a snow, utility, or other emergency.
      (2)   Each downtown residential parking permit shall require an annual
fee paid to the City Clerk’s Office before issuance of the permit of an amount
to be set by resolution.
      (3)   Permits shall be issued based on a calendar year and shall expire
each year on December 31.
      (4)   The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk’s Office in the form
of a hanging tag that shall be placed on the rear-view mirror of any vehicle
parking in a designated area.
   (F)   Any vehicle for which city parking citations have been issued
previously and for which ten or more citations are currently outstanding,
meaning the citations have not been disposed of by payment of the
administrative fee and fine, final court action, or by dismissal, shall be
deemed to be illegally parked and subject to removal as set forth in §
70.24. Prior to the release of any vehicle removed pursuant to this section,
all outstanding citations must be paid for, in full.
(Ord. 1811, passed 8-8-02; Am. Ord. 1817, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 2220,
passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 2365, passed 2-25-21; Am. Ord. 2373, passed 8-24-21)
§ 70.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions as found at Neb. RS 60-606 to
60-676, as they now exist, or may hereafter be amended, shall be incorporated
herein by reference. Further, specifically, Neb. RS 60-624, Highway defined,
shall include for purposes of this chapter, all alleys which are publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel. In addition, the definitions as set forth in §
10.05 of this code shall be incorporated within this chapter by reference.
(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02)
§ 70.06 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic-control
device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park any vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk, except in a residentially zoned district of the
city, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., of the succeeding day,
Sunday through Saturday, inclusive;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the
Governing Body indicates a different length by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure over a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad track;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any highway without first securing a current registration as
provided by law; or
         (k)   For more than 24 hours at one general location.
         (l)   On the north side of 10th Street, from the intersection of
Chestnut Street and 10th Street to the intersection of Laurel Street and 10th
Street except as may be permitted by divisions (A)(2) and (3) of this section.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway or alley or be within
five feet from the entrance of said public or private driveway or alley;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or
other traffic- control device located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 25
feet of such entrance when properly signposted; or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as shall be
unlawful.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the
driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary
performance of public duties.
(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1841, passed 6-12-03; Am. Ord. 1932,
passed 5-25-06)
§ 70.07 PARKING REGULATIONS; SIGNS; CONTROL BY GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two- way roadway where parking is permitted shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or edge of such roadway so as to leave at least 4 feet between
the vehicles so parked and any other parked vehicles. No vehicle shall be
parked upon a roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway which is
available for parking.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by the Governing Body, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right- hand curb
or edge of the roadway or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-
hand curb or edge of such roadway.
   (C)   A Governing Body may permit angle or center parking on any roadway,
except that angle or center parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid
highway or on any part of the state highway system within the jurisdiction of
the Governing Body of the city, unless the Director-State Engineer has
determined that such roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle or center
parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The Governing Body may prohibit or restrict stopping, standing, or
parking on highways under its jurisdiction and erect and maintain proper and
adequate signs thereon. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02)
§ 70.08 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV) AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES (UTV).
   (A)   Definitions. 
      (1)   All-terrain vehicle (ATV) is defined pursuant to Neb. RS 60-103 and
means any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
         (a)   Is 50" or less in width,
         (b)   Has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less,
         (c)   Travels on four or more non-highway tires, and
         (d)   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specially designed by the original manufacture for the operator and one
passenger.
         (e)   ATVs are declared to be motor vehicles subject to Nebraska Rules
of the Road and traffic laws in addition to this chapter.
      (2)   Utility-type vehicle (UTV) is defined pursuant to Neb. RS 60-135.01
and means any motorized off-highway device which:
         (a)   Is 74" in width or less,
         (b)   Is not more than 180", including the bumper, in length,
         (c)   Has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, and
         (d)   Travels on four or more non-highway tires.
         (e)   UTV does not include ATVs, golf cart vehicles, or low-speed
vehicles as the same are defined by Nebraska law. UTVs are declared to be motor
vehicles subject to Nebraska Rules of the Road and traffic laws in addition to
this chapter.
   (B)   Operation and equipment. An ATV or UTV may be operated upon city
streets and highways within the corporate limits of the city only if the
operator and vehicle is in compliance with the following provisions in addition
to the Nebraska Rules of the Road and city codes:
      (1)   Such ATV or UTV must be registered with City Hall as provided in
this chapter, unless the same is owned by the city itself.
      (2)   An ATV or UTV shall not be operated at a speed faster than 30 miles
per hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is less. When in operation, the
headlights and taillights of the vehicle shall be on.
      (3)   Any person operating an ATV or UTV as authorized by this code
shall:
         (a)   Have a valid Class O operator's license as provided for in Neb.
RS 60-4,126;
         (b)   Have liability insurance coverage for the ATV or UTV while in
operation upon a street or highway and provide such insurance proof of coverage
upon the demand of any peace officer requesting such proof within five days of
such request; such insurance shall be within the limits stated in Neb. RS 60-
509, as amended from time to time;
         (c)   Only operate such ATV or UTV between sunrise and sunset;
         (d)   Only operate such ATV or UTV less than 30 mph; and
         (e)   Only have as many riders as the manufacturers intended.
      (3)   Every ATV and UTV shall be equipped with:
         (a)   A braking system maintained in good operating condition;
         (b)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition and without
a cutout, bypass or similar device, or any modifications to the muffler system
which increases the volume of the noise of the exhaust system. No portion of
the system shall be permitted to contact the ground when weighted by its
operator;
         (c)   A United States Forest Service-qualified spark arrester;
         (d)   Headlights, taillights, and break lights; and
         (e)   Equipped with a safety flag which extends no less than five feet
above the ground and is attached to the rear of such vehicle. The flag shall be
day-glow in color, triangular in shape, and of a size with an area of not less
than 30 square inches.
   (C)   Usage in parades; usage on public roads, sidewalks and trails. ATVs
and UTVs may be operated without complying with this section only:
      (1)   During parades which have been authorized by the state or any
department, board, commission, or political subdivision of the state,
      (2)   If the operation is removing snow from driveways or sidewalks
within 48 hours after cessation of a snow storm, or
      (3)   On public trails and streets only if engaged by the public entity
for snow removal.
   (D)   Controlled-access highways and off-limit streets. An ATV or UTV shall
not be operated on any controlled-access highway with more than two marked
traffic lanes. Unless engaged by the city for municipal government purposes, it
shall be unlawful to operate an ATV or UTV anywhere on. Provided, however, the
crossing of said streets shall be permissible subject to the restrictions
identified herein.
   (E)   Crossing highways. For the purpose of this section, the crossing of a
highway shall be permitted only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° perpendicular
to the direction of travel being made on such highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a timely and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing shoulder
or roadway of said highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all traffic which
constitutes an immediate or potential hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing shall only be made at
an intersection of another highway or roadway; and
      (5)   Both headlights and taillights must be on when crossing is made.
   (F)   Registration. 
      (1)   Only ATVs or UTVs registered with City Hall or owned by the city
shall be authorized for operation on streets or highways within the corporate
limits of the city. A registration sticker shall be issued by City Hall upon
the owner submitting the following:
         (a)   Certification from the Wahoo Police Department stating that the
ATV or UTV has been inspected and is in compliance with the equipment
requirements identified by city code;
         (b)   Proof of liability insurance coverage for the vehicle
specifically listing the vehicle as referenced by year, make, model, and serial
number; and
         (c)   A $100 annual fee for registration of the vehicle.
      (2)   The registration sticker shall entitle the vehicle to be operated
on the streets and highways of the city as provided by code during the calendar
year of issuance. The annual fee will not be prorated and is not transferrable.
No refunds shall be allowed for any reason. Registration will expire on
December 31 of each year.
      (3)   A reflecting, self-destructing sticker with an assigned number will
be provided to the registering owner upon registration of such vehicle at City
Hall. This registration sticker shall be affixed on the vehicle's lower
driver's side windshield if equipped, or if the vehicle is not equipped with a
windshield, then the sticker shall be affixed on the driver's side front of
such vehicle. A duplicate sticker at a cost of $25 may be issued by City Hall
in the event of a lost or destroyed registration sticker.
   (G)   Dealer registration.
      (1)   A dealer of ATVs or UTVs located within the city shall make an
application to City Hall for a dealer registration sticker, in lieu of
registering each ATV and UTV which the dealer owns, to be used solely for the
purposes of transporting, testing, demonstrating, or use in the daily use and
conduct of business of the dealer. A dealer registration sticker shall be
issued upon the dealer submitting the following:
         (a)   Certification from the dealer stating that ATVs and UTVs to be
operated in accordance with the dealer registration sticker comply with the
equipment requirements identified by city code;
         (b)   Proof of liability insurance coverage for the fleet of ATVs and
UTVs to be operated
pursuant to this section; and
         (c)   A $300 annual fee is paid for the dealer registration sticker.
      (2)   Displaying the dealer registration sticker entitles the vehicle to
be operated as provided by city code on the streets and highways of the city
during the calendar year of issuance of the dealer registration sticker for
uses described in this section. The annual fee shall not be prorated and no
refunds will be allowed for any reason. A dealer registration sticker may be
allowed to be placed on a placard or other item so as to allow for its
transferability from vehicle to vehicle and shall be displayed upon the vehicle
during its operation. A duplicated dealer registration sticker at a cost of $25
may be issued by City Hall in the event of a lost or destroyed dealer
registration sticker.
   (H)   Accident; report required. If an accident involving an ATV or UTV
results an injury to any person resulting in the examination or treatment of
the injured person by a physician, or results in the death of any person, then
the operator of each ATV or UTV involved in the accident shall give notice of
the accident in the same manner as provided in Neb. RS 60-699.
   (I)   Penalty; impoundment. Any person who violates any provision of this
section or violates the provisions defined by Neb. RS Ch. 39 or Ch. 60 while
operating an ATV or UTV shall be subject to the penalties under the provisions
of Neb. RS Ch. 39 and Ch. 60 and additionally all city-issued registrations for
all of the operator's and the owner's ATVs and UTVs shall be revoked as
follows:
      (1)   For the operator's first offense, the operator shall be fined $200;
      (2)   For the operator's second offense occurring within two years of the
first offense, the operator shall be fined $400;
      (3)   For the operator's third offense occurring within two years of the
first offense, the operator shall be fined $400, impoundment of vehicle, and
all city-issued registrations of both the operator and the owner shall be
revoked for a period of two years from the date of offense;
      (4)   For the operator's fifth offense occurring within five years of the
first offense, all city-issued registrations of both the operator and the owner
shall be revoked for a period of ten years from the date of offense.
(Ord. 2429, passed 4-25-23)
§ 70.09 GOLF CARTS.
   (A)   Definition. Golf cart is defined pursuant to Neb. RS 60-103 and means
any vehicle which:
      (1)   Is four-wheeled,
      (2)   Can attain in one mile more than 20 mph and not more than 25 mph on
paved, level surface,
      (3)   Gross vehicle weight rating is less than 3,000 lbs, and
      (4)   Complies with 49 C.F.R., Part 571, or
      (5)   Three-wheeled vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile is not
more than 25 mph on a paved, level surface,
      (6)   Gross weight rating is less than 3,000 lbs,
      (7)   Equipped with a windshield and occupant protection system, and
      (8)   Complies with 49 C.F.R., Part 571.
   (B)   Operation and equipment. A golf cart may be operated upon city streets
and highways within the corporate limits of the city only if the operator and
vehicle is in compliance with the following provisions in addition to the
Nebraska Rules of the Road and city codes:
      (1)   Such golf cart must be registered with City Hall as provided in
this chapter, unless the same is owned by the city itself.
      (2)   A golf cart may only be operated on city streets with a posted
speed limit of 35 mph or less.
      (3)   A golf cart shall not be operated at a speed faster than 20 miles
per hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is less.
      (4)   Any person operating a golf cart as authorized by this code shall:
         (a)   Have a valid Class O operator's license as provided for in Neb.
RS 60- 4,126;
         (b)   Have liability insurance coverage for the golf carts while in
operation upon a street or highway and provide such insurance proof of coverage
upon the demand of any peace officer requesting such proof within five days of
such request; such insurance shall be within the limits stated in Neb. RS 60-
509, as amended from time to time;
         (c)   Only operate such golf carts between sunrise and sunset; and
         (d)   Only have as many riders as the manufacturers intended.
      (5)   Every golf cart shall be equipped with: A braking system maintained
in good operating condition; complete with working brake lights.
   (C)   Usage in parades; usage on public roads, sidewalks and trails. Golf
carts may be operated without complying with this section only:
      (1)   During parades which have been authorized by the state or any
department, board, commission, or political subdivision of the state,
      (2)   If the operation is removing snow from driveways or sidewalks
within 48 hours after cessation of a snow storm, or
      (3)   On public trails and streets only if engaged by the public entity
for snow removal.
   (D)   Controlled-access highways and off-limit streets. A golf cart shall
not be operated on any controlled-access highway with more than two marked
traffic lanes, or any portion of Chestnut Street.
   (E)   Crossing highways. For the purpose of this section, the crossing of a
highway shall be permitted only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° perpendicular
to the direction of travel being made on such highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a timely and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing shoulder
or roadway of said highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right of way to all traffic which
constitutes an immediate or potential hazard; and
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing shall only be made at
an intersection of another highway or roadway.
   (F)   Registration. 
      (1)   Only golf carts registered with City Hall or owned by the city
shall be authorized for operation on streets or highways within the corporate
limits of the city. A registration sticker shall be issued by City Hall upon
the owner submitting the following:
         (a)   Certification from the Wahoo Police Department stating that the
golf cart has been inspected and is in compliance with the equipment
requirements identified by city code;
         (b)   Proof of liability insurance coverage for the vehicle
specifically listing the vehicle as referenced by year, make, model, and serial
number; and
         (c)   A $100 annual fee for registration of the vehicle.
      (2)   The registration sticker shall entitle the vehicle to be operated
on the streets and highways of the city as provided by code during the calendar
year of issuance. The annual fee will not be prorated and is not transferrable.
No refunds shall be allowed for any reason. Registration will expire on
December 31 of each year.
      (3)   A reflecting, self-destructing sticker with an assigned number will
be provided to the registering owner upon registration of such vehicle at City
Hall. This registration sticker shall be affixed on the vehicle's lower
driver's side windshield if equipped, or if the vehicle is not equipped with a
windshield, then the sticker shall be affixed on the driver's side front of
such vehicle. A duplicate sticker at a cost of $25 may be issued by City Hall
in the event of a lost or destroyed registration sticker.
   (G)   Accident; report required. If an accident involving a golf cart
results in an injury to any person resulting in the examination or treatment of
the injured person by a physician, or results in the death of
any person, then the operator of each golf cart involved in the accident shall
give notice of the accident in the same manner as provided in Neb. RS 60-699.
   (H)   Penalty; impoundment. Any person who violates any provision of this
section or violates the provisions defined by Neb. RS Ch. 39 or Ch. 60 while
operating a golf cart shall be subject to the penalties under the provisions of
Neb. RS Ch. 39 and Ch. 60 and additionally all city-issued registrations for
all of the operator's and the owner's golf cart shall be revoked as follows:
      (1)   For the operator's first offense, the operator shall be fined $200;
      (2)   For the operator's second offense occurring within two years of the
first offense, the operator shall be fined $400;
      (3)   For the operator’s third offense occurring within two years of the
first offense, the operator shall be fined $400, impoundment of vehicle, and
all city-issued registrations of both the operator and the owner shall be
revoked for a period of two years from the date of offense;
      (4)   For the operator’s fifth offense occurring within five years of the
first offense, all city-issued registrations of both the operator and the owner
shall be revoked for a period of ten years from the date of offense.
(Ord. 2440, passed 8-22-23)
PARKING; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.20 BUREAU OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and
duties of the office of the City Clerk. A copy of each citation issued for
nonmoving traffic violations or violations of the Rules and Regulations of the
Park and Recreation Department shall be deposited by the City Police Department
with the City Clerk, whose duty it shall be to collect all fines and, to
maintain appropriate and accurate records of all such fines paid.
   (B)   Any person having been issued a citation for a nonmoving traffic
violation or a violation of the Rules and Regulations of the Park and
Recreation Department desiring to plead guilty and waive court appearance, may
pay the City Clerk according to the following fine schedule based upon elapsed
time from the occurrence of the violation, excluding weekends and legal
holidays:
      (1)   Handicapped parking violations.
         1-5 days:      $25   (Fine- $20.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
         6-15 days:      $50 (Fine- $45.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
      (2)   All other nonmoving traffic violations.
         1-5 days:      $5 (Fine- $.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
         6-15 days:      $10 (Fine- $5.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
         16+ days:      $25 (Fine - $5.05; Administrative Costs - $19.95)
      (3)   Park and Recreation Department violations.
         1-5 days:      $5 (Fine- $.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
         6-15 days:      $10 (Fine- $5.05; Administrative Costs- $4.95)
         16+ days:      $25 (Fine - $5.05; Administrative Costs - $19.95)
   (C)   The applicable fine shall be payable at the office of the City Clerk
during hours which said office shall be open to the public for transaction of
business either in person or by mail. Further, said applicable fine may be paid
by placing the money for said applicable fine in the night depository of the
City Hall, 605 North Broadway, Wahoo, Nebraska 68066.
   (D)   In the event that any person having been issued a citation for a
nonmoving traffic violation or a violation of the Rules and Regulations of the
Park and Recreation Department fails to pay the applicable fine within the
allotted time period, such violator or the owner of the offending motor vehicle
shall be liable to prosecution in the County Court for the offense or offenses
charged and subject to the penalty provided for by §
10.99 of this code.
   (E)   Whenever any person refuses, neglects, or fails to comply with any of
the requirements of this section as herein provided, he or she shall be denied
the benefits of any of the provisions thereof.
(’72 Code, § 5-417.02) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81; Am. Ord. 1256, passed 7-10-
86; Am. Ord. 1677, passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1881, passed 12-9-04; Am. Ord. 1942,
passed 9-28-06; Am. Ord. 2387, passed 3-8-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Bureau of Violations authorized, see Neb. RS 18-1729
§ 70.21 PRESUMPTION OF CONTROL BY OWNER.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provisions of this chapter,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was parked in
violation of such chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle,
shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered
owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the
point where and for the time during which such violation occurred.
('72 Code, § 5-417) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81)
§ 70.22 CITATIONS, DUTY OF POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, whenever they
observe a violation of this chapter, to attach to such vehicle at the time such
vehicle is found in violation, a citation to the owner or operator thereof that
such vehicle is or has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter,
which citation shall describe such violation and instruct such owner or
operator to report to the City Hall in regard to such violation.
('72 Code, § 5-417.01) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81)
§ 70.23 CLOSING STREETS AND ALLEYS TO PARKING.
   The City Street Commissioner shall have the power and authority to prohibit
the parking of motor vehicles on any street or alley whenever he or she deems
it necessary for the removal of snow, or the repair of said street or alley.
The Street Commissioner shall have the power and authority to have any vehicle
parked in violation of such order removed from the street or alley at the cost
of the owner. Any person refusing to obey such an order of the Street
Commissioner shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided
in this chapter.
('72 Code, § 5-418) (Am. Ord. 1359, passed 1-10-91) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.24 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a
street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of the chapter, such
individual may remove or have such vehicle removed or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off
the roadway of such street or alley or from such street or alley.
   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of any
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle
prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be
entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such charges are paid. The
lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any
vehicles.
(Neb. 60-6,165) ('72 Code, § 5-419) (Ord. 1248, passed 10-10-85)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedules
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   School crossing zones
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed zones are hereby created:
   (A)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any residential district, EXCEPT as
provided herein.
      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in Country Club Acres Subdivision to the City
of Wahoo.
   (B)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district, EXCEPT as provided
herein.
   (C)   Forty-five miles per hour on South Chestnut Street from the south
boundary line of the city limits to the intersection of South Chestnut Street
and Sloup Drive.
   (D)   Forty miles per hour on South Chestnut Street from the intersection of
South Chestnut Street and Sloup Drive to the intersection of South Chestnut
Street and First Street.
   (E)   Forty miles per hour on Highway 77/92 from the west boundary line of
the city limits to the intersection of Highways 77/92 and South Chestnut
Street.
   (F)   Thirty miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the intersection of
Highways 77/92 and South Chestnut Street to the intersection of Highways 77/92
and Elm Street.
   (G)   Thirty-five miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the intersection of
Highways 77/92 and Elm Street to that point on Highways 77/92 which would
intersect with Thirteenth Street, extended east to said highway.
   (H)   Forty-five miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the point on said
highway which would intersect with Thirteenth Street extended east to
Commercial Park Road.
(’72 Code, § 5-711(part)) (Am. Ord. 1321, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 1505,
passed 7-27-95; Am. Ord. 1796, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 1926, passed 4-13-06;
Am. Ord. 2017, passed 5-28-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES.
   The following areas in the city are hereby declared to be school crossing
zones:
   (A)   On Linden Avenue between Second Street and "C" Street;
   (B)   On Fifteenth Street at the intersection of Locust Street;
   (C)   On First Street from Broadway Street to Beech Street including the
intersections of First Street and Broadway Street and First Street and Beech
Street;
   (D)   On Locust Street from 15th Street to 23rd Street, including the
intersection of Locust Street and 23rd Street;
   (E)   On Hackberry Street from 15th Street to 23rd Street, including the
intersection of Hackberry Street and 15th Street and Hackberry Street and 23rd
Street;
   (F)   On 23rd Street from Hackberry Street to Locust Street.
('72 Code, § 5-223(2)) (Ord. 1589, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1819, passed 10-10-
02; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 4-10-03; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 10-23-03) Penalty, see
§
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   FAIR HOUSING
         
91.   FIRE REGULATIONS
         
92.   CEMETERIES
         
93.   LIBRARY
         
94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
         
95.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
         
96.   ANIMALS
         
97.   NOISE CONTROL
         
98.   TREES AND SHRUBS
         
99.   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
CHAPTER 90: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Information
   
90.04   Unlawful acts
   
90.05   Handicapped person; discriminatory practices prohibited; design and
construction standards
   
90.06   Transaction related to residential real estate; discriminatory
practices prohibited
   
90.07   Multiple listing service; other service; discriminatory practices
prohibited
   
90.08   Religious organization, private home, private club, or housing for
older persons; restricting use not prohibited
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare of the
residents of the city by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair Housing
Act, Neb. RS 20-301 through 23-344, to the effect that there shall be no
discrimination in the city, in the acquisition, ownership, possession, or
enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I Section 25 of the
Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
('72 Code, § 10-701) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. A person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing
practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or more families
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more minors being domiciled with:
      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual;
or
      (2)   The designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with
written permission of the parent or other person.
   HANDICAP. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment, excluding the current illegal use
of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. RS 28-401, which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities:
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   RENT. Lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for consideration the right
to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. Any specification limiting the transfer, rental, or
lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national origin,
sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.
('72 Code, § 10-702) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)
§ 90.03 INFORMATION.
   The City Clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved person or
any other person information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing Act and the
Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such individual.
(Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-322) ('72 Code, § 10-708) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)
§ 90.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Except as exempted by §
90.08, it shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer,
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling
to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial
status, or sex;
      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status, or sex;
      (3)   Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex, or
an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
      (4)   Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
      (5)   Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning
the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex
of a person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;
      (6)   Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any
restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any
restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;
      (7)   Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the
compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee's compliance
with this chapter on the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and
      (8)   Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.
   (B)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any minor.
('72 Code, § 10-703) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED; DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except as exempted by §
90.08, it shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable
or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
         (a)   The buyer or renter;
         (b)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter;
         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap of:
         (a)   Such person;
         (b)   Any person associated with such person; or
         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full
enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the landlord may,
when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the
renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that
existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the
handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and
      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after September 1, 1991, a failure to
design and construct the dwellings in such manner that:
         (a)   The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
         (c)   All premises within the dwellings contain the following features
of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
            3.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation
of grab bars; and
            4.   Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National
Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI Al17.1,
shall satisfy the requirements of subdivision (B)(3)(c) of this section.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, covered multifamily dwellings shall
mean:
      (1)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have
one or more elevators; and
      (2)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more
units.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
('72 Code, § 10-704) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE; DISCRIMINATORY
PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction because
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, "transaction related to residential real
estate" shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate; or
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status, or sex.
('72 Code, § 10-705) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.07 MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on
account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex.
('72 Code, § 10-706) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.08 RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME; PRIVATE CLUB, OR HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS; RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of a
dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to
persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national
origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open
to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or limit the right of any
person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or
rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change
tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this exception
shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or occupancy more
than four sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or her home.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, housing
for older persons shall mean housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state program that the commission determines is
specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the
program;
      (2)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
('72 Code, § 10-707) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Preservation of property
   
91.02   Disorderly spectator
   
91.03   Equipment
   
91.04   Interference
   
91.05   Obstruction
   
91.06   Assistance
   
91.07   Driving over hose
   
91.08   Traffic
   
91.09   False alarm
   
91.10   Pedestrians
Fire Prevention
   
91.25   Fire Prevention Code
   
91.26   Modifications
   
91.27   Fire Code enforcement
   
91.28   Lawful entry
   
91.29   Notice of violation
   
91.30   Fire limits defined
   
91.31   Fire limits building permit
   
91.32   Building moving
   
91.33   Fire limits material
   
91.34   Explosives; blasting permits
   
91.35   Removal required
   
91.36   Walls
   
91.37   Stacking combustibles
   
91.38   Smoking prohibited
   
91.39   Fire prohibited
   
91.40   Fires regulated
   
91.41   Open burning ban; waiver
   
91.42   Poisonous and flammable gas
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall have
the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection
of human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The
Fire Chief may direct the city firefighters to remove any building, structure,
or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The Fire Chief
shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with explosives,
any building or structure during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
checking the progress of the same.
('72 Code, § 7-101)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549
§ 91.02 DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a
period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist, or refuse to
obey the City Fire Chief or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The Fire
Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during such
time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the performance of
their official duties.
('72 Code, § 7-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 91.03 EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members of
the City Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle, or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the city.
('72 Code, § 7-103) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see Neb. RS 28-519
§ 91.04 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct the
City Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance of
their duty.
('72 Code, § 7-104) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 91.05 OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant or
have or place any material within 15 feet of the hydrant. Any vehicle or
material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire Chief
or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and expense of the
owner or claimant.
('72 Code, § 7-105) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Parking prohibited, see Neb. RS 60-6,166
§ 91.06 ASSISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in
the removal and protection of property.
('72 Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 91.07 DRIVING OVER HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief
or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 60-6,184) ('72 Code, § 7-107) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 TRAFFIC.
   Every vehicle already stationary when the fire alarm shall have been sounded
must remain so for a period of five minutes after the sounding of the fire
alarm. No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief, shall follow, approach, or park closer than 500 feet to
any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected. Nothing
herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors, members of the
Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.
('72 Code, § 7-108) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,183
§ 91.09 FALSE ALARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause to raise any false alarm of fire.
('72 Code, § 7-109) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   False reporting prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-907
   False fire alarms prohibited, see Neb. RS 35-520
§ 91.10 PEDESTRIANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in any street
after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall have
completely passed.
('72 Code, § 7-110) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 91.25 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire
Marshal of the state of Nebraska relating to fire prevention are incorporated
by reference into this code and made a part of this chapter as though spread at
large herein together with all subsequent amendments thereto. One copy of the
Uniform Fire Code shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time.
('72 Code, § 7-201) (Am. Ord. 1080, passed 11-11-76) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt, see Neb. RS 18-132
   Zoning and building regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 19-901 through 19-
933
   Powers and duties of State Fire Marshal, see Neb. RS 81-502
§ 91.26 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided
that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or
allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be
entered up on the records of the Department and a signed copy shall be
furnished the applicant. Procedural sections of this Code shall not be subject
to modification by the Chief of the Fire Department.
('72 Code, § 7-202)
§ 91.27 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated Fire
Code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
('72 Code, § 7-203)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549
§ 91.28 LAWFUL ENTRY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire Chief
to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the said structure
for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are
likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the city
ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.
('72 Code, § 7-204)
Statutory reference:
   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum Products and
Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512
§ 91.29 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure that was lawfully inspected as prescribed, and who receives written
or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the city ordinances
to correct the condition that violates the said ordinance or ordinances within
five days from the date of receipt of such notice.
('72 Code, § 7-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.30 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   The following zoned districts in the city shall be in the following listed
fire zones in accordance with Table 5-A of the Uniform Building Code:
   A   Agricultural District - Fire Zone 3
   R-1   Residential District - Fire Zone 3
   R-2   Residential District - Fire Zone 3
   R-3   Residential District - Fire Zone 3
   R-4   Multiple Family Residential District - Fire Zone 2
   R-5   Mobile Home Residential District - Fire Zone 3
   R-6   Modular Home Residential District - Fire Zone 3
   R-O    Residential Office District - Fire Zone 2
   C-1    Highway Commercial - Fire Zone 2
   C-2    Light Commercial District - Fire Zone 2
   C-3    Central Business District - Fire Zone 1
   C-4    General Commercial District - Fire Zone 1
   M-1    Industrial Park District - Fire Zone 2
   M-2   Light Industrial District - Fire Zone 1
   M-3    Heavy Industrial District - Fire Zone 1
   P    Parking District - Fire Zone 2
   F-1   Flood Plain District - Fire Zone 3
('72 Code, § 7-206) (Am. Ord. 1080, passed 11-11-76)
§ 91.31 FIRE LIMITS BUILDING PERMIT.
   Prior to the moving or construction of any building in the fire limits,
application must be made to the City Council. Construction shall include the
enlarging or alteration of any building in the fire limits. Such application
shall be furnished by the City Clerk and shall require such information as the
City Council deems necessary to determine whether or not to grant a building
permit.
('72 Code, § 7-207) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.32 BUILDING MOVING.
   No person shall move any building of combustible material into the fire
limits or move any such building from one place to another within the fire
limits. However, upon application to the City Council, and agreement by two-
thirds of the City Council, a combustible building may be temporarily moved to
another location within the fire limits if the owner or agent desires to
immediately build a noncombustible building on the present site of the
combustible building which is to be moved. This temporary relocation within the
fire limits may only continue until the new structure is completed or the
building permit for the new structure expires, whichever is sooner. Each and
every 24 hour period for which the moved building remains in the fire limits
after this temporary permit expires shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation of this section. Before any temporary permit is issued under this
section, a bond as required in §
32.25 of this city code shall be secured.
('72 Code, § 7-208) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.33 FIRE LIMITS MATERIALS.
   Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered,
moved, or enlarged unless such structure will be enclosed with walls
constructed wholly of stone, well-burned brick, terra cotta, concrete, or other
such noncombustible materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that the said
structure will be reasonably fireproof.
('72 Code, § 7-209) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.34 EXPLOSIVES; BLASTING PERMITS.
   In addition to notifying the Fire Department pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1233(3),
any person desiring to discharge explosive materials, as defined in Neb. RS 28-
1213, within the city, shall apply for and secure a permit from the City
Council 24 hours prior to such discharge, and shall discharge such explosive
materials in conformance with the conditions specified in the permit. In no
case shall any person perform blasting operations unless operating under the
direct supervision of a person in possession of a valid user's permit issued by
the Nebraska State Patrol.
(Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229, 28-1233) ('72 Code, § 7-301) (Ord. 1327,
passed 12-28-89) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.35 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   In the event that any wooden or combustible building or structure, or any
noncombustible building which stands within the fire limits, is damaged to the
extent of 50% or more of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall not
be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down and removed within 60 days from
the date of such fire or other casualty.
('72 Code, § 7-211) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.36 WALLS.
   (A)   All exterior or division walls of buildings hereafter erected in the
fire limits shall be of sufficient thickness to support the load to be carried.
All exterior or division brick walls:
      (1)   In one story buildings shall be not less than eight inches in
thickness;
      (2)   In two story buildings shall be not less than 12 inches in
thickness in the first story and shall be not less than eight inches in
thickness in the second story;
      (3)   In three story buildings shall be not less than 17 inches in
thickness in the first story, not less than 12 inches in thickness in the
second story, and not less than eight inches in thickness in the third story.
   (B)   Reinforced stone or gravel concrete exterior or division walls with
steel reinforcements running both horizontally and vertically and weighing not
less than one half pound per square foot must have a thickness of not less than
eight inches. That portion of exterior brick walls exposed to the street shall
be faced with pressed brick. That portion of exterior hollow tile walls exposed
to the street or alley shall be faced with stucco not less than one inch in
thickness, or at the discretion of the owner, that portion of wall exposed to
the street may be faced with pressed brick. Fire walls shall be not less than
eight inches in thickness. All division walls shall be constructed so that
their thickness shall be not less than 12 inches. No brick veneer buildings
will be permitted or allowed to be constructed in the fire limits. Foundations,
excavations, and cement basements shall be constructed of fireproof material
and in the manner approved by the Building Code, adopted in
Chapter 150 of this code.
('72 Code, § 7-212) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.37 STACKING COMBUSTIBLES.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or
corporation to have or keep any hay, straw, stalks, excelsior, empty boxes,
barrels, or other combustible materials, which are hereby designated as
nuisances, scattered, stacked, or piled up or exposed, unenclosed by a building
upon any street, alley, or lot within the fire limits.
('72 Code, § 7-213) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.38 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a vapor nicotine product or
indulge in the smoking of tobacco in a place of employment, a public place or
within publicly owned property, except as designated by a proprietor. For
purposes of this exception, a proprietor may conspicuously post or display a
sign in readily viewable form for employees and the public to smoke within the
exterior of a building or structure.
(72 Code, § 7-215) (Am. Ord. 2344, passed 4-9-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.39 FIRE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement, or
near any curb, now built or hereafter to be built, within the city.
(Neb. RS 17-556) ('72 Code, § 7-216) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.40 FIRES REGULATED.
   It shall be lawful to build or set out certain fires, provided, that the
person building such fires shall have the substance to be burned in a fireproof
trash burner or incinerator with a metal fireproof screen of not more than one
inch mesh and located at least 20 feet from any building. The incinerator shall
be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of burning paper or other
substance. If any person shall require a fire in the course of his or her trade
as a blacksmith or mechanic, such fire shall be built and maintained in the
manner prescribed by the Fire Chief. All fires shall be built after 7:00 a.m.
and completely extinguished by sunset, except the aforesaid fires used in the
course of a trade which shall be allowed during such hours as the Fire Chief
shall prescribe. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to, burn, or
cause to be burned any garbage, animal matter, or vegetable matter. The burning
of straw, hay, leaves, or brush in the open air is hereby permitted and
allowed, provided that the person setting out the same request permission and
receive an open burning permit in writing, signed by the local Fire Chief, on a
form provided by the State Fire Marshal; and provided further, that any such
burning shall be done while the said fire is attended by the person setting out
the same at all times, and that the said fire shall be located at least 20 feet
from any building.
('72 Code, § 7-217) (Am. Ord. 1210, passed 9-22-83) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549 and 17-556
   Statewide ban; exemptions, see Neb. RS 81-520.01
§ 91.41 OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.
   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under division (A)
above for an area under the City Fire Department’s jurisdiction by issuing an
open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct open burning.
The permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to conduct open
burning shall at a minimum contain:
         (a)   The name and telephone number of the landowner;
         (b)   The burn location;
         (c)   The date and beginning and ending time of the burn;
         (d)   A description of the material to be burned; and
         (e)   The name and telephone number of the person responsible for the
burn.
      (2)   The local Fire Department may have additional requirements for a
burn to be permitted. The permit shall contain the signature, written or
electronic, of the local Fire Chief. The State Fire Marshal shall provide a
sample form with the minimum requirements on the website of the State Fire
Marshal.
   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the City Fire
Department’s jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior to
starting the burn.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions acceptable
for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under division (B) above.
   (E)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for each such
permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the City Council for inclusion in
the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds shall not
reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee shall be
collected from any state or political subdivision to which such a permit is
issued to conduct open burning under division (B) above in the course of that
state’s or political subdivision’s official duties.
(’72 Code, § 7-218) (Am. Ord. 2486, passed - -25) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Statewide open burning ban; waiver; permit, see Neb. RS 81-520.01
§ 91.42 POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GAS.
   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to store or keep in the city for
any period of time any form of poisonous or flammable gas or liquefied
petroleum gas or add to, enlarge, or replace any facility used for the storage
of such gases, must first get permission from the City Council and State Fire
Marshall. The City Council shall require the name of the gas, the place of
storage, and the amount of gas stored. If permission is granted, the City
Council shall prescribe such rules, regulations, and precautionary actions as
they may deem necessary. Permit requirements for the initial construction or
location of storage facilities shall not apply to those facilities in existence
on the effective date of this chapter; provided, any such present use that is
discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not be revived without a permit. The
provisions of this section shall be controlling throughout the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 17-549) ('72 Code, § 7-214) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: CEMETERIES
Section
   
92.01   Operation and funding
   
92.02   Conveyance of lots
   
92.03   Burial of indigents
   
92.04   Veterans
   
92.05   Destruction of property
§ 92.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city owns and manages the city's cemeteries. The City Council, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, maintenance, and
beautification of the cemeteries, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the taxable value of all taxable
property within the city subject to taxation for general purposes. The revenue
from the said tax shall be known as the Cemetery Fund and shall include all
gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, money, stocks, bonds, or other
valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for
the purpose of endowing the cemetery. The Cemetery Fund shall at all times be
in the custody of the City Treasurer. The City Council shall have the power and
authority to pass such rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, a
schedule of fees and costs for the operation of the cemeteries as may be proper
for their efficient operation.
('72 Code, § 3-301) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403
§ 92.02 CONVEYANCE OF LOTS.
   The City Council may convey cemetery lots by certificate signed by the
Mayor, and countersigned by the City Clerk under the City Seal specifying that
the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot described therein
by number for the purpose of interment. The said certificate shall give a right
in fee simple to the proprietor, his heirs, and assigns. The certificate shall
then be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-941) ('72 Code, § 3-302) (Am. Ord. 1099, passed 10-13-77)
§ 92.03 BURIAL OF INDIGENTS.
   Within one of the city's cemeteries there shall be included a plot of
ground, known as the potter's field, which shall be available for the burial of
indigents and unknown travelers who may die while they are within the city.
('72 Code, § 3-304) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)
§ 92.04 VETERANS.
   The city shall set aside a certain area within one of its cemeteries as a
memorial and free burial place for deceased veterans who were residents of the
city.
('72 Code, § 3-305) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)
§ 92.05 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove
any tomb, monument, or gravestone placed in the cemeteries, or any fence,
railing, or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the cemeteries,
or who shall willfully destroy, cut, break, or injure any tree, shrub, or plant
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 28-512) ('72 Code, § 3-310) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05) Penalty,
see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: LIBRARY
Section
   
93.01   Operation and funding
   
93.02   Rules and regulations
   
93.03   Books
   
93.04   Damaged and lost books
   
93.05   Book removal
   
93.06   Cost of use
   
93.07   Money collected
   
93.08   Reports
   
93.09   Donations
§ 93.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The city owns and manages the city library through the Library Board. The
City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
purchases, improvements, and maintenance of the library, may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the taxable
value of all taxable property within the city. The revenue from the tax shall
be known as the Library Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and
real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the city library. The
Library Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the City Treasurer. The
Board shall have the power and authority to appoint a director and to hire such
other employees as it may deem necessary and may pass such other rules and
regulations for the operation of the library as may be proper for its efficient
operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision and control
of the City Council.
('72 Code, § 3-201)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create; powers and duties, see Neb. RS 51-201 through 51-219
Cross reference:
   Library Board, see §
33.01
§ 93.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of
the city library for the preservation and efficient management thereof. It
shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties, and forfeitures for injury to
the library grounds, rooms, books, or other property, or for failure to return
a book. All fees, penalties, and forfeitures may be collected in civil action
in the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to pay any assessments.
('72 Code, § 3-203)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enact regulations, see Neb. RS 51-205
   Civil actions authorized, see Neb. RS 51-214
§ 93.03 BOOKS.
   The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange, or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books in the library.
Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or
duplicate books so disposed of.
('72 Code, § 3-202)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 51-207
§ 93.04 DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS.
   Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the library
shall forfeit and pay to the library not less than the value of the book in
addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the Library Board may
assess.
('72 Code, § 3-204)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to determine and impose penalties, see Neb. RS 51-211
§ 93.05 BOOK REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made
by the Library Board to take a book from the library without the consent of the
director or an authorized employee of the library. Any person removing a book
from the library without properly checking it out shall be deemed to be guilty
of an offense.
('72 Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to determine and impose penalties, see Neb. RS 51-211
§ 93.06 COST OF USE.
   The city library shall be free of charge for the use of the inhabitants of
the city and any other city in Saunders County. Persons living outside the
limits of any city in Saunders County shall be charged an annual usage fee. The
director may exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person
who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with the rules and regulations
established for the government thereof.
('72 Code, § 3-206)
Statutory reference:
   Library use free of charge, see Neb. RS 51-201, 51-212
§ 93.07 MONEY COLLECTED.
   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over monthly by the
director to the City Treasurer along with a report of the sources of the
revenue.
('72 Code, § 3-207)
Statutory reference:
   Funds generated by library to be used for library purposes, see Neb. RS 51-
209
§ 93.08 REPORTS.
   The Library Board shall, at the first regular meeting of the Mayor and City
Council in August each year, make a report to the City Council of the condition
of their trust on the first day of August of each year, showing all moneys
received and expended, number of books or periodicals on hand, newspapers and
current literature subscribed for or donated to the reading room, the number of
books or periodicals purchased or acquired by gift during the year, the number
lost or missing, the number of visitors attending, the number and character of
books loaned or issued, with such statistics, information, and suggestions as
may be deemed of general interest to or as the City Council may require. The
Library Board shall make such other reports from time to time as the Mayor and
Council may request or order.
('72 Code, § 3-208)
§ 93.09 DONATIONS.
   Any person may make a donation of money, lands, or other property for the
benefit of the library, and the title to the property donated may be made to
and shall vest in the city for the "Public Library," and such property shall
thereupon be exempt from taxation. The President of the Library Board shall
have the power to release, upon full payment, any mortgage constituting a
credit to the Library Fund outstanding in the name of the Library Board, and
the signature of the President on any such release shall be authenticated by
the Secretary of the Board. The President and Secretary in like manner, upon a
resolution duly passed and adopted by the Board, may renew any such mortgage.
('72 Code, § 3-209)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Health regulations
   
94.02   State health rules
   
94.03   Enforcement official
   
94.04   County Health Board
Nuisances
   
94.20   Definition, terms
   
94.21   Definition, general and specific
   
94.22   Jurisdiction
   
94.23   Duty
   
94.24   Nonexclusive procedure
   
94.25   Enforcement
   
94.26   Form of proper service of notice
   
94.27   Affect of failure to abate
   
94.28   Hearing
   
94.29   Hearing officer
   
94.30   Abatement by city
   
94.31   Record of expenses
   
94.32   Hearing on statement of expenses
   
94.33   Expenses a special assessment against the property
   
94.34   Notice of special assessment
   
94.35   Alternatives
   
94.36   Procedure in case of emergency
   
94.37   Expenses collected by civil action
Rodents and Insects
   
94.55   Extermination
   
94.56   Occupant
   
94.57   Owner
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such
penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.
('72 Code, § 4-101)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 94.02 STATE HEALTH RULES.
   The "Rules and Regulations Relating to Public Health," Department of Health
of the state of Nebraska are hereby incorporated by reference when the same are
applicable to the city, in their present form and as they may hereafter be
amended. One copy of each of the said pamphlets is filed at the office of the
City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902) ('72 Code, § 4-103)
§ 94.03 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Chief of Police, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the chief health
officer of the city. It shall be his or her duty to notify the City Council and
the Board of Health of health nuisances within the city and its zoning
jurisdiction.
('72 Code, § 4-102)
Statutory reference:
   Quarantine officer, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 94.04 COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the city.
('72 Code, § 4-104)
NUISANCES
§ 94.20 DEFINITION, TERMS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Any personal property left on public property for more than 24
hours, except when the leaving of said personal property on said portion of
public property, at that location, is legally permitted.
   ABATED. Removal, rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to
procedures set forth herein.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT. The City Administrator, the Chief of Police, and/or the
Building Inspector of the city as directed to enforce this city code against
all nuisances.
   HEARING OFFICER. The President of the City Council, or his or her Council
appointee in their absence.
   OWNER. Any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest
in any vehicle, machinery and/or real property.
   PROPERTY. Real estate and any appurtenances located thereon, vehicles, and
machinery.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or
other state-, county-, or city-owned property.
(Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.21 DEFINITION, GENERAL AND SPECIFIC.
   (A)   General definition. A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or
omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing
to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:
      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Is offensive to the senses;
      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street,
or highway in the city;
      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   (B)   Specific definition. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing,
leaving, or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions,
places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be nuisances:
      (1)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound, or unwholesome grain, meat, hides,
skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal,
fish, or fowl;
      (2)   Offal and dead animals;
      (3)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits, or like places which are
not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous;
      (4)   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, house yards, barnyards,
stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or property;
      (5)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the city;
      (6)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings
and offal, parts of fish, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity, provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer of
the city, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner
approved by the health officer;
      (7)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron,
wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the
same be kept in covered gins or galvanized iron receptacles;
      (8)   Litter, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing crates,
mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing material,
lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, old
automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials; litter shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes;
         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building rubble;
         (c)   Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation;
         (d)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or vehicles, or
parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character,
utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the
ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions,
or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk;
      (9)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished;
      (10)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds,
or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or
machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of
the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment
used by contractors or builders or by other persons;
      (11)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of
ground;
      (12)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens
or any other place, building, or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of any
kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is
being processed, when the places in which the animals are confined, or the
property on which the vegetable or animal matter is located are maintained and
kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom;
      (13)   Storage, accumulation, keeping, placing, or allowing to remain of
trash, garage, scrap and wrecked, worn-out, broken or inoperative, or partially
destroyed or disassembled personal or real property of any kind, including any
motor vehicles, tractors, trailers, machinery, and equipment;
      (14)   The practice of engine braking within the corporate limits of the
city or within one mile thereof, which is hereby prohibited unless the motor
vehicle upon which the engine braking is being performed has an adequate
muffler system to muffle the noise emitted from the motor vehicle when engine
breaking;
      (15)   The growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or
worthless vegetation on any lot or parcel of ground within the city, and/or the
adjoining streets and alleys to said lot or parcel; the term weeds, shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Bindweed (convolvulus arvensis);
         (b)   Puncture vine (tribulus terrestris);
         (c)   Leafy spurge (euphorbia esula);
         (d)   Canada thistle (cirsium arvense);
         (e)   Perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba);
         (f)   Russian knapweed (centaurea picris);
         (g)   Johnson grass (sorghum halepense);
         (h)   Horse Nettle (solanum carolinense);
         (i)   Bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum);
         (j)   Buckthom (rhamus sp.) (toum);
         (k)   Hemp plant (cannabis sativa);
         (l)   Ragweed (ambrosiaceae);
         (m)   Nodding or musk thistle;
         (n)   Quack grass (agropyron repens); and
         (o)   Perennial sow thistle (sonchus arbensis);
      (16)   The permitting of a refrigerator, icebox, freezer, or other
dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to children whether on
private or public property unless all doors are first removed and the appliance
is made reasonably safe;
      (17)   The storage or keeping of one or more motor vehicles, each not
having a properly issued current motor vehicle registration and current motor
vehicle license plate properly displayed; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to the storage of unlicensed and/or unregistered motor vehicles
in a fully enclosed garage or where otherwise authorized by city zoning
regulations;
      (18)   The storage, keeping or abandonment of inoperable vehicles or
machinery in full or in parts, including scrap metals, except in enclosed
buildings or garages or where otherwise authorized by the city zoning
regulations;
      (19)   The permitting, allowing, or maintaining of any dead or diseased
trees within the right-of-way of streets within the corporate limits of the
city adjacent to any lot or parcel of ground within the city (provided,
however, the procedure as set forth in Neb. RS 17-555 or its successor shall
control);
      (20)   The permitting, allowing, or maintaining of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the corporate limits of the city;
      (21)   The keeping of bees within the corporate limits of the city 200
feet or less from any dwelling other than that of the owner of the bees;
      (22)   The permitting of emission of smoke from any source that is
polluted. The standards for air pollution established or adopted by the State
of Nebraska shall be presumptive evidence as to when the air is deemed to be
polluted under this section;
      (23)   The obstruction or impeding without legal authority any river or
collection of water or to corrupt and render unwholesome or impure any
watercourse, stream, or other water within the corporate limits of city. The
standards for water quality established or adopted by the State of Nebraska
shall be presumptive evidence as to when the water is deemed to be polluted
under this section;
      (24)   The abandoning of personal property on public property;
      (25)   The permitting or allowing of the infestation of insects, rodents,
and other pests in and about any private property;
      (26)   The permitting, allowing, or maintaining of any buildings or
structures, or portions thereof, which are structurally unsafe or not provided
with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a
hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance;
      (27)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in
this code.
(’72 Code, § 4-302) (Am. Ord. 1056, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-
11-94; Am. Ord. 1466, passed 8-11-94; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 2-10-00; Am. Ord.
1943, passed 11-9-06; Am. Ord. 1999, passed 7-24-08; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-
27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720
§ 94.22 JURISDICTION.
   The City Administrator, the Chief of Police, and/or the Building Inspector
of the city are directed to enforce this city code against all nuisances. The
jurisdiction of the City Administrator, Chief of Police, Building Inspector,
and court shall extend to the territorial application of this chapter shall
include all territory adjacent to the limits of the city within the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city.
(’72 Code, § 4-304) (Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 17-1001
   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720
§ 94.23 DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of real
estate in the city, and within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the
city, to keep such property free of public nuisances. All, or any part of said
property found to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated pursuant to
procedures set forth herein.
(’72 Code, § 4-303) (Am. Ord. 1056, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1238, passed 3-
28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-123, 17-123.01
§ 94.24 NONEXCLUSIVE PROCEDURE.
   The procedure set forth in this chapter for abatement of a nuisance is
nonexclusive and is in addition to the procedure for abatement which is set
forth in §§
94.27,
94.35,
94.36,
94.37 and/or
94.99 of this code.
(’72 Code, § 4-305) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.25 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When Code Enforcement declares that any property within the city or
its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, is maintained contrary to one or more
of the provisions of
Chapter 94, except §
94.21(B)(24) hereof, they shall mail, via first class (in which case such mail
shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance), and post conspicuously on
the property a written notice to the owner, the owner’s duly authorized agent,
occupant, lessee, and/or mortgagee of the property. The notice shall state the
conditions which constitute the public nuisance, shall order the abatement of
the nuisance within the time period set forth in the notice, detail the owner’s
ability to dispute the nuisance, and shall be substantially in the following
form:
Date:
TO: (OWNER)
CC: (OWNER’S DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE)
RE: (ADDRESS)
   NOTICE OF NUISANCE
   Pursuant to Chapter 94 of the Wahoo Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska, I, the undersigned, declare that the following real property in the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska, known as  (street address)  and more particularly
described as follows:
   (legal description)
   is being maintained as a public nuisance contrary to § 94.20 of the Wahoo
Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
   The conditions which constitute the public nuisance upon the above described
property are as follows:
   You shall have ___ days from the date of receipt of this Notice to abate
said above described nuisance. Failure to do so will result in the City abating
the nuisance with the cost of the abatement to be assessed to you.
   If you are of the opinion that my determination of the above conditions does
not constitute a public nuisance, you may within five (5) days of date of
receipt of this Notice of Nuisance, file a request with the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska, for a hearing before a hearing officer concerning such determination.
The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the hearing rules and procedures
adopted by the City Council. The hearing shall be held within fourteen (14)
days after the filing of your request. The City Clerk shall fix a date and time
for the hearing. The address and telephone number of the City of Wahoo is as
follows:
   City Hall
   605 North Broadway
   Wahoo, NE 68066
   402-443-3222
                                 CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
                                 By _________________________
                                 City of Wahoo Code Enforcement
   (B)   As to §
94.21(B)(24) of this code, said division shall be enforced pursuant to §
34.40 of this code.
(’72 Code, § 4-306) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.26 FORM OF PROPER SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of notice of nuisance shall be by posting of the notice of nuisance
conspicuously at the property, the posting of which will be documented with a
photograph, and by depositing said notice of nuisance with the United States
Postal Service enclosed in a sealed envelope conspicuously marked as to its
importance and with postage thereon fully prepaid. Said notice of nuisance
shall be mailed by first-class and addressed to said owner, owner’s duly
authorized agent, occupant, lessee, and/or mortgagee at the last known address
of said parties as disclosed by the current tax rolls, and if there is no known
address, then in care of the property address. Service is complete at the time
of such posting or deposit. The failure of any person to receive such notice
shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder.
(’72 Code, § 4-307) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.27 AFFECT OF FAILURE TO ABATE.
   If the nuisance is not abated within the period given in the notice of
nuisance, Code Enforcement may determine to proceed to abate the nuisance
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
(Neb. RS 17-123, 17-123.01, 18-1720)
(’72 Code, § 4-308) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.28 HEARING.
   (A)   If the owner, as defined in § 94.20 hereof, of the property upon which
there has been determined to the existence of a nuisance does file a request
for hearing before the hearing officer within five days of receipt of the
notice of nuisance the City Clerk shall fix a date and time to hear the matter,
said hearing to be held within 14 days after the filing of the request. The
City Clerk shall prepare a written notice of hearing which shall include the
name and address, including mailing address, of the owner. The City Clerk shall
then mail by first-class mail a notice of hearing to the owner no later than
ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (B)   At the time fixed in the notice of hearing, the hearing officer shall
hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify respecting the
condition constituting the nuisance, including the estimated cost of abatement
and other matters which may be pertinent. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall, within five days of the date of the hearing, declare the
hearing officer’s findings in a written decision of hearing. If the hearing
officer so concludes, the hearing officer may declare the condition existing to
be a nuisance and direct the property owner to abate the nuisance pursuant to
the provisions of this code. Such final determination shall be considered a
final order of the city. The said notice of decision of hearing shall be
substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF DECISION OF HEARING OFFICER
TO:
   YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT ON ____________, 20__, the hearing officer of
the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, after notice and hearing, did determine that the
following (did) (did not) constitute a public nuisance, to wit:
upon the following described real estate, to wit:
If the Hearing Officer concluded that the above did constitute a public
nuisance:
   You are granted ___ days from the date of this Notice of Decision to abate
said nuisance. Failure to abate said nuisance shall result in said nuisance
being abated by the City of Wahoo and the cost of abatement shall be assessed
upon said property and constitute a lien upon said real property until paid.
   DATED ____________, 20__.
                                 CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
                                 By _________________________
                                 City of Wahoo Code Enforcement
(’72 Code, § 4-309) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.29 HEARING OFFICER.
   The President of the City Council, or his/her council appointee in their
absence, shall be the hearing officer of the city on all matters pertaining to
Chapter 94 of the Wahoo Municipal Code. The City Council shall promulgate, by
council resolution, hearing rules which shall govern the handling of hearings
before the hearing officer.
(Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15)
§ 94.30 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the person fails to abate the nuisance within the time set forth, the
City Administrator, the Chief of Police, or the Building Inspector may order
the abatement of the nuisance.
(’72 Code, § 4-311) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15)
§ 94.31 RECORD OF EXPENSES.
   The City Clerk shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in
abating the nuisance included but not limited to labor, equipment costs,
postage, and city staff time. The City Clerk shall post conspicuously on the
property and the City Clerk shall also mail to the owner of the property a
statement showing the expense of the abatement, together with a notice of the
time and place when the statement will be submitted to the hearing officer for
approval and confirmation and at which time the hearing officer may consider
the objections and protests to the cost of the work. Said notice shall be
substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING ON EXPENSE
OF ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
      Pursuant to § 94.30 of the Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska,
you are hereby notified that the following is a statement showing the expense
incurred by the City of Wahoo in abating a nuisance upon the following
described real estate, to wit:
   Said expenses are as follows:
      You are further notified that said Statement of Expenses shall be
submitted to the Hearing Officer for consideration on the ____ day of
_________, 20__, at ______ o'clock __.M., __________________, Wahoo, Nebraska,
at which time you may appear to object or protest the expense incurred in the
abatement of said nuisance.
                                       CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
                                       By _________________________
                                       City of Wahoo Code Enforcement
(’72 Code, § 4-312) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.32 HEARING ON STATEMENT OF EXPENSES.
   At the time fixed for hearing on the statement of expense, the hearing
officer shall consider the statement and protest or objections raised by the
persons liable to be assessed for the costs of the abatement. The hearing
officer may revise, correct, or modify the statement as it considers just and
thereafter shall confirm the statement by motion or resolution. The decision of
the hearing officer on all protests and objections which may be made shall be
final and conclusive. The procedure governing the hearing shall be provided by
§
94.28 of this chapter.
(’72 Code, § 4-313) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.33 EXPENSES A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AGAINST THE PROPERTY.
   (A)   If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance
within two months after the hearing officer confirms the cost of abatement, the
city may either: (a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon
the real estate upon which the nuisance was abated in the same manner as other
special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed; or (b) recover in any
civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the real estate upon which
the nuisance existing.
   (B)   The assessment shall continue until it is paid together with interest
as set by the applicable statutes of the State of Nebraska.
(’72 Code, § 4-314) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.34 NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   The city may file in the offices of the County Register of Deeds and County
Treasurer a certificate substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
   Under the authority of the Wahoo Municipal Code, the City did on
__________________, 20____, abate a nuisance upon the real estate hereinafter
described and then on __________________, 20____, did assess the cost of the
abatement upon the real estate. The City of Wahoo claims a special assessment
on the real estate for the expense of doing the work in the amount of
$___________. This amount is a special assessment against the real estate until
it is paid, with interest as set by the applicable statutes of the State of
Nebraska, until discharged of record. The real estate referred to above, and
upon which the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land
situated within the City of Wahoo, County of Saunders, State of Nebraska and
more particularly described as follows:
   (legal description)
   DATED __________________
                                       CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
                                       By _________________________
                                       Its City Administrator
(’72 Code, § 4-315) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.35 ALTERNATIVES.
   Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent Code
Enforcement from directing the City Attorney to commence a civil and/or
criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable civil or penal
code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein.
(’72 Code, § 4-316) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.36 PROCEDURE IN CASE OF EMERGENCY.
   When the conditions which constitute the nuisance pose an immediate threat
to the public peace, health, or safety, Code Enforcement may order the nuisance
abated immediately.
(’72 Code, § 4-317) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
§ 94.37 EXPENSES COLLECTED BY CIVIL ACTION.
   If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance
within two months after the hearing officer confirms the cost of abatement, the
city may collect the costs associated with said abatement from the property
owner included but not limited to labor, equipment costs, postage, and city
staff time and enforce the collection by civil action of any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(’72 Code, § 4-319) (Ord. 1361A, passed 2-28-91; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15;
Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
RODENTS AND INSECTS
§ 94.55 EXTERMINATION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any dwelling or
building to be responsible for the active and continued extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein, or on the premises. In the event that
the owner, lessee, or occupant of any dwelling or building neglects, fails, or
otherwise refuses to control and actively exterminate the insects, rodents, and
other pests in and about his or her premises, the Board of Health shall issue
notice for that person to do so. If the owner, lessee, or occupant has not made
a good faith effort to exterminate the pests within five days, the premises
shall be deemed to be a nuisance and a health hazard.
('72 Code, § 4-501)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720
   Nuisances prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1321
§ 94.56 OCCUPANT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the occupant in a single dwelling unit,
whether or not the dwelling unit is located in a multiple unit structure, to
exterminate the rodents and insects infesting the premises when it is found by
the Board of Health that only the occupant's dwelling is so infested.
('72 Code, § 4-502)
§ 94.57 OWNER.
   The owner of a multiple dwelling unit shall have the duty to exterminate
therein for rodents and insects when infestation exists in two or more units or
when infestation exists in shared or public areas of a multiple unit structure
when the infestation is due to failure by the owner to maintain the dwelling in
an insect and rodent proof condition. The owner of a single dwelling unit shall
have the duty to exterminate therein notwithstanding the occupancy of a renter
or lessee when the infestation of insects or rodents is due to the said owner's
failure to construct or maintain the premises in such a manner as to make it
reasonably resistant to the entrance and habitability of such pests.
('72 Code, § 4-503)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§
94.20 through
94.37, set forth at length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed
guilty of Class V misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than $500 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply. Whenever a nuisance exists
as defined in this chapter, the city may proceed to a suit in equity to enjoin
and abate the same, in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 2192, passed 8-27-15; Am. Ord. 2474, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city as to nuisances, see Neb RS 17-207, 17-563, 18-1720, 18-
1722
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
City Property
   
95.001   Maintenance and control
   
95.002   Opening, widening, improving or vacating
   
95.003   Protection from damage
   
95.004   Obstructions prohibited; permitted exceptions
   
95.005   Weeds
   
95.006   Sale and conveyance of real property
   
95.0061   Sale and conveyance of personal property
   
95.007   Special improvement district; assessment and creation procedure
   
95.008   Land adjacent to improvement district
   
95.009   Acquisition of real property
   
95.010   Acquisition of real property; appraisal
   
95.011   Public works involving architecture or engineering; requirements
Sidewalks
   
95.030   Definitions
   
95.031   (Reserved)
   
95.032   Requirement to keep clean
   
95.033   (Reserved)
   
95.034   Construction by owner
   
95.035   Repair
   
95.036   Construction by city
   
95.037   Construction bids
   
95.038   Construction by petition
   
95.039   Construction specifications
   
95.040   Notice requirements
Streets
   
95.055   Numbering required
   
95.056   Names and numbers
   
95.057   Excavation
   
95.058   Harmful liquids
   
95.059   Eave and gutter spouts
   
95.060   Heavy equipment
   
95.061   Construction notice
   
95.062   Pipe lines and wires
   
95.063   Construction assessment
   
95.064   Petition for improvements
   
95.065   Deferral from special assessments
   
95.066   Driveway approaches
   
95.067   Vacating public ways
Curb and Gutter
   
95.080   Cutting curb
Event Permit and Regulations for Use of City Streets
   
95.100   Definitions
   
95.101   Permit required
   
95.102   Permit application; procedure for filing
   
95.103   Permit application standards
   
95.104   Permit application notice of rejection
   
95.105   Permit application; notice to city and other officials
   
95.106   Permit application approval
   
95.107   Permit revocation
   
95.108   Appeal procedure
   
95.109   Alternative permit
   
95.110   Duties of permittee
   
95.111   Public conduct during events
   
95.112   Exceptions
CITY PROPERTY
§ 95.001 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   The City Council shall have the care, supervision, and control of all public
highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within the city
and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances.
(Neb. RS 17-567(1)) ('72 Code, § 8-101)
§ 95.002 OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING, OR VACATING.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality shall have power to open, widen, or otherwise
improve or vacate any street, avenue, alley, or lane within the limits of the
municipality and also to create, open, and improve any new street, avenue,
alley, or lane. All damages sustained by the citizens of the municipality, or
by the owners of the property therein, shall be ascertained in such manner as
shall be provided by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the same shall revert to
the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side thereof and
become a part of such property, unless the city reserves title in the ordinance
vacating such street or alley. If the title is retained by the city, such
property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such terms and
conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley, or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to such land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of such property, unless the
city reserves title in the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is
retained by the city or village, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged
or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best
interests of the city.
      (4)   When the municipality vacates all or any portion of a street,
avenue, alley, or lane, the Municipality shall, within 30 days after the
effective date of the vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance
with the Register of Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is
located to be indexed against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to maintain, operate,
repair and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property is
vacated there; and
         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public utilities and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew and operate water
mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines, sound
and signal transmission lines and other similar services and equipment and
appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, on, or below the
surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the time title to
the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general public or the
abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish such purposes
at any and all reasonable times.
(Neb. RS 17-558)
   (B)   The municipality shall have power to create, open, widen, or extend
any street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area, or other public way, or
annul, vacate, or discontinue the same.
(Neb. RS 17-559)
('72 Code, § 8-102) (Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
§ 95.003 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall remove, destroy, or tear down any signal, barricade, fence,
railing, or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting
paving or any other work while in course of construction or after it has been
constructed on any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds. No person shall
drive over or upon or go upon any paving or other public works in any of the
streets, alleys, or public grounds while the same is protected by any signal,
barrier, fence, or railing, or until the same has been removed by the
contractors or by the duly authorized officials of the city. It is hereby
declared to be unlawful for any person to mar, deface, destroy, remove, or
carry away any street sign or highway marker erected either by authority of the
city or by the state of Nebraska, within the corporate limits.
('72 Code, § 8-105) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.004 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Trees and shrubs growing upon or near the lot line, or upon public
ground, and interfering with the use or construction of any public improvements
shall be deemed an obstruction under this chapter. The roots may be removed by
the city at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the tree is
located should the owner fail, or neglect, after notice, to do so. It shall be
unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to obstruct, or
encumber, by fences, gates, buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the
streets, alleys, or sidewalks. The public ways and property shall be considered
to be obstructed when the owner or occupant of the adjacent property shall
permit or suffer to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him or her
any hedge, shrubbery, bush, or similar growth within two feet adjacent to the
lot line whether there is a sidewalk abutting or adjoining such premises or
not. It shall be the duty of owners and occupants to at all times keep trimmed
and pruned all such similar growth. Whenever any such growth is allowed to grow
within two feet of the lot line contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the
City Council may pass a resolution ordering the owner or occupant to remove
such obstructions within five days after having been served with a copy of the
resolution by the city stating that the city will do so and will charge the
costs thereof to the owner or occupant as a special assessment for improvements
as herein provided, or shall collect the same by civil suit brought in the name
of the city against the owner or occupant. It shall be the duty of an owner or
occupant engaged in construction of any building or improvement upon or near
the public ways and property to have all excavations or exposures of any kind
protected and guarded by suitable guards or barricades by day and by warning
lights at night. In the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter, it shall be the duty of the city to stop all
work upon the buildings and improvements until suitable guards are erected and
kept in the manner aforesaid. Trees and shrubs growing upon the lot line
partially on public ground and partially upon the abutting property, or wholly
upon the abutting property, but so close to the lot line as to interfere with
the making of any public improvement or so that the roots thereof interfere
with any utility wires or pipe shall be deemed an obstruction, and such trees,
shrubs, and roots may be removed by the city pursuant to the procedure
prescribed above. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the
county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to
be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
known address of the nonresident property owner. The last known address shall
be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required
notice was first published.
('72 Code, § 8-106)
   (B)   Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction,
wrecking, or repairing of any building, or the construction, or repair, of a
sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public street space with such
building material and equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall
make application to and receive a permit in writing from the city official in
charge of city streets to do so, provided that no permit for the occupancy of
the sidewalk space and more than one-third of the roadway of the public space
adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be constructed,
erected, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired shall be granted, and provided
further that a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within
the public space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted in
the manner required by the official issuing the permit.
('72 Code, § 8-107) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to remove obstructions, see Neb. RS 17-142 and 17-555
   Authority to regulate and abate obstructions, see Neb. RS 17-557 and 17-
557.01
§ 95.005 WEEDS.
   It is hereby the duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate
limits for growing weeds during the growing season, and if rank and noxious
weeds are found growing thereon, he or she shall notify the owner or occupant
thereof to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably
done and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season
for weeds, provided that any weeds growing in excess of six inches on any
sidewalk space shall be considered a violation of this section. In the event
that the owner of the lot or parcel of land abutting said sidewalk space within
the city is a nonresident of the city or cannot be found therein, the notice
may be given to any person having the care, custody, or control of such lot or
parcel of land. In the event that there can be found no one within the city to
whom notice can be given, it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner or
his or her agent to post a copy of the notice on the premises and then to cut
or cause the weeds thereon to be cut as therein provided and report the cost
thereof in writing to the Council. The cost shall then be audited and paid by
the city and the amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of
land as a special tax thereon and shall be collected as are other taxes of the
city or may be recovered by civil suit brought by the city against the owner of
the parcel of land. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the
county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to
be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
known address of the nonresident property owner. The last known address shall
be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required
notice was first published.
('72 Code, § 8-108) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-563
§ 95.006 SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, the power of the
city to convey any real property owned by it, including land used for park
purposes and public squares, except real property used in the operation of
public utilities, shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at
public auction or by sealed bid of that property and the manner and terms of
such sales, except that the property shall not be sold at public auction or by
sealed bid when:
      (1)   The property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
      (2)   The property is being conveyed to another public agency; or
      (3)   The property consists of streets and alleys.
   (B)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for real property at
which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a sealed bid.
   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of property described in division (A) of this section and the
terms of such sales shall be published once each week for three consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city.
   (D)   (1)   If within 30 days after the third publication of the notice a
remonstrance petition against the sale:
         (a)   Conforms to Neb. RS 32-628,
         (b)   Is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to
30% of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city
election held therein, and
         (c)   Is filed with the City Council, that property shall not then,
nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the petition
falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be
collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely
if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council, with the
aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the petition. The City
Council shall deliver the petition to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall issue to the City Council a written receipt that the petition is in
the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each person signing
the petition with the voter registration records to determine if each signer
was a registered voter on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall also
compare the signer's printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address with the voter registration records to determine
whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address shall be
presumed to be valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address match the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The determinations of the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the City Council
finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the petition, the sufficiency of the petition, and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception, and
misrepresentation in the petition process.
      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and
address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the
invalidity of the signature or address is other than the nonregistration of the
signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall set forth the reason
for the invalidity of the signature. If the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more than once
to the remonstrance and that only one person is registered by that name, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification
under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and shall count
only the earliest dated signature.
      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the City
Council the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid
remonstrance. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the
remonstrance and the certifications to the City Council within 40 days after
the receipt of the remonstrance from the City Council. The delivery shall be by
hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page shall be
counted.
      (6)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of the
remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive
testimony regarding them. The City Council shall, following the hearing, vote
on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance
if sufficient valid signatures have been received.
   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the city may be conveyed
without consideration to the state for state armory sites or, if acquired for
state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with the
conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 through 18-1006.
   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale, publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale, and passing of the 30-day right-of-
remonstrance period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall be
confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and
terms of the sale.    
   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall not apply to the sale
of real property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real
property, the total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following
passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the
sale shall be posted in three prominent places within the city for a period of
not less than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall
give a general description of the property offered for sale and state the terms
and conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an ordinance may
be required.
(’72 Code, § 8-109) (Ord. 1214, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1532, passed 1-25-96;
Am. Ord. 1657, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 2427,
passed 2-28-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-503 and 17-503.01
§ 95.0061 SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The power of the City to convey any personal property owned by it shall be
exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms thereof.
Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property, notice
of the sale shall be posted in three (3) prominent places within the city for a
period of not less than seven (7) days prior to the sale of the property. If
the fair market value of the property is greater than $5000, notice of the sale
shall also be published once in a legal newspaper published in or of general
circulation in the City at least seven (7) days prior to the sale of the
property. The notice shall give a general description of the property offered
for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale.
(Neb. RS 17-503.02) (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
§ 95.007 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT; ASSESSMENT AND CREATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The City Council may, by ordinance, create a special improvement
district for the purpose of replacing, reconstructing, or repairing an existing
street, alley, water line, sewer line, or any other such improvement.
   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-2428 to 19-2431, the City Council
shall have power to assess, to the extent of such benefits, the costs of such
improvements upon the properties found especially benefitted thereby, whether
or not such properties were previously assessed for the same general purpose.
In creating such special improvement district, the City Council shall follow
procedures applicable to the creation and assessment of the same type of
improvement district as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 18-1751) ('72 Code, § 8-110) (Ord. 1285, passed 9-24-87)
§ 95.008 LAND ADJACENT TO IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
   Supplemental to any existing law on the subject, a city may include land
adjacent to such city when creating an improvement district, such as a sewer,
paving, water, water extension, or sanitary sewer extension district. The City
Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of special benefits, the
costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefitted
thereby, except as provided in §
95.065.
(Neb. RS 19-2427)
('72 Code, § 8-111) (Ord. 1286, passed 9-24-87)
§ 95.009 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
   When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent domain,
the city shall do so only after the City Council has authorized the acquisition
by action taken in a public meeting after notice and public hearing.
(Neb. RS 18-1755) ('72 Code, § 8-112) (Ord. 1488, passed 3-9-95)
§ 95.010 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; APPRAISAL.
   The city shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for consideration
real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more unless an appraisal
of such property has been performed by a certified real estate appraiser.
(Neb. RS 13-403) ('72 Code, § 8-113) (Ord. 1489, passed 3-9-95)
§ 95.011 PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the city shall not
engage in the construction of any public works involving architecture or
engineering unless the plans, specifications, and estimates have been prepared
and the construction has been observed by an architect, a professional
engineer, or a person under the direct supervision of an architect,
professional engineer, or those under the direct supervision of an architect or
professional engineer.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to the following
activities:
      (1)   Any public works project with contemplated expenditures for the
completed project that do not exceed $40,000;
(Neb. RS 81-3445, 81-3449(3), and 81-3453(3))
      (2)   Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building if the
alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;
(Neb. RS 81-3449(3) and 81-3453(4))
      (3)   Performance of professional services for itself if the city
appoints a city engineer or employs a full-time person licensed under the
Engineers and Architects Regulation Act who is in responsible charge of
architectural or engineering work;
(Neb. RS 81-3423, 81-3449(9), and 81-3453(6))
      (4)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized
profession;
(Neb. RS 81-3449(11) and 81-3453(7))
      (5)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water
conservation practices performed on any land owned by the city that is not
subject to a permit from the Department of Environmental Quality;
(Neb. RS 81-3449(13) and 81-3453(12))
      (6)   The work of employees and agents of the city performing, in
accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation, and maintenance;
(Neb. RS 81-3449(14) and 81-3453(13))
      (7)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct
supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly designated as
locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant operating
engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or operate machinery
or equipment or who supervise construction within their own plant;
(Neb. RS 81-3453(10))
      (8)   The construction of city water wells as defined in Neb. RS 46-1212,
the installation of pumps and pumping equipment into city water wells, and the
decommissioning of city water wells, unless such construction, installation, or
decommissioning is required by the city to be designed or supervised by an
engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the city as a part of a
public water supply; and
(Neb. RS 81-3453(15))
      (9)   Any other activities described in Neb. RS 81-3449 to 81-3453.
(Ord. 1658, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   Public service provider defined, 81-3423
SIDEWALKS
§ 95.030 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General. The following definition shall be applied throughout this
subchapter. When no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the
word shall apply.
('72 Code, § 8-201)
   (B)   Specific.  The term "sidewalk space," as used herein, shall mean that
portion of a street between curb lines and adjacent property lines.
('72 Code, § 8-202)
§ 95.031 (RESERVED).
§ 95.032 REQUIREMENT TO KEEP CLEAN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner
of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet,
mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any
snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon the sidewalk. All
sidewalks within the business district shall be cleaned within five hours after
the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow shall have taken
place during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned before 8:30
a.m. the following day, provided that sidewalks within the residential areas of
the city shall be cleaned within 24 hours after the cessation of the storm.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place, push or deposit snow, sleet, ice or mud
or any debris from any private property onto the streets of the city.
('72 Code, § 8-204) (Am. Ord. 1274, passed 3-12-87; Am. Ord. 1866, passed 1-22-
04) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-557
§ 95.033 (RESERVED).
§ 95.034 CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall give a
description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The official in charge of sidewalks shall issue the desired permit
unless good cause shall appear why the permit should be denied, provided that
if it is desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly
prescribed location, grade, or elevation, the city official in charge of
sidewalks shall submit the application to the City Council who shall determine
whether the permit should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, or cause to be constructed the sidewalk at any other
location, grade, or elevation than so designated by the city. All sidewalks
shall be built and constructed on the established grade or elevation, and if
there is no established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the
city official in charge of sidewalks.
('72 Code, § 8-206) (Am. Ord. 1038, passed 6-12-75; Am. Ord. 1040, passed 10-9-
75)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to construct and repair, see Neb. RS 17-522
§ 95.035 REPAIR.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks, or
cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor and
City Council deems necessary and assess the expense thereof on the property in
front of which such construction or repairs are made, after having given
notice:
      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city; and
      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the occupant
in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such premises ten
days prior to the commencement of such repair or construction.
(Neb. RS 17-522)
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   State that the governing body has ordered repair of the sidewalk;
      (2)   Contain the city's estimate of the cost of the repair;
      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten days after
the date of publication of the notice, notify the city that he or she will
repair the sidewalk within 30 days after such date of publication;
      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so notify the
city within the ten days or, having so notified the city, fails to repair the
sidewalk within the 30 days, the city will cause the sidewalk to be repaired
and the expense thereof to be assessed against the property.
   (C)   (1)   Before the city imposes any special assessments for sidewalk
repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be published shall be mailed
to the last-known address of all nonresident property owners as shown on the
current tax rolls at the time such notice is first published.
(Neb. RS 13-310)
      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall mail the notice by certified mail with
return receipt requested.
(Neb. RS 13-312)
      (3)   For purposes of this division, NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER means any
person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as shown on the
current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in which the property
subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner of the property.
(Neb. RS 13-314)
   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with such plans and
specifications as may be approved by the governing body.
   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed in the
manner provided in Neb. RS 17-524.
('72 Code, § 8-207)
§ 95.036 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction of a
sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the city. Notice of the City
Council's intention to construct the sidewalk shall be given by the City Clerk
by publication of notice one time in a legal newspaper of general circulation
in the city.
   (B)   A copy of the notice shall be personally served upon the occupant in
possession of such property, or, when personal service is not possible, the
notice shall be posted upon such premises ten days prior to the commencement of
construction. The notice required in this section shall be prepared by the City
Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such service shall
include a form of return evidencing personal service or posting as herein
required.
   (C)   The notice shall notify the owner of the premises of the passage of
the resolution ordering him or her to construct or cause to be constructed a
sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication, and further that if he
or she fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same to be done within the
time allowed, the city will cause the sidewalk to be constructed, and the cost
thereof shall be levied and assessed as a special tax against the premises,
provided that the notice shall contain the official estimate of the cost of the
construction, and no special assessment in excess of this estimate shall be
assessed against the property. In the event the property owner is a nonresident
of the county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any
special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by
law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the
last known address of the nonresident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required
notice was first published.
('72 Code, § 8-208)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to construct and repair, see Neb. RS 17-522 and 17-523
§ 95.037 CONSTRUCTION BIDS.
   Whenever the city shall construct, widen, replace, or reconstruct any
sidewalk, notice prepared by the City Attorney, specifying the work to be done
and calling for bids for doing such work and supplying the necessary materials
and labor shall be published in at least one issue of a legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city, provided that bids so invited shall be filed
in the office of the City Clerk within ten days after the date of publication.
Bids shall be opened at the next regular or special meeting of the City
Council, and the City Council shall then award the work to the lowest
responsible bidder. Upon approval of the work, the City Council may require the
contractor to accept payment in certificates issued to him or her by the City
Clerk entitling him or her to all assessments or special taxes, against such
real estate whenever such assessments or special taxes, shall be collected
together with the interest or penalty collected thereon. Each certificate shall
give the legal description of the lot, lots, or parcel of ground against which
the assessments or special taxes are assessed. Such certificate or certificates
may be assigned and transferred, entitling the holder to the same rights as if
held by the original contractor. The County Treasurer shall pay over to such
contractor or other holder of the certificate or certificates all assessments
or special taxes against such real estate, together with the interest and
penalty thereon, at any time upon presentation of such certificate or
certificates after said assessments or special taxes against such real estate
together with interest or penalty thereon shall have been collected.
(Neb. RS 18-2442 et seq.) ('72 Code, § 8-209)
§ 95.038 CONSTRUCTION BY PETITION.
   If the owners of the record title representing more than 60% of the front
footage of the directly abutting property, subject to assessment for sidewalk
improvements, petition the City Council to make the same, the City Council
shall proceed in all things as though such construction had been ordered by it.
Upon the petition of any freeholder who is an abutting owner in fee simple of
property subject to assessment for sidewalk improvements, the City Council may
order permanent sidewalks built in accordance with this chapter upon the
freeholder making, executing, and delivering to the city an agreement to the
effect that the petitioning freeholder will pay the engineering service fee,
that all other incidental construction costs until paid shall be a perpetual
lien upon the real estate along which the freeholder desires such sidewalk to
be constructed, and that the petitioner gives and grants to the city the right
to assess and levy the costs of such construction against the freeholder's real
estate abutting the sidewalk improvement and promises to pay such costs with
interest. The total cost of such improvement shall be levied, allocated,
financed, and specially assessed as provided by law. In the event the property
owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the city
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy
of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested to the last known address of the nonresident property
owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax
rolls at the time such required notice was first published.
('72 Code, § 8-210)
Statutory reference:
   Petition by landowners, see Neb. RS 17-510
§ 95.039 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All sidewalks and driveways shall be built in such specifications and of
such materials as may be prescribed by the Street Commissioner; provided, that
the same has previously been approved by the Mayor and City Council. General
specifications and material requirements shall be on file at the office of the
City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
('72 Code, § 8-211) (Am. Ord. 1038, passed 6-12-75; Am. Ord. 1040, passed 10-9-
75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.040 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The notice forms prescribed in this subchapter shall be in the form
prescribed by the City Attorney and service of such notice, except as otherwise
prescribed in this chapter, shall in all ways conform to his or her directives.
('72 Code, § 8-212)
STREETS
§ 95.055 NUMBERING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every building or residence fronting upon any of the streets shall be
numbered and the following system of numbering the same is hereby adopted, to
wit: All streets shall be numbered north and south from First Street, and east
and west from Broadway. Streets running north from First Street shall be called
north streets, and streets running south from First Street shall be called
south streets, as North Broadway and South Broadway, North Linden Avenue and
South Linden Avenue, and the like. Streets running east from Broadway shall be
called east streets, and those running west from Broadway shall be called west
streets, as East Fifth Street and West Fifth Street, and the like. All odd
numbers shall be given to the buildings and residences on the south side, and
all even numbers shall be given to the buildings and residences on the north
side of each street running east and west; on all streets running north and
south, the odd numbers shall be on the west side, and the even numbers on the
east side of each of such streets. Numbers shall commence on all streets
running south from said First Street with 100 for the first number in the first
block, 200 for the second block, 300 for the third block, and the like, and
numbers shall commence on all streets running north from said First Street with
100 for the first number in the first block, 200 for the second block, 300 for
the third block, and in like manner to the corporate limits. Numbers shall
commence on all streets running east from Broadway with 100 for the first
number in the first block, 200 for the first number in the second block, 300 in
the third block, and in like manner to the city limits; and numbers shall
commence on all streets running west from Broadway with 100 for the first
number in the first block, 200 for the first number in the second block, 300 in
the third block, and in like manner to the city limits. On any street where
there is a long block directly opposite to two blocks, the numbers in the long
block shall be made to correspond with the blocks opposite. In all cases where
there shall be short streets, or streets which do not extend to the said basic
or starting streets, to wit: First Street and Broadway, such streets shall be
taken to have the numbered blocks which they would have and receive in case
they did extend to said First Street or Broadway, and shall be designated in
their numbers of buildings or residences as east or west, or north or south, as
they may be east or west from Broadway, or north or south of First Street.
   (B)   The space or distance allowed each number shall be eight feet. To find
a number, measure from the corner of the block, commencing with the first
number of the block, and count one number for each eight feet until opposite
the door, and the number for these eight feet shall be the number for the door
or building. Numbers shall be placed in such manner and shall be of such type
as may be prescribed by the City Council.
('72 Code, § 8-301)
§ 95.056 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   The City Council may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or provide
a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business purposes
and located along such streets shall retain such numbers as the City Council
may require. It shall be the duty of the city official in charge of streets,
upon the erection of any new building or buildings, to assign the proper
numbers to the building or buildings and give notice to the owner or owners and
occupant or occupants of the same.
('72 Code, § 8-302)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to improve, see Neb. RS 17-509
§ 95.057 EXCAVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or
streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the
chief city street official authorizing such excavations.
(Neb. RS 17-567) ('72 Code, § 8-303) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.058 HARMFUL LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street, waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating oils, which damage
or act as a solvent upon said streets.
(Neb. RS 17-557) ('72 Code, § 8-304) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.059 EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
dwelling house or business building within the limits of the city where the
dwelling or building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper
guttering and eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the
sidewalks and streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or
business building shall be constructed to drain into the alleys or shall be
buried beneath the sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to be
impossible to drain the eave spouts into the alley.
('72 Code, § 8-305) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-557
§ 95.060 HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to move or operate
heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
or crossing on any unpaved street without first having protected such curb,
gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing with heavy plank
sufficient in strength to warrant against the breaking or damaging of such
curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing. Hereafter, it
shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or convey over or across any
paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels
that bear upon the pavement, with wheels having cutting edges, with wheels
having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain
tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or otherwise injure or damage any
pavement, gutter, or curb, provided that, where heavy vehicles, structures, and
machines move along paved or unpaved streets, the city police are hereby
authorized and empowered to choose the route over which the moving of such
vehicles, structures, or machines will be permitted and allowed. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic tires with metal or
metal-type studs not exceeding 5/16 of an inch in diameter inclusive of the
stud-casting with an average protrusion beyond the tread surface of not more
than 7/64 of an inch between November 1 and March 15, provided that school
buses and emergency vehicles shall be permitted to use metal or metal- type
studs all year; it shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the streets. It shall be permissible to use
a rubber tired crane with a fixed load when such vehicle will be transported on
a state highway or on any road within the corporate limits of the city, the
city in which the crane is intended to be transported has authorized a one-day
permit for the transportation of the crane and specified the route to be used
and the hours during which the crane can be transported, such vehicle is
escorted by another vehicle or vehicles assigned by the city, and such
vehicle's gross weight does not exceed the limits set out in Neb. RS 60-6,294
(10), and it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions
upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other
condition tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.
('72 Code, § 8-306) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Tire requirements, see Neb. RS 60-6,250
   Rubber-tired cranes, see Neb. RS 60-6,288(2)(j)
§ 95.061 CONSTRUCTION NOTICE.
   The Street Commissioner shall notify the owners in fee simple of real estate
abutting a street, alley, or a part thereof which is to be put under contract
for paving or repaving. Notice shall also be given to all gas, electric
service, and telephone companies. Notice shall also be given to all consumers
of gas, water, and sewer services which will be discontinued during such
construction. The notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper at
least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party
undertaking such construction, and the notice shall state at what date
connections must be made and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer, and
underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving of the
street under construction. After expiration of such time, permits for
excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after the
completion of the pavement in the street or alley, and the formal final
acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the city.
('72 Code, § 8-307)
Statutory reference:
   Notice required, see Neb. RS 17-522
§ 95.062 PIPE LINES AND WIRES.
   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be located, or erected over, upon, or under the
streets, alleys, and common grounds of the city. Application for location of
the above shall be made to the City Council in writing. Approval by that body
shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a right-of-way
for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, and
wires shall at all times erect and locate their poles, wires, gas mains, pipe
lines, and other appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be
designated by the City Council. Such poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and
other appurtenances, shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their
own expense when requested to do so by the City Council. Any such relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the City Council, and the City Clerk shall
notify any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours
after receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances to be removed. The City Council shall
designate another location as closely as possible where the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed. All poles,
wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances, shall be reset, placed,
or erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the water system,
sewerage system, poles, wires, and mains of any public utility, adjacent
buildings, or with travel on the public ways and property. Whenever possible,
all pole lines, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or appurtenances shall be
confined to the alleys of the city.
('72 Code, § 8-308) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.063 CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT.
   To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements, as may be
authorized by law, the City Council shall have power and authority to levy and
collect special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground
adjacent to, abutting upon, or especially benefitting from, the street, avenue,
alley, or sidewalk in whole or in part opened, widened, curbed, curbed and
guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled, macadamized, parked, extended,
constructed, or otherwise improved or repaired. The City Council sitting as the
Board of Equalization shall review all such improvements in accordance with the
procedure provided by law. All special assessments shall be made by the City
Council at a regular or special meeting by resolution, taking into account the
benefits derived or injuries sustained in consequence of such improvements and
the amount charged against same. The vote shall be recorded in the minutes.
Notice of the time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to
be held shall be published in some legal newspaper published, or of general
circulation, in the city at least four weeks before the same shall be held. In
lieu of such aforementioned notice, personal service may be had upon the
persons owning or occupying the property to be assessed. Such assessments shall
be known as "special assessments for improvements" and with the cost of notice
shall be levied and collected as a special tax in addition to the taxes for
general revenue purposes, subject to the same penalties and collected in like
manner as other city taxes and shall be certified to the County Clerk by the
City Clerk forthwith after the date of levy, for collection by the Treasurer of
the county unless otherwise specified. After it shall become delinquent said
assessment shall draw interest at the legal interest rate per annum. In the
event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property
lies, the city shall, before levying any special assessment against that
property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of
certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the
nonresident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed
on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.
('72 Code, § 8-309)
Statutory reference:
   Assessments, see Neb. RS 17-511 and 17-524
   Agricultural land within improvement districts, see Neb. RS 19-2428 through
19-2431
   Maximum interest rates, see Neb. RS 45-104.01
§ 95.064 PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Whenever a petition signed by the owners of record title representing more
than 60% of the front footage of the property directly abutting upon the
street, streets, alley, alleys, public way, or the public grounds proposed to
be improved, shall be presented and filed with the City Clerk, petitioning
therefor, the City Council shall by ordinance create a paving, graveling, or
other improvement district or districts, and shall cause such work to be done
or such improvement to be made, and shall contract therefor, and shall levy
assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such
street, streets, alley, or alleys, especially benefitted thereby in such
district in proportion to such benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement.
The City Council shall have the discretion to deny the formation of the
proposed district when the area has not previously been improved with a water
system, sewer system, and grading of streets. If the City Council should deny a
requested improvement district formation, it shall state the grounds for such
denial in a written letter to interested parties.
(Neb. RS 17-510) ('72 Code, § 8-310) (Ord. 1204, passed 9-22-83)
§ 95.065 DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever the City Council of a city creates an improvement district as
specified in §
95.010 which includes land adjacent to the city which is within an agricultural
use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record
title of such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments.
For purposes of this section, the terms agricultural use and agricultural use
zone shall have the meaning specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.
(Neb. RS 19-2428)
   (B)   (1)   Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by
this section shall, to secure such assessment, make application to the City
Council within 90 days after creation of an improvement district as specified
in §
95.009. Any owner of record title who makes application for the deferral
provided by this section shall notify the County Register of Deeds of such
application in writing prior to approval by the City Council.
      (2)   The City Council shall approve the application of any owner of
record title upon determination that the property:
         (a)   Is within an agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for
agricultural use; and
         (b)   The owner has met the requirements of this section.
(Neb. RS 19-2429)
   (C)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any
of the following events:
      (1)   Notification by the owner of record title to the City Council to
remove such deferral;
      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application
within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in this division (C)
of this section;
      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who
does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;
      (4)   The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or
      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
(Neb. RS 19-2430)
   (D)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this
section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record title of
such property shall pay to the city an amount equal to the total amount of
special assessments which would have been assessed against such property, to
the extent of special benefits, had such deferral not been granted. Interest
upon the special assessments shall be deferred and shall accrue from the time
the property becomes disqualified for deferral. The interest rate shall be the
same as was charged to other property owners within the special assessment
district in question and amortized over a term to coincide with the original
amortization period.
(Neb. RS 19-2431(1))
   (E)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as
a result of a sale or transfer described in subdivision (C)(2) or (3) of this
section, the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day
preceding such sale or transfer.
(Neb. RS 19-2431(2))
('72 Code, § 8-311) (Ord. 1205, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1283, passed 9-24-87)
§ 95.066 DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   (A)   The Street Commissioner may require the owner of property served by a
driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street right-of-way to
repair or replace any such driveway approach which is cracked, broken, or
otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or is likely to cause
damage to or interfere with any street structure, including pavement or
sidewalks.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such driveway
approach. If within 30 days of mailing such notice the property owner fails or
neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the Street
Commissioner may cause such work to be done and assess the cost upon the
property served by such approach.
(Neb. RS 18-1748) ('72 Code, § 8-312) (Ord. 1265, passed 11-13-86)
§ 95.067 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   SPECIAL DAMAGES shall mean only those losses or damages or injuries
which a property owner suffers that are peculiar or special or unique to his or
her property and which result from the City Council vacating a street, avenue,
alley, lane, or similar public way. SPECIAL DAMAGES shall not mean those losses
or damages or injuries that a property owner suffers that are in common with
the rest of the city or public at large, even though those losses or damages or
injuries suffered by the property owner are greater in degree than the rest of
the city or public at large.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best
interests of the city to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar
public way, the City Council shall comply with the following procedure:
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property owners
either by first class mail to their last known address or if there is no known
address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of general
circulation in the city. The content of the notice shall advise the abutting
property owners that the City Council will consider vacating such street,
avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way at its next regular meeting or, if a
special meeting is scheduled for such discussion, then the date, time, and
place of such meeting.
      (2)   Consent; waiver. The City Council may have all the abutting
property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being taken
by the City Council and waive their right of access. The signing of such form
shall have no effect on claims for special damages by the abutting property
owners but shall create the presumption that the City Council's action was
proper. If the abutting property owners do not sign the consent/waiver form,
the City Council may still proceed with vacating the street, avenue, alley,
lane, or similar public way under the authority granted by Neb. RS 17-558 and
17-559.
      (3)   Ordinance. The City Council shall pass an ordinance that includes
essentially the following provisions:
         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the public good
or in the best interests of the city.
         (b)   A statement that the city will have an easement for maintaining
all utilities.
         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special damages to
abutting property owners.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint three or five or seven disinterested residents
of the city to a special commission to ascertain the amount of special damages
that the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and which resulted
from the City Council vacating the street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar
public way. The appointees of the special commission shall be approved by the
City Council. Only special damages shall be awarded to the abutting property
owners.
   (D)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the abutting
property owners as special damages, the commission shall use the following
rule:
An abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the
difference between the value of the property immediately before and immediately
after the vacating of such street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way.
If no difference in value exists, the abutting property owner is entitled to no
compensation.
('72 Code, §§ 8-313, 8-314) (Ord. 1270, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1269, passed
11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1848, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-558 and 17-559
CURB AND GUTTER
§ 95.080 CUTTING CURB.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the Building
Inspector therefor. Before any person shall obtain a permit, the person shall
inform the City Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be done, and it
shall be the Utilities General Manager's duty to inspect the place of entry
into the paving, sidewalk, or curb, before the same is cut. When cutting into
any paving, it shall be the duty of the party to cut the paving under such
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council or the City
Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the opening made, the applicant
shall inform the Street Commissioner, who shall supervise and inspect the
materials used and the work done in closing the opening. It shall be
discretionary with the City Council to order the Street Commissioner, under the
supervision and inspection of the Utilities General Manager or the committee of
the City Council on the streets and alleys, to do the work of cutting and
closing the paving and charge the costs thereof to the party who obtained such
permit. The City Council may consent to the work of cutting and closing the
paving to be done by the party holding such permit. Before any permit is issued
by the City Council the applicant for such permit shall deposit with the City
Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the City Council for all paving, curb, or
sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a per square foot cost of
construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by the city for the purpose
of replacing the paving, curb, or sidewalk, in the event that the work is done
by the city. In the event that the city elects to require the applicant to
replace the paving, curb, or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the
city until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Utilities General
Manager or of the committee of the City Council on streets and alleys. In
addition to making the deposit above set forth, the applicant shall, before any
permit is issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety
or sureties to be approved by the City Council in a sum set by resolution of
the City Council.
('72 Code, § 8-401)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-567
EVENT PERMIT AND REGULATIONS FOR USE OF CITY STREETS
§ 95.100 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions of terms as used in
this chapter shall be as follows:
   EVENT.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, sponsored run or walk event, block party, or any similar display,
in or upon any city street.
   EVENT PERMIT. A permit as required by this chapter.
   PERSON. Includes a firm, partnership, association or persons, corporation,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.101 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any event,
unless an event permit has been obtained from the City of Wahoo.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.102 PERMIT APPLICATION; PROCEDURE FOR FILING.
   Any person seeking issuance of an event permit shall file an application
with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City of Wahoo.
   (A)   Filing period. An application for an event permit for all events
except those described below shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than
14 days before the date on which the event is proposed to be conducted:
      (1)   Not less than 14 days before the date of a sponsored walk or run
event;
      (2)   Not less than 30 days for an event that requires a liquor license,
security, or other approval by the City Council, as deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police and Mayor of the City of Wahoo.
   (B)   Contents. The application for an event permit shall set forth the
following information:
      (1)   The date when the event is to be conducted;
      (2)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point, or the location of the event;
      (3)   The hours when such event will start and terminate including set
up, take down and the times of the actual event;
      (4)   The location of the event including route, pre- and post-staging
areas, or areas to be blocked off from public use;
      (5)   The time at which units of the event will begin pre-event staging
at any such area or areas;
      (6)   The location of streets or parking areas of any staging areas for
such event;
      (7)   The approximate number of persons who attend the event and in the
case of a parade, the type of animals and the description of the vehicles which
will constitute such parade;
      (8)   Any additional information which the City Clerk shall find
reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue;
      (9)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the event chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (10)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such event, or if the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;
      (11)   If the event is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with City Clerk a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold
the event, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
   (C)   Late applications. The City Clerk where good cause is shown therefore
shall have the authority to consider any application under this chapter which
is filed less than the dates described in division (A) before the date such
event is proposed to be conducted.
   (D)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for an
event permit a fee of $10, excepting all events sponsored by the City of Wahoo.
   (E)   Late Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing a late application
a late fee of $10.
   (F)   Liability insurance. All applicants shall present a certificate of
insurance, covering the City of Wahoo as an additional insured. A statement of
pending coverage shall be presented with the application. The certificate may
be presented after approval of a permit is given but must be presented prior to
the event. If the certificate is not presented, the City Clerk shall revoke the
permit and the event shall be cancelled. The following limits are required:
 
General Aggregate                         $1,000,000
Bodily Injury/Property Damage             $1,000,000 each occurrence
Personal Injury Damage                    $1,000,000 each occurrence
Contractual Liability                     $1,000,000 each occurrence
Products Liability & Completed Operations $1,000,000 each occurrence
Fire Damage                               $100,000 any one fire
Medical Expense                           $5,000 any one person
 
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.103 PERMIT APPLICATION STANDARDS.
   The City Clerk shall issue a permit as provided for under this chapter when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the event will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of such event will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the event or at
the assembly points of the event (in the case of a parade) will not unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of such event will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment in route to a fire;
   (F)   The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
   (G)   The event is scheduled appropriately, with substantial time for set
up, take down, and staging;
   (H)   The event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.104 PERMIT APPLICATION NOTICE OF REJECTION.
   The City Clerk shall act upon the application for an event permit within
reasonable time after the filing thereof.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.105 PERMIT APPLICATION; NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS.
   Immediately upon the issuance of an event permit, the City Clerk shall send
a copy thereof to the following:
   (A)   Mayor;
   (B)   City Administrator;
   (C)   Street Supervisor;
   (D)   Fire Chief; and
   (E)   Parks and Recreation Director.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.106 PERMIT APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   An application shall be considered approved after the City Clerk has signed
the area designated for approval on the application. However, if approval of a
permit requires consideration by the Mayor and Council the application shall be
considered approved only after action has been taken by the Council to approve
the request, and the application has been signed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.107 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The City Administrator or Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke
an event permit issued under this chapter upon application of the standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.108 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of an event
permit to the City Council. The appeal must be filed within ten days after
receipt of a notice of denial.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.109 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The City Clerk, in denying an application for an event permit, shall be
empowered to authorize the conduct of the event on a date, at a time, or over a
route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within ten days after notice of the action of
the City Clerk, file a written notice of acceptance with the City Clerk. An
alternate event permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the
effect of an event permit under this chapter.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.110 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.111 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING EVENTS.
   Provisions relating to the conduct of the public during an event shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any event or event assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in an event.
   (B)   Driving through events. No driver of a vehicle, street or trackless
trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising an event when
such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as an
event, such as a parade.
   (C)   Parking on route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a
highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route or location of an
event. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it is unlawful
for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
§ 95.112 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities; provided that such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and
   (C)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Ord. 2047, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 2408, passed 11-22-22)
CHAPTER 96: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Owner defined
   
96.02   Prohibited animals
   
96.03   Household pets limited
   
96.04   Animal shelter
   
96.05   License for dogs and cats
   
96.06   License tags for dogs and cats
   
96.07   Wrongful licensing of dogs and cats
   
96.08   Running at large
   
96.09   Capture impossible
   
96.10   Liability of owner
   
96.11   Impounding
   
96.12   Impoundment and disposal of abandoned, cruelly neglected or mistreated
animals
   
96.13   Citation for abandoned, cruelly neglected or mistreated animals
   
96.14   Rabies suspected; impoundment
   
96.15   Animal noise
   
96.16   Service animal
   
96.17   Offensive odors
   
96.18   Sanitary regulations
   
96.19   Irresponsible animal owner
Dangerous Animals
   
96.30   Definitions
   
96.31   Restrained
   
96.32   Confinement
   
96.33   Failure to comply
   
96.34   Proof of insurance
   
96.35   Procedure for designation
 
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 OWNER DEFINED.
   Any person who shall keep, maintain, harbor or permit any animal to be for
ten days or more in or about his or her house, store, or enclosure, or to
remain to be fed, shall be deemed the owner and possessor of such animal and
shall be deemed to be liable for all penalties herein prescribed.
(Neb. RS 54-606, 71-4401) ('72 Code, § 6-104) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.02 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Defined. Prohibited animals shall include all exotic, livestock,
unusual and wild animals as more thoroughly described below:
      (1)   EXOTIC ANIMAL shall mean any animal that is native to a foreign
country or of foreign  origin or character, is not native to the United States
or was introduced from abroad except domestic pets. This term specifically
includes animals such as, but not limited to, elephants, camels, antelope,
anteaters, kangaroo and water buffalo.
      (2)   LIVESTOCK shall mean swine, cattle, horses, mules, sheep, chickens,
roosters, fowl, goats, llamas, or any other animal which is normally and
historically kept and raised on farms in the United States and used or intended
for use as food, fiber, or farm work except household pets. Provided, however,
that livestock shall be permissible in areas where livestock animal units are
permissible under the City of Wahoo's zoning regulations.
      (3)   UNUSUAL ANIMAL shall mean any exotic, wild, poisonous, or
potentially dangerous  animal not normally considered domesticated and shall
include animals prohibited by the City of Wahoo, State of Nebraska, or federal
requirements, and also:
         (a)   Class mammalia; order carnivora, family felidae (such as lions,
tigers, jaguars, leopards, and cougars) and hybrids of the same except commonly
accepted domesticated cats; family canidae (such as wolves, coyotes, and fox)
and hybrids of the same except domesticated dogs; family mustelidae (such as
weasels, martins, fishers, skunks, wolverines, mink, and badgers) except
ferrets; family procyonidae (such as raccoon); family ursidae (such as bears);
and order chiroptera (such as bats).
         (b)   Class reptilia;
            1.   All poisonous or venomous snakes, lizards, amphibians and
other reptiles and shall include but not be limited to: cobras and their allies
(elapidae, hydrophidae); vipers and their allies (crotalidae, viperidae);
boonslang and kirtland's tree snake (clonophis); and gila monster
(helodermatidae);
            2.   Order loricata (such as alligators, caymans, and crocodiles);
            3.   Green anaconda (eunectes murinus), Indian python (molurus
molurus), reticulated python (python reticulatus), and African rock python
(python sebae).
      (4)   WILD ANIMAL shall mean any animal within the boundaries of the
United States which  is now or historically has been found in the wild, or is
in the wild state wherein it is living in its original, natural condition and
is not domesticated.
   (B)   Own, keep or harbor prohibited animal. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to own, keep, or harbor any prohibited animal within the
corporate limits of the City of Wahoo. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A public zoo, circus, or carnival that maintains all legally
required permits under applicable state or federal law, including applicable
rules and regulations of the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission and federal
wildlife agencies; or
      (2)   An animal shelter.
   (C)   Sell, give away, transfer or import prohibited animal. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, give away, transfer, or import into the city
any prohibited animal except for a public zoo doing business with another zoo.
   (D)   Impoundment. In the event that the city determines a prohibited animal
is being owned, kept, or harbored by any person in violation of this title, the
city may impound the animal, or order the owner to remove such animal from the
city limits or to destroy it. If the city orders the owners to remove the
prohibited animal, the city shall deliver a copy of the order in person or by
certified mail. If the owner fails to remove such prohibited animal after the
expiration of eleven days from receipt of notice, the city is hereby authorized
to confiscate such animal and dispose of it in accordance with this title.
   (E)   Owner’s cost. Any person or persons violating this section shall bear
full cost and expenses incurred by the city in the recovery, care, medical
treatment, boarding costs, impoundment cost, and disposal of said animals,
including removal from a motor vehicle or trailer.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 HOUSEHOLD PETS LIMITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or harbor, within the
corporate limits and the zoning jurisdiction of the municipality more than
three of any single species of animal, or a combination of household pets
exceeding eight, which are at least six months of age, unless specifically
permitted by zoning regulation. A HOUSEHOLD PET shall mean dogs, cats, birds,
guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, snakes, iguana, and turtles. HOUSEHOLD PET shall
also include any domesticated animal that a person owns or that is sold or
offered for sale generally for the purpose of being kept indoors as household
pets, except as described as a prohibited animal. A DOMESTICATED ANIMAL shall
mean a tame animal that is subject to the dominion and control of an owner and
accustomed to living in or near human habitation without requiring
extraordinary restraint or unreasonably disturbing such human habitation.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 ANIMAL SHELTER.
   ANIMAL SHELTER shall mean any organization, whether privately held or
governmentally run, for the purpose holding stray, lost, abandoned, surrendered
animals or for providing temporary kenneling and finding permanent adoptive
homes for animals.
(Neb. RS 17-548) ('72 Code, § 6-110) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.05 LICENSE FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a dog or cat over the age of
six months within the city shall within 30 days after acquisition of the dog or
cat acquire a license for each such dog or cat annually by or before May 1 of
each year. The tax shall be delinquent from and after May 31, and an additional
delinquency fee as established by city resolution shall thereafter be assessed
in addition to the annual license fee; provided, the possessor of any dog or
cat brought into or harbored within the corporate limits subsequent to May 1 of
any year shall be liable for the payment of the dog or cat tax levied herein.
The city may impose a higher licensing tax for animals which have not been
either spayed or neutered at the time of licensing. Licenses shall be issued
after vaccination verification by the City Clerk upon the payment of a license
fee as established by city resolution for each dog or cat. The license shall
not be transferable, and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale, or
other disposition of the licensed dog or cat.
   (B)   The owner shall state at the time the application is made and upon
printed forms provided for such purpose his or her name and address and the
name, breed, color, and sex of each dog or cat owned and kept by the owner. A
certificate that the dog or cat has had a rabies shot and distemper/parvo
vaccinations effective for the ensuing year of the license, shall also be
presented when the license is applied for. No license or tag shall be issued
until the aforementioned certificates are shown.
('72 Code, § 6-101) (Am. Ord. 1242, passed 7-25-85; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 7-5-
90; Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see § 96.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603
§ 96.06 LICENSE TAGS FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Upon the payment of the license fee, the person designated by the
licensing authority shall issue to the owner of a dog or cat a license
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog or cat so licensed. The metallic
tags shall be properly attached to the collar or harness of all dogs or cats so
licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor the said animal until
April 30 following such licensing.
   (B)   Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times
when off the premises of the owner. In the absence of a tag, the animal shall
be regarded as a stray whenever off its owner's property.
   (C)   In the event that a license tag is lost and upon satisfactory evidence
that the original plate or tag was issued in accordance with the provisions
herein, the person designated by the licensing authority shall issue a
duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for which the license tax has
been paid and shall charge and collect a fee set by resolution of the City
Council for each duplicate or new tag so issued. All license fees and
collections shall be immediately credited to the General Fund. It shall be the
duty of the person designated by the licensing authority to issue tags of a
suitable design that are different in appearance each year.
('72 Code, § 6-102) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603
§ 96.07 WRONGFUL LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog or cat to
permit or allow such dog or cat to wear any license, metallic tag, or other
city identification than that issued by the City Clerk for dogs and cats.
(Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603) ('72 Code, § 6-103) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.08 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal (regardless of species) to
allow such animal to run at large at any time within the corporate limits of
the city. It shall be the duty of the city police to cause any animal found to
be running at large within the city to be taken up and impounded. RUNNING AT
LARGE shall mean any animal found off the premises of the owner, and not under
control of the owner or a responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain,
wire, rope, cage, or other suitable means of physical restraint.
('72 Code, § 6-105) (Am. Ord. 1066, passed 3-11-76; Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-
2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526
   Dog collars required, see Neb. RS 54-605
§ 96.09 CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE.
   The city police shall have the authority to kill any animals showing vicious
tendencies, or characteristics of rabies which make capture impossible because
of the danger involved.
(Neb. RS 54-605) ('72 Code, § 6-106) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.10 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an animal owned, kept, or
harbored by the owner, or under his or her charge or control, to injure or
destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another
person. The owner or possessor of any such animal, in addition to the usual
judgment upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured in
an amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained.
('72 Code, § 6-108) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see § 96.99
Statutory reference:
   Statutory liability, see Neb. RS 54-601
   Joint liability, see Neb. RS 54-602
§ 96.11 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the person designated by the licensing
authority to capture, secure, and remove in a humane manner to any animal
shelter or veterinarian any animal violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter. Stray animals that are roaming at large, remaining on private
property without consent of the owner or tenant, or remaining on or frequenting
public property, are deemed to be the property of the city. If the stray animal
cannot be captured by conventional means, every police or humane officer is
authorized to use any means necessary to remove the animal. The animals so
impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be provided with a
sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each impounded animal shall
be kept and maintained at the pound for a period of not less than five days
unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. The day on which the animal was
impounded shall count as one day and any part of any day during which the
animal is impounded shall also count as a full day. Before an animal is
released from impoundment, the items listed in division (B) below shall be met.
Any unclaimed impounded animal, after being kept for no more than five days,
will become the property of the city or of the Animal Shelter and shall be
placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   (B)   Before releasing an animal from impoundment, except an impoundment due
to rabies or suspect of rabies, the following items must be met:
      (1)   The animal must be current regarding its rabies vaccination and
distemper/parvo vaccination. If the animal is not current regarding said
vaccinations it shall be given the vaccinations at the owner's expense.
      (2)   If the animal is a dog or cat then it shall have a current license
of the city as stated in §§
96.05 and
96.06.
      (3)   The owner shall pay the animal shelter's or veterinarian's daily
boarding fee.
      (4)   The owner shall pay to the city a general impoundment fee as set
forth by resolution.
      (5)   The owner shall pay to the city a restitution fee as set forth by
resolution to reimburse the cost of employing a humane officer, if so employed,
at the time of impoundment.
('72 Code, § 6-109) (Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-
2019)
Statutory reference:
   Pounds authorized, see Neb. RS 17-548
   Pounds created by rabies control authorities, see Neb. RS 71-4408
§ 96.12 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED, CRUELLY NEGLECTED OR MISTREATED
ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal found abandoned, cruelly neglected or mistreated or in such
a condition as to constitute a direct threat to its life, safety or health may
be impounded if seized pursuant to a search warrant or validly seized without a
warrant. When a criminal complaint has been filed in connection with the
impounded animal, that court shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the
disposition of the animal and to determine any rights therein, including
questions relating to the title, possession, control, and disposition of the
animal. Within seven days after the animal has been impounded, either the City
Attorney or the Saunders County Attorney shall file an application with the
court for a hearing to determine disposition and the cost for the care of the
animal. Notice of hearing shall be given to the owner or custodian from whom
the animal was seized. Such notice shall be served by personal or residential
service. If service cannot be made, then service may be made by publication in
the county where the animal was seized. The hearing may be held not more than
ten business days after the date of application for hearing unless otherwise
ordered by the court.
   (B)   The court may:
      (1)   Order immediate forfeiture of the animal to either the city or the
local animal shelter and authorize the appropriate disposition of the animal;
      (2)   Order the owner or custodian of the animal to retake possession of
the animal subject to management conditions; and/or
      (3)   Order the owner or custodian of the animal to retake possession
following the posting of a bond or other security or to otherwise order
reimbursement of all reasonable expenses for the care of the animal including
veterinary and shelter care. Payment shall be subject to state statute.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the humane destruction of a
seized animal at any time as determined necessary by a licensed veterinarian or
as authorized by court order.
(Neb. RS 28-1012 and 28-1012.01) (Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.13 CITATION FOR ABANDONED, CRUELLY NEGLECTED OR MISTREATED ANIMALS.
   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal has been
abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or mistreated may issue a citation to
the owner or custodian as prescribed by state statute. Any law enforcement
officer acting under this section shall not be liable for damage to property if
such damage is not the result of the officer's negligence.
(Neb. RS 28-1012 and 28-1012.01) (Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.14 RABIES SUSPECTED; IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any animal suspected of being afflicted with rabies, or any animal not
vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which has bitten
any person and caused an abrasion of the skin, shall be seized and impounded
under the supervision of the Animal Shelter for a period of not less than ten
days. If upon examination by a veterinarian, the animal has no clinical signs
of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it may be released to the owner, or,
in the case of an unlicensed dog or cat, it shall be dispositioned of in
accordance with the provisions herein. If the owner of the said animal has
proof of vaccination, it shall be confined by the owner or some other
responsible person for a period of at least ten days, at which time the animal
shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are
observed, the animal may be released from confinement.
(Neb. RS 71-4406) ('72 Code, § 6-111) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.15 ANIMAL NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any animal which
by loud, continued, or frequent noise, barking, howling, or yelping or
otherwise shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood, or person, or which
habitually makes noise at or chases pedestrians, drivers, or vehicles while
they are on any public sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the city. Upon the
written complaint or telephone complaint of any affected person that any animal
owned by the person named in the complaint is an annoyance or disturbance, or
otherwise violates the provisions of this section, the city police shall
investigate the complaint and, if in their opinion the situation warrants,
shall notify the owner to silence and restrain such animal. Upon a second
violation, within any 30-day period, the city police shall issue a citation to
the owner of the animal for violation of this section. The provisions of this
section shall not be construed to apply to the City Animal Shelter.
(Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.16 SERVICE ANIMAL.
   (A)   Service animal defined. SERVICE ANIMAL shall have the same meaning as
in 28 C.F.R. 36.104, as amended.
   (B)   Exempt from license tax. Every service animal shall be licensed as
required by the city code, but no license tax shall be charged. Upon the
retirement or discontinuance of the animal as a service animal, the owner of
the animal shall be liable for the payment of the required license tax.
   (C)   Misdemeanor; violence on a service animal. A person commits the
offense of violence on a service animal when he or she intentionally injures,
harasses, or threatens to injure or harass or attempts to intentionally injure,
harass, or threaten an animal that he or she knows or has reason to believe is
a service animal.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
Statutory reference:
   Statutory fee exemption, see Neb. RS 54-603
§ 96.17 OFFENSIVE ODORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep any household pet in
any pen, shed, or yard within the city from which any deleterious or offensive
odor shall be emitted; and the maintaining of any of the above-mentioned
household pets in such condition shall of itself constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.18 SANITARY REGULATIONS.
   The owner of any household pet shall keep all pens, enclosures, and shelter
structures wherein such animals are kept in a clean and sanitary condition so
as not to give off offensive odors which are a source of discomfort to persons
residing in the vicinity thereof. The owner of any household pet shall not
allow offal, manure, and waste material of such animal to accumulate or remain
in the pens, enclosures, and shelter areas, excluding pasture acreage, upon
which such animal resides or is confined in any manner which is conducive to
the breeding or attraction of flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects or in
any manner which endangers the public health or safety or which creates an
unhealthy environment. The maintenance or permitting of any of the foregoing
conditions on any such lot or parcel of ground is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. The owner of any household pet shall in a sanitary manner
remove or dispose of all offal, manure, and waste material accumulating from
such animal at least once every seven days.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 96.19 IRRESPONSIBLE ANIMAL OWNER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who has been declared an
irresponsible animal owner by the Chief of Police to own any animal, or to
reside on premises with any animal owned by another person, for a period of 36
months from the issuance of such declaration.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may declare a person to be an irresponsible animal
owner when any person has been convicted of three or more violations of this
chapter within a thirty-six month period. Such declaration is also revocation
of all existing licenses and permits issued to such person and shall prohibit
any licenses or permits from being issued to such person for a period of
thirty-six months.
   (C)   The city shall notify the person declared to be an irresponsible
animal owner of the declaration in writing. Such notice shall be served either
in person or by mailing such notice by certified mail. After eleven days from
the date of such notice, the declaration shall be final and binding upon the
city and upon the irresponsible animal owner unless within ten days after such
notice, the irresponsible animal owner requests, in writing, a review of the
determination by the hearing officer pursuant to the city’s then existing
nuisance regulations.
   (D)   The person designated as an irresponsible animal owner shall have ten
days from the date of the notice, or if appealed ten days from the final
decision, to relinquish ownership to the city or Animal Shelter. If ownership
is not relinquished, the city may impound any animal owner by the irresponsible
animal owner, and dispose of such animal in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019)
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 96.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the city and includes any local law enforcement agency or other
agency designated by the city to enforce the animal control laws of the city.
The animal control authority for the city shall be the Chief of Police of the
city.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, appointed, or authorized
by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of
this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of
animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals and shall
include any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties in
whole or in part  include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment
of any animal. The animal control officer of the city shall be the Chief of
Police of the city, and his or her officers.
      DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal that, according to the records of the animal control
authority:
         (a)   Has killed a human being;
         (b)   Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical
treatment;
         (c)   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
         (d)   Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous
animal by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice of such
determination from an animal control authority or an animal control officer,
and the animal inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans
or domestic animals.
      (2)   An animal shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS ANIMAL if the
individual was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal at the time of the
injury or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented,
abused, or assaulted the animal.
      (3)   An animal shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS ANIMAL if the injury,
damage, or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520, or 28-521,
was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the animal, was
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting
to commit a crime.
      (4)   An animal shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS ANIMAL if the animal
is a police animal as defined in Neb. RS 28-1008.
      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. See definition of “household pet” referenced in §
96.03.
      MEDICAL TREATMENT. Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or
custody of an animal.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal that when unprovoked:
         (a)   Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment; or
         (b)   Injures a domestic animal; or
         (c)   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
      (2)   Any specific animal with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
(Neb. RS 54-617) ('72 Code, § 6-114) (Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord.
2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord. 2356, passed 10-8-20)
§ 96.31 RESTRAINED.
   (A)   A dangerous animal that has been declared as such shall be spayed or
neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed
veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of both procedures
is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous animal. Written proof of
both procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to
the animal control authority after the procedures are completed.
   (B)   No owner of a dangerous animal shall permit the animal to go beyond
the property of the owner unless the animal is restrained securely by a chain
or leash.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section or for a reasonable
veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous animal shall transport such animal
or permit such animal to be transported to another county, city, or village in
this state.
   (D)   An owner of a dangerous animal may transport such animal or permit
such animal to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state
for the purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has obtained
written permission prior to such relocation from the animal control authority
of the county, city, or village in which the owner resides and from the county,
city, or village in which the owner will reside. Each animal control authority
may grant such permission based upon a reasonable evaluation of both the owner
and the animal, including if the owner has complied with the laws of this state
and of the county, city, or village in which he or she resides with regard to
dangerous animals after it was declared dangerous. An animal control authority
shall not grant permission under this section if the county, city, or village
has an ordinance or resolution prohibiting the relocation of dangerous animals.
After the permanent relocation, the animal control authority of the county,
city, or village in which the owner resides shall monitor the owner and such
animal for a period of at least 30 days but not to exceed 90 days to ensure the
owner's compliance with the laws of this state and of such county, city, or
village with regard to dangerous animals. Nothing in this division shall permit
the rescindment of the declaration of dangerous animal.
(Neb. RS 54-618) ('72 Code, § 6-115) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord.
2356, passed 10-8-20)
§ 96.32 CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation shall own, keep, or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises
occupied by him, her, or it or under his, her, or its charge or control any
dangerous animal without such animal being confined so as to protect the public
from injury.
   (B)   While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous animal shall be
securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young
children and to prevent the animal from escaping. The pen or structure shall
have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at least one
foot. The pen or structure shall also protect the animal from the elements. The
pen or structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the
owner. The owner of a dangerous animal shall post warning signs on the property
where the animal is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public
access and that inform persons that a dangerous animal is on the property. Each
warning sign shall be no less than ten inches by 12 inches and shall contain
the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least
three inches high on a black background.
(Neb. RS 54-619) ('72 Code, § 6-116) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord.
2356, passed 10-8-20)
§ 96.33 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Any dangerous animal may be immediately confiscated by an animal
control officer if the owner is in violation of this chapter. The owner shall
be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control
authority for the care of a dangerous animal confiscated by an animal control
officer or for the destruction of any dangerous animal if the action by the
animal control authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this
chapter.
(Neb. RS 54-620)
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal control
authority to dispose of a dangerous animal in an expeditious and humane manner.
(Neb. RS 54-621) ('72 Code, § 6-118)
   (C)   (1)   Any owner whose dangerous animal inflicts on a human being a
serious bodily injury as defined in Neb. RS 28-109 is guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor for the first offense, whether or not the same dangerous animal is
involved.
      (2) It is a defense to a violation of division (C)(1) of this section
that the dangerous animal was, at the time of the infliction of the serious
bodily injury, in the custody of or under the direct control of a person other
than the owner or the owner's immediate family. (Neb. RS 54-622.01)
   (D)   Effect of prior conviction. If a dangerous animal of an owner with a
prior conviction under this section attacks or bites a human being or domestic
animal, in addition to any other penalty, the dangerous animal shall be
immediately confiscated by an animal control authority, placed in quarantine
for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner.
(Neb. RS 54-623) (Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord. 2356, passed 10-8-
20) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.34 PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   Any animal that has been determined to be a dangerous animal by the animal
control authority shall not be licensed at the next annual license renewal
period unless the owner thereof shall first present written proof of liability
insurance of not less than $300,000 to the animal control authority.
('72 Code, §§ 6-117 and 6-119) (Ord. 1344, passed 5-24-90; Am. Ord. 1345,
passed 6-28-90; Am. Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord. 2356, passed 10-8-20)
§ 96.35 PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION.
   The animal control authority shall be authorized to designate animals as
either not dangerous, potentially dangerous, or dangerous pursuant to the
definitions prescribed in §
96.30 above. Should either the owner of the designated animal or a party
alleged to have been injured by said animal disagree with the decision of the
animal control authority then they shall be given 30 days to file an
administrative appeal of that determination to Wahoo City Council. A failure to
file a timely appeal of that administrative decision shall forever bar any
claims by the affected parties.
(Ord. 2356, passed 10-8-20)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violation any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not more than $500.00 for each offense.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties for all violations herein provided, the
court may order such person to reimburse the city, and/or a public or private
agency for expenses incurred in the care, medical treatment, impoundment, and
disposal of any animal involved in or connected with the incident for which the
complaint was filed. A court may also enter an order requiring restitution to
any person for damage or injury to such person or such person's property.
   (C)   Each day that a violation of any section in this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as
such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative with and in addition to
any penalty or forfeiture elsewhere in this chapter provided.
(Ord. 2305, passed 4-11-2019; Am. Ord. 2362, passed 11-24-20)
CHAPTER 97: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
97.01   Findings
   
97.02   Title
   
97.03   Purpose
   
97.04   Scope
   
97.05   Definitions
   
97.06   Administration of noise control program
   
97.07   Duties of Health Officer
   
97.08   Noise disturbances prohibited
   
97.09   Motorized vehicles and motorcycles on public right-of-way
   
97.10   Motorized vehicles and motorcycles off public right-of-way
   
97.11   Racing events
   
97.12   Rail carrier operation
   
97.13   Emergency exception
   
97.14   Variances
   
97.15   Abatement orders
   
97.16   Additional remedy; injunction
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 FINDINGS.
   The findings made in Ordinance 1766 are hereby made a part of this chapter
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.02 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited and known as the Noise Control Ordinance of the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.03 PURPOSE.
   It is found and declared that:
   (A)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud
noises within the limits of the city and within one mile of the city is a
condition which has existed for some time, and the extent and volume of such
noises are increasing;
   (B)   The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary,
unnatural, or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural
in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health,
comfort, convenience, safety and welfare and prosperity of the residents of the
city; and
   (C)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy; and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of
the inhabitants of the city and the area within its zoning jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.04 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the
limits of the city and the area within one mile of the city. No local
regulation shall exceed the applicable state or federal standards.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.05 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. A copy of the applicable ANSI standards
shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be available during normal working
hours. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL AREA. Any area and LLR zoning districts as designated pursuant
to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35.
   AMBIENT NOISE. All encompassing noise associated with a given environment,
being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated db(A) or dbA.
   COMMERCIAL AREA. Any area in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts as designated
pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration, or similar action on public or private property.
   DECIBEL (dB). A logarithmic and dimensionless unit for measuring the volume
of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base tea of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (Leq). The constant sound level that, in a
given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual
time-varying A-weighted sound.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR). The value specified by the manufacturer
as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases
where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating
(GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended
maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Chief of Police of the city, or said individual's
deputies.
   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include
explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
   INDUSTRIAL AREA. Any area in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts as designated
pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor,
such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-
trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune
buggies, or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
   MOTORBOAT. Any vessel which operates on water that is propelled by a motor,
including, but not limited to, boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski
towing devices, and hovercraft.
   MOTORCYCLE. An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not
limited to, motor scooters, mini bikes, and motor driven cycles.
   MUFFLER. A device for diminishing the sound of projected noise from an
internal combustion engine.
   NOISE. Any sound not occurring in the natural environment that causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound not occurring in the natural environment that
would tend to annoy or disturb humans with reasonable sensitivities, or which
injures or endangers the comfort, health, welfare, hearing, peace, or safety of
other persons.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne
plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including,
but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or
alley or similar place that is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Real property or structures thereon which are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
   PURE TONE. Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set
of single pitches.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property
divisions.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area in the NRC, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts as
designated pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35.
   RMS SOUND PRESSURE. The square root of the time-averaged square of the sound
pressure, denoted Prms.
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity,
or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
   SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, C, flat, or
linear as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for
sound level meters (ANSI § 1A1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If
the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting networks
used to measure sound pressure levels.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty
micropascals (20 x 10-6 N/m2). SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL is denoted Lp or SPL and is
expressed in decibels.
   VIBRATION. An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random
nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with respect to a
given reference.
   WEEKDAY. Any day Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.06 ADMINISTRATION OF NOISE CONTROL PROGRAM.
   The noise control program established by this chapter shall be administered
by the Health Officer. In order to implement and enforce this chapter and for
the general purpose of sound and vibration abatement and control, the Health
Officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in said office,
the power to:
   (A)   Conduct, or cause to be conducted, research, monitoring and other
studies related to sonogram vibration;
   (B)   Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes, effects and
general methods of abatement and control of noise and vibration, or regarding
the actions prohibited by this chapter or by any applicable state or federal
regulations;
   (C)   Work to coordinate the noise and vibration control activities of all
municipal departments, and cooperate with all appropriate local, state or
federal agencies, or private persons or organizations to promote compliance
with this chapter and to promote uniform noise and vibration standards;
   (D)   Consult with any other department or agency responsible for any
proposed or final standard, regulation or similar action on the advisability of
revising such action if the Health Officer has reason to believe that such
action is not consistent with this chapter;
   (E)   Review public projects which are subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments for compliance with this chapter, if such
projects are likely to cause sound or vibration in violation of this chapter;
   (F)   Conduct inspections, surveys and examinations of properties for the
purpose of determining compliance with or violation of this chapter. All such
inspections, surveys and examinations conducted pursuant to this chapter shall
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Inspection Code;
   (G)   Delegate functions, where appropriate under this chapter, to personnel
within the Police Department and to other agencies or departments of the city.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.07 DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the Health
Officer shall within a reasonable time after the effective date of this
chapter:
   (A)   Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter, and take
any legal and proper action necessary to abate such violations; and
   (B)   Administer noise program grants and other funds and gifts from public
and private sources, including the state and federal governments.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.08 NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any
noise disturbance. For sources of noise other than those specifically listed in
this subsection, determinations of noise disturbances may be made through
application of sound level limits listed at
Table 1. The sound level limits listed at
Table 1 may be applied to noise sources specifically listed in this subsection
for the purpose of determining noise disturbances where the receiving land uses
are other than residential. Without limiting the foregoing, the following acts,
and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation of this prohibition:
      (1)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices: 
         (a)   Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of
any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier,
or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary, except for activities open to the public and for which any required
permit has been issued. For those activities requiring a permit, a property
line noise limit and/or time limit will be established that is agreeable to the
permit grantor, the Health Officer, and the grantee.
         (b)   In all other cases, property line noise standards for the
residential receiving land use may be applied to determine the existence of
noise disturbance. The standards are:
            1.   Sixty dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
            2.   Fifty dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the time period 10
p.m. to 7 a.m..
      (2)   Loudspeakers/public address systems: Using or operating for any
purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary. The following property line noise standards may be applied to the
residential receiving land use to determine the existence of a noise
disturbance:
         (a)   Sixty dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 7 a.m. to
10 p.m.;
         (b)   Fifty dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 10 p.m.,
to 7 a.m.
      (3)   Animals and birds: 
         (a)   Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal or bird which makes
sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary. The following property line noise standards may be applied to the
residential receiving land use or noise sensitive zone to determine the
existence of a noise disturbance:
            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 10
p.m. to 7 a.m.
         (b)   This provision shall not apply to licensed veterinarians.
      (4)   Loading and unloading: Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or
other handling of boxes, carts, containers, building materials, or similar
objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
real property boundary. The following property line noise standards may be
applied to the residential receiving land use or noise-sensitive zone to
determine the existence of a noise disturbance, except as noted in subsection
(C):
         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
         (b)   Fifty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the time period 10
p.m. to 7 a.m.
      (5)   Construction: Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work:
         (a)   Between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. the following day on any
day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary, except for emergency work of public service utilities or by
variance issued pursuant to this chapter;
         (b)   This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools
of a type normally found in the home.
      (6)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing: Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary. The following property line noise standards may be applied to the
residential receiving land use to determine the existence of a noise
disturbance, except as noted in subsection (C):
         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
         (b)   Fifty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the time period 10
p.m. to 7 a.m.
      (7)   Powered model vehicles: Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential
real property boundary or in a public space. Maximum sound levels in a public
space, as measured at a distance of 50 feet (15 meters) from the source, or
within residential property shall be as follows:
         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
         (b)    Fifty-five dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the time period
10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
      (8)   Stationary nonemergency signaling devices:  
         (a)   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any signal from any
stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended primarily
for nonemergency purposes, from any place, in such a manner as to create a
noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. The following
property line noise standards may be applied to the residential receiving land
use to determine the existence of a disturbance:
            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 7
a.m. to 10 p.m.;
            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time period 10
p.m. to 7 a.m.
         (b)   Devices used in conjunction with a religious worship service,
public and private educational, and railroad grade crossing warning shall be
exempt from the operation of this provision. Additionally, any device used
solely for the purpose of signaling a specific clock time at a place of
religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this provision.
      (9)   Tampering:  Removing, impairing, or rendering inoperative by any
person other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement of any
muffler, or noise-control device, or noise label of any product or use of a
product which has had a muffler or noise-control device or noise label removed
or rendered inoperative, with knowledge that such action has occurred.
      (10)   Horns, signaling devices, etc.: The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street
or public place of the city so as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential real property except as a danger warning.
       (11)   Portable air compressors: No person shall operate a portable air
compressor manufactured after January 1, 1978, with maximum rated capacity of
less than or equal to 250 cubic feet per minute (cfm) which produces an average
sound level in excess of 76 dBA. No person shall operate a portable air
compressor manufactured after July 1, 1978, with maximum rated capacity greater
than 250 cfm that produces an average sound level in excess of 76 dBA. All
measurements shall be taken at 23 feet (7 meters) and shall follow test
procedures outlined in 41 Federal Register 2175 published January 14, 1976.
      (12)   Tampering with sound monitoring equipment: The removing or
rendering inaccurate or inoperative of any sound monitoring instrument or
device positioned by or for the Health Officer; provided, such device or the
immediate area is clearly labeled to warn of the potential illegality.
      (13)   Adequate exhaust system: No person shall operate a motor vehicle
or motorcycle equipped with an exhaust system that emits excessive or unusual
noise. A motor vehicle or motorcycle owner/operator may request from the Health
Officer that a stationary noise level test be made to determine whether the
exhaust system emits excessive or unusual noise. Said request must be made
within ten days from the date the operator is cited for operating a motor
vehicle or motorcycle equipped with an exhaust system that emits excessive or
unusual noise. The exhaust system will be considered adequate if the sound
level limits set forth in
Table 3 are not exceeded.
      (14)   Refuse collection vehicles:
         (a)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of the
compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse between the
hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. the following day in a residential area; or
         (b)   Collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle between the
hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. the following day in a residential area; or
         (c)   Collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle or operate or
permit the operation of a refuse compacting mechanism between the hours of 7
p.m. and 6a.m. the following day in a commercial or industrial land area where
the point of collection or compaction is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a
residential area.
      (15)   Standing motor vehicles:
         (a)    No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of 10,000 pounds or
any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than
five minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other
than traffic congestion, within 150 feet (46 meters) of a residential area in
such manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary except as noted in subsection (C). For periods exceeding five minutes,
the property line noise standards listed at
Table 1 shall be used to determine the existence of a noise disturbance.
Emergency vehicles in the performance of their duty shall be exempt from this
section.
         (b)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
motorcycle or any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of
less than 10,000 pounds, while the vehicle is stationary, in such a manner as
to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary,
provided, however, that no measurements shall be made less than 25 feet from
the property line of the property on which the vehicle is located. The
following property line noise standards may be applied to determine the
existence of a noise disturbance:
            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum fifteen second Leq, for the time
period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;
            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum fifteen second Leq, for the time
period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
      (16)   Impulsive sound: No person shall cause or allow the emission of
impulsive sound from any noise source which exceeds the peak level limits
specified in
Table 2 provided, however, that no measurements shall be made less than 25 feet
from the property line of the source from which the noise emanates.
   (B)   Measurements to determine whether a noise disturbance exists shall be
made at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use. The
measurements shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or its successor body, for a
minimum of a Type II meter.
   (C)   All activities within a commercial or industrial land area shall be
exempt from any of the general or specific provisions in subsections (A)(4),
(A)(6) and (A)(15)(a) between the hours of 6 a.m. and l0 p.m. of the same day
on any day.
   (D)   If a noise level limit has been established by another city department
for a specific noise source or activity, that limit shall be used to determine
the existence of noise disturbance if different from a level in subsection (A)
or
Table 1 that may be applicable.
   (E)   Farms or farming operations in excess of ten acres in area that were
in existence prior to changes in surrounding land use, or prior to occupancy of
land in and about the locality of such farms or farming operations, shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that the farms
or farming operations were not creating noise disturbances to surrounding land
before the change in land use or occupancy of land.
TABLE 1
SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE
Receiving Land Use Category Time Sound Level Limit, in dBA Maximum Ten-Minute*
                                 Leq Level**
TABLE 1
SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE
Receiving Land Use Category Time              Sound Level Limit, in dBA Maximum
                                              Ten-Minute* Leq Level**
Residential                 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 65
                            10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 55
Commercial                  At all times      70
Industrial                  At all times      75
Agricultural                6 a.m. to 10 p.m. 75
                            10 p.m. to 6 a.m. 50
Notes:
* Unless a different time period has been specified for the specific types of
noise disturbances listed under §
97.08(A).
**Slow meter response or use meter with Leq function
 
TABLE 2
PEAK SOUND LEVEL LIMITS BY RECEIVING LAND USE FOR IMPULSIVE SOUND
Receiving Land Use Category Time No. of Peaks/Hr. Maximum Peak Level Limit* in
                                                  dBa
TABLE 2
PEAK SOUND LEVEL LIMITS BY RECEIVING LAND USE FOR IMPULSIVE SOUND
Receiving Land Use Time                No. of Peaks/Hr. Maximum Peak Level
Category                                                Limit* in dBa
Residential        7 a.m. to 10 p.m.   1                85
Commercial         At all times        1                90
                                       2                84
                                       4                78
                                       8                72
                                       16+              66
Industrial         At all times        1                95
Agricultural       6 a.m. to 10 p.m.   2                89
                   10 p.m. to 6 a.m.** 4                83
                                       8                77
                                       16+              71
Notes:
* Fast-hold meter function only.
**Reduce limits listed by twenty dBA for this period.
 
TABLE 3
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE NOISE EMISSION STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING ADEQUACY OF EXHAUST SYSTEM, STATIONARY LIMITS*
Vehicle Type Maximum Level
TABLE 3
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE NOISE EMISSION STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING ADEQUACY OF EXHAUST SYSTEM, STATIONARY LIMITS*
Vehicle Type         Maximum Level
Automobiles, Vans, Light Trucks (GVWR < 10,000 lbs.)
Front Engine         95 (93 + 2) dBA
Rear and Mid-Engine  99 (97 + 2) dBA
Motorcycles          102 (100 + 2) dBA
Heavy Trucks **
(GVWR < 10,000 lbs.) 90 (88 + 2) dBA
Notes:
* Measurement at 20 inches (05 meters) and at 45° angle from exhaust outlet
with engine rpm at 3,000 for automobiles, vans and light trucks; and at one-
half indicated engine red line for motorcycles. Slow meter response will be
used. For vehicles equipped with dual exhausts, compliance will be determined
from the highest side measurement. For exhaust outlets located beneath the
vehicle, measurements will be taken 8 inches (0.2 meters) from the side of the
vehicle, These limits apply only to those vehicles licensed to operate on
public right-of-way.
** Measurement at 50 feet (15 meters) with transmission in neutral and engine
revved from idle to wide-open throttle (applies to vehicles with engine
governor only). Fast meter response will be used.
 
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.09 MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or
private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in
such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle
exceeds the level set forth in
Table 4. All measurements shall be taken with a sound level meter meeting the
standards of ANSI, or its successor body, for a Type El instrument as a minimum
and shall be taken with a fast meter response.
      (2)   This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of attached vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or
precluding the enforcement of any other provision of this code relating to
motor vehicle mufflers.
TABLE 4
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE SOUND LIMITS
Sound Level Limit, in dBA, in Relation to Posted Speed Limit Measured at 50
Feet or 15 Meters
Type of Motor Vehicle 35 mph or less  Over 35 mph
TABLE 4
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE SOUND LIMITS
Sound Level Limit, in dBA, in Relation to Posted Speed Limit Measured at 50
Feet or 15 Meters
Type of Motor Vehicle      35 mph or less                           Over 35 mph
Any motor vehicle carrier
of GVWR or GCWR or 10,000  86                                       90
lbs or more
                           25 mph or less Greater than 25 mph to 40 Over 40 mph
                                          mph
Any motorcycle             76             80                        84
Any other motor vehicle or
any combination of         70             76                        79
vehicles towed by any
motor vehicle
 
   (B)   For the purpose of enforcing the above levels, the standard
measurement distance may be shortened to no less than 21 feet or increased to
no more than 100 feet, applying the following correction factors, to be added
or subtracted from the permitted sound level:
Measurement Distance (Feet) Correction to Limit Sound Level, in dBA
Measurement Distance (Feet)     Correction to Limit Sound Level, in dBA
21 or more but less than 29     +7
29 or more but not less than 32 +6
32 or more but less than 35     +5
35 or more but less than 39     +3
39 or more but less than 43     +2
43 or more but less than 48     +1
48 or more but less than 58     0
58 or more but less than 70     -1
70 or more but less than 83     -2
83 or more but less than 99     -3
99 or more but less than 118    -4
 
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.10 MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES OPERATING OFF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or
motorcycle off a public right- of-way in such a manner that the sound level
emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in
Table 5 at a distance of 50 feet (15 meters) or more from the path of the
vehicle when operated on a public space, or at or across the real property
boundary when operated on private property. This section shall apply to all
motor vehicles and motorcycles, whether or not duly licensed and registered.
 
TABLE 5
RECREATIONAL MOTORIZED VEHICLE SOUND LIMITS
Vehicle Type       Sound Level Limit, in dBA
Snowmobile         78
Motorcycle         78
All Other Vehicles 78
 
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.11 RACING EVENTS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, or permit the conducting of, any part of an
organized racing event which involves a contest between or among motor vehicles
or motorcycles on public or private property after 10 p.m. or before 10 a.m.
When an emergency condition occurs as a result of an accident or absence of an
emergency vehicle during a racing event that results in a delay in finishing by
10 p.m., the time period for ending the event may be extended by one-half hour.
The Health Officer shall be notified as to the specific reason for the
extension within 12 hours after the conclusion of the event.
   (B)   For periods other than those associated with scheduled racing events,
no person shall permit the operation of motor vehicles or motorcycles used in
organized racing events which involves tuning of motor vehicles or motorcycles,
practice sessions, or other related activities on the property of a public or
private racing facility after 9:30 p.m. or before 10 a.m.
   (C)   As directed by the Health Officer, the owner or operator of a racing
facility for motor vehicles or motorcycles shall implement a plan approved by
the Health Officer for the reduction of noise levels from the facility.
   (D)   The provisions of (A), (B), and (C) above shall not apply to any
racing event held at a racetrack lawfully operated under a special permit
granted pursuant to this code and/or the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in
§
151.35. Said subsections shall apply, however, to any racing event held at a
racetrack which constitutes a nonconforming use outside of the I-2, I-2, or A
zoning districts of the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.12 RAIL CARRIER OPERATION.
   (A)   No rail carrier shall operate any locomotive, when connected to a load
and in a stationary position, in such a manner that the sound level emitted by
the locomotive exceeds the level set forth in
Table 6 below. All readings shall be taken at 100 feet (30 meters).
 
TABLE 6
RAIL CARRIER SOUND LIMITS AND STATIONARY CONDITIONS
                            Sound Level, in dBA
                            Throttle Setting at Idle Throttle Setting at Any
                                                     Other Setting
Manufactured on or before   73 dBA                   93 dBA
December 31, 1979
Manufactured after December 70 dBA                   87 dBA
31, 1979
 
   (B)   (1)   No rail carrier shall operate any locomotive or combination of
locomotives when moving at any time under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration, or deceleration in such a manner that the sound level emitted by
the locomotive exceeds the level set forth in
Table 7. All readings shall be taken at 100 feet (30 meters) from the
centerline of any section of track which exhibits less than a two-degree curve
or a radius of curvature greater than 2,865 feet (873 meters).
 
TABLE 7
RAIL CARRIER OPERATIONS UNDER MOVING CONDITIONS
                                            Sound Level Limit, in dBA
Manufactured on or before December 31, 1979 96 dBA
Manufactured after December 31, 1979        90 dBA
 
      (2)   No rail carrier shall operate any rail car or combination of rail
cars which while in motion produce sound levels in excess of:
         (a)   Eighty-eight dBA at rail car speeds up to and including 45 mph
(72 km/hr); or
         (b)   Ninety-three dBA at rail car speeds greater than 45 mph (72 km/
hr)
   All measurements shall be taken in accordance with procedures outlined in
this section and on any section of track which is free of special track work or
bridge or trestles.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict,
penalize, enjoin, or in any other manner regulate the movement of rail carriers
which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or pursuant to,
applicable federal laws or regulations.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.13 EMERGENCY EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or
      (2)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work, or
      (3)   The emission of sound in the performance of governmental services.
   (B)   Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to permit law
enforcement, ambulance, fire, or other emergency personnel, or persons
performing governmental services to make excessive noise in the performance of
their duties when such noise is clearly unnecessary.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.14 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall have the authority to grant an initial
variance to the strict application of this chapter for a period of not to
exceed 15 calendar days. Any person seeking such a variance shall file an
application with the Health Officer. The application shall contain the
information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity
for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would
constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on
other persons.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall have the authority to grant an extension to
any variance. Any person seeking such an extension shall file an application
with the Health Officer. Notice of an application for an extension shall be
posted by a sign placed in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon
which action is pending. No extension shall be granted for a period of two days
from and after posting of the property.
   (C)   (1)   Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance
of any requested extension of a variance may, prior to the end of the two day
period after posting of the property, file a statement with the Health Officer
containing any information to support the claim If the Health Officer finds
that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing
shall be held. All such hearings shall be held within five days after the
period for filing claims under this subsection has ended
      (2)   In determining whether to grant or deny any application, the Health
Officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other
persons of not granting the variance or extension against the adverse impact to
the health, safety, and well being of those affected, the adverse impact on
property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance or
extension. Applicants for variances or extensions and persons contesting
extensions may be required to submit any information the Health Officer may
reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, Health Officer shall
place on public file a copy of decision and the reasons for denying or granting
the variance or extension and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether
to grant variances and extensions.
      (3)   Variances or extensions shall be granted by notice to the applicant
containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted
activity. The variance or extension shall not become effective until all
conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of
the variance or extension shall terminate such variance or extension and
subject the applicant to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source
of sound or activity for which the variance or extension was granted.
      (4)   The Health Officer may issue guidelines defining the procedures to
be followed in applying for a variance or extension and the criteria to be
considered in deciding whether to grant variances and extensions.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision or order of the Health
Officer under this chapter may appeal such decision or order to the Planning
Commission by filing a notice of appeal with the Board Secretary within 15 days
from the date of the issuance of such decision or order by the Health Officer.
      (2)   The Secretary of the Planning Commissions, having received a
properly submitted notice of appeal, shall notify the chairman of the Planning
Commission and establish a date for the appeals hearing. The Secretary shall
then notify the person making the appeal, and any person who appeared before or
filed a statement with the Health Officer, in writing of the time and place of
the hearing, which shall, in no event, be more than 15 days from the date of
the filing of the notice of appeal with the Board Secretary. The Planning
Commission shall, within seven days of the concluding date of the appeals
hearing, file with the Health Officer a written final decision, either
affirming the decision of the Health Officer, or modifying or reversing same. A
copy of said decision shall be forwarded to the appellant.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.15 ABATEMENT ORDERS.
   (A)   The Health Officer or other agency responsible for enforcement of any
provision of this chapter may issue an order requiring abatement of any source
of sound alleged to be in violation of this chapter within a reasonable time
period and according to the guidelines which the Health Officer may prescribe.
Such abatement orders may be issued in lieu of prosecution for violation, and
failure to comply with any abatement order shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall order an immediate halt to any sound which
exposes any person to continuous sound levels in excess of those shown in
Table 8 below or to impulsive sound levels in excess of those shown in
Table 9 below; provided, that no such order shall be issued if the only persons
exposed to sound levels in excess of those listed in Tables
8 and
9 are exposed as a result of:
      (1)   Trespass,
      (2)   Invitation upon private property by the person causing or
permitting the sound, or
      (3)   Employment by the person or contractor of the person causing or
permitting the sound.
   (C)   Any person who violates an order issued pursuant to this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less
than $500 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to. have been
committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
TABLE 8
CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND WELFARE*
Sound Level Limit, in dBA Duration
TABLE 8
CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND WELFARE*
Sound Level Limit, in dBA Duration
90                        24 hours
93                        12 hours
96                        6 hours
99                        3 hours
102                       1.5 hours
105                       4.5 minutes
108                       22 minutes
* Use equal energy time-intensity trade-off if level varies, find energy
equivalent over 24 hours
 
 
TABLE 9
IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND SAFETY
Sound Level Limit, in dBA Number of Repetitions per 24-Hour Period
145                       1
135                       10
125                       100
 
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.16 ADDITIONAL REMEDY; INJUNCTION.
   The Health Officer shall take such action as necessary and legal to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. As an additional remedy, the operation or
maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of
any provisions hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable
persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health,
or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a
public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining
order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. No provision
of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause
of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage
arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at length herein, or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to
comply.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)
CHAPTER 98: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Injuring prohibited
   
98.03   Street trees and park trees plantings; permit
   
98.04   Street trees and park trees plantings; rules and regulations
   
98.05   Street trees; species to be planted; permit
   
98.06   Street trees; distances and clearances for planting
   
98.07   Street trees; ownership and maintenance
   
98.08   Street trees; city's rights and city's aid
   
98.09   Tree topping
   
98.10   Tree contractor license required; exceptions
Nuisances
   
98.15   Declared nuisances
   
98.16   Enforcement
   
98.17   Abatement of nuisance
Tree Board
   
98.20   Creation and establishment
   
98.21   Term of office
   
98.22   Compensation
   
98.23   Duties and responsibilities
   
98.24   Operation
   
98.25   Interference with Tree Board
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT OF GOD. A manifestation of nature so unusual and extraordinary that it
could not under normal conditions have been reasonably anticipated or expected.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks and all other areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free
access as a park, except for the sidewalk space areas as defined in §
95.030(B) of this code.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
sidewalk space as defined in §
95.030(B) of this code.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.02 INJURING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or wantonly
cut down, destroy, by girdling or tapping, or otherwise injure any tree within
the city that is not owned by such person, unless permission to do so has been
granted by the owner of such tree.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.03 STREET TREES AND PARK TREES PLANTINGS; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted, any
tree or shrubbery in or upon any sidewalk space, park, or other city-owned
property within the city, without first having obtained a permit in writing
from the Parks and Recreation Director to do so. The terms of the permit shall
be strictly followed by the person to whom it is issued. No tree or shrubbery
of another or different kind shall be planted and no tree or shrubbery shall be
planted in another or different location than designated in the permit. The
requirement to obtain a permit shall not apply to employees of the city when
planting trees on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.04 STREET TREES AND PARK TREES PLANTINGS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Parks and Recreation Director, in cooperation with the Mayor and City
Council, shall formulate rules and regulations for the planting of trees on
city-owned real estate. Said rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto,
shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.05 STREET TREES; SPECIES TO BE PLANTED; PERMIT.
   The city shall maintain a list of recommended trees for planting in the
sidewalk space in size classes based on mature height: small (15 feet to 30
feet); medium and large (over 30 feet). The purpose of this list will be to
maintain diversity in the total tree population of city. This list shall be
available to residents of the city upon request to aid in the selection of
trees for private and public properties. The list of recommended trees shall be
updated periodically to reflect new developments or species that will affect
the population of the community forest of city.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.06 STREET TREES; DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES FOR PLANTING.
   (A)   The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the size
classes listed in §
98.05. No trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees,
l5 feet; medium trees and large trees, 35 feet; except in special plantings
designed or approved by a landscape architect and the Parks and Recreation
Director.
   (B)   Trees may be planted in the sidewalk space where there is more than
six feet between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb of the street. Street
trees shall be planted no closer than three feet from a sidewalk, driveway, or
street.
   (C)   No street tree shall be planted within the sight triangle. The sight
triangle is defined as an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet
above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines 45 feet in
each direction along the curb line of the streets. At the intersection of major
or arterial streets, the distance of 45 feet shall be increased to 75 feet for
each arterial leg of the intersection. No street tree shall be planted closer
than ten feet of any fireplug.
   (D)   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in §
98.05 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line, or other utility.
   (E)   The city reserves unto itself the right to plant trees, plants, and/or
shrubs in the sidewalk space of all streets in the city.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07; Am. Ord. 2144, passed 11-14-13)
§ 98.07 STREET TREES; OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The abutting property owner or owners shall be the owner of all street
trees located in the sidewalk space adjacent to the abutting property.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner of all street
trees to maintain said trees, to include, but not be limited to, trimming,
pruning, and maintaining so that said street trees will not be declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of §
98.15, except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) hereof.
   (C)   The City reserves unto itself, pursuant to § 51.26 of this code, the
right to cut and remove any overhanging branches or limbs of trees so that the
electrical lines of the city will be free and safe and to protect said lines or
property of the electrical system of the city. Said cutting and removing shall
be at the expense of the city.
   (D)   The city reserves unto itself the right to cut and remove any
overhanging branches or limbs of trees on the sidewalk space that extend over
streets less than 14 feet above the surface of the street. Said cutting and
removing shall be at the expense of the city.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.08 STREET TREES; CITY'S RIGHTS AND CITY'S AID.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to prune, maintain, and remove street
trees within the sidewalk space of all streets as may be necessary to insure
the public safety, which are in an unsafe condition, which are injurious to or
affects the safe operation and maintenance of sewer lines, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, are seriously
affected with any fatal disease, or which interfere with street lighting from
city street lights, with the convenience of the public using the adjacent
street or sidewalk, or public safety on the adjacent street and sidewalks, at
the expense of the abutting property owner, except as provided in §
98.07(C) and (D), and provided the city has followed the procedures as set
forth in §
98.15.
   (B)   In the case of an act of God resulting in a community disaster, or in
the event of an emergency, both as declared by the Mayor and Council of the
city, or as ordered by the Mayor in the event of a lesser occurrence, the city
may aid the property owner in the removal, trimming, and/or clean-up of street
trees.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.09 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree or park tree. Topping, rounding off, or
pollarding is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the Tree Board. Said authorization may be
delegated by the Tree Board to the Parks and Recreation Director.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.10 TREE CONTRACTOR LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of
cutting, pruning, or removing trees on public or private property within the
city for commercial gain or profit without employing a person to supervise such
work who is a licensee under this code, §
111.70. A licensed tree contractor is not required to be a certified arborist.
   (B)   All tree-related work in the city must be performed in accordance with
all requirements of the City of Wahoo Tree Ordinance.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17)
NUISANCES
§ 98.15 DECLARED NUISANCES.
   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to §
94.21 of this code, for a property owner to permit, allow, or maintain any dead
or diseased trees within the sidewalk space of the city.
   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to §
94.21 of this code, for a property owner to permit, allow, or maintain any dead
or diseased trees on private property within the city.
   (C)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to §
94.21 of this code, for a property owner to permit the limbs or branches of any
tree or trees, on the property owner's property as well as street trees and
limbs on the sidewalk space that abuts the property owner's property, to extend
over sidewalks less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of §
98.15, the Mayor of the City, or the Chief of Police of the city, or the Chief
of Police's deputy, or the Director of Parks and Recreation, are charged with
enforcement of this chapter, and to that end shall have the authority to enter
upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees
thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis
to determine whether or not the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent them from entering on private property for purposes of
carrying out their duties under this chapter, or to interfere with them in the
lawful performance of their duties under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to Neb. RS 17-555, any property owner receiving a notice
pursuant to §
94.25 shall be given 30 days to abate and remove such nuisance.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.17 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   The Mayor, or the Chief of Police of the city, or the Chief of Police's
deputy, or the Director of Parks and Recreation, shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter pursuant to the abatement procedures set forth for
nuisances in
Chapter 94 of this code, except as hereinbefore set forth.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
TREE BOARD
§ 98.20 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the city, which
shall consist of the five members of the Wahoo Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.21 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The terms of the five individuals comprising the Tree Board shall coincide
with their respective terms on the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.22 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.23 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Tree Board shall be as follows:
   (A)   To beautify the appearance of the city by promoting and encouraging
the responsible planting, care, replacement, and maintenance of trees in the
city.
   (B)   To plan and sponsor activities in celebration of Arbor Day.
   (C)   To provide educational materials and programs to the public concerning
the planting and care of trees.
   (D)   To make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council concerning
landscape plans for any new or existing public facilities constructed by the
city.
   (E)   When requested by the Mayor and City Council, to consider,
investigate, make findings, reports, and recommendations upon any special
matter or question relating to trees.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.24 OPERATION.
   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Copies of its minutes shall
periodically be presented to the Mayor and City Council. Copies of its rules
and regulations shall be on file with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
§ 98.25 INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park
trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)
CHAPTER 99: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Section
   
99.01   Purpose
   
99.02   Applicability
   
99.03   Application requirements
   
99.04   Reviewing authority and procedure
   
99.05   Decision
   
99.06   Application form
   
Appendix A: Request for Reasonable Accommodation
§ 99.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for
persons with disabilities or handicaps seeking equal access to housing under
the Rehabilitation Act, the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Federal Fair
Housing Amendments Act and the Nebraska Fair Housing Act (the Acts) in the
application of the City of Wahoo's building codes, fire or safety codes, zoning
laws, other land use and general regulations, and police policies and
procedures.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
§ 99.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with
a disability or handicap, as defined in the Acts, or by an entity acting on
behalf of a person or persons with disabilities or handicaps to provide or
secure equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling and/or otherwise receive
services or participate in programs or activities provided by the city when the
application of a City of Wahoo building code, fire or safety code, zoning law
or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to such
equal opportunities. As defined in the Acts, a person with a disability or
handicap is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or
substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded
as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of such impairment.
   (B)   A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or
exception to rules, standards and practices when such modification or exception
is necessary to eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a
disability or handicap with equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling and/
or to otherwise receive services or participate in programs or activities
provided by the city. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in
the manner prescribed by §
99.03.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
§ 99.03 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted
on an application form provided by the City Clerk, or in the form of a letter
to the City Clerk, and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
      (2)   The street address and legal description or assessor's parcel
number of the property for which the request is being made.
      (3)   The current actual use of the property.
      (4)   The law, provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable
accommodation is being requested.
      (5)   Additional information. The following information shall be
submitted with the application:
         (a)   A statement from the applicant describing the basis for the
claim that the individual (or group of individuals, if application is made by
an entity acting on behalf of a person or persons with disabilities or
handicaps) is considered disabled or handicapped under the Acts.
         (b)   A statement as to why the requested accommodation is
financially, therapeutically, or otherwise necessary to afford a handicapped or
disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling and/or to
otherwise receive services or participate in programs provided by the city.
         (c)   Documentation supporting the financial, therapeutic, or other
necessity for the accommodation.
   (B)   Upon the filing of the application, together with all information
required above, the City Council shall refer a request for reasonable
accommodation to the Mayor and City Administrator who shall together issue a
written recommendation on the request. The Mayor and City Administrator are
hereinafter referred to in this chapter as the “Reviewing Authority.”
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
§ 99.04 REVIEWING AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE.
   The Reviewing Authority shall review the request and make a recommendation
and report to the City Council within 45 days from the date of referral
regarding granting, granting with modifications, or denying the request for
reasonable accommodation in accordance with §
99.03. Failure of the Reviewing Authority to submit its report and
recommendation to the City Council within said 45 days shall be deemed to be a
recommendation of approval, unless the delay is at the request of or due to the
default of the applicant.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
§ 99.05 DECISION.
   (A)   Upon receiving the report from the Reviewing Authority or upon failure
of the Reviewing Authority to timely submit its report, the City Council after
public hearing shall take final action upon the application and may grant,
grant with modifications, or deny the request for reasonable accommodation
consistent with the Acts and based upon the following findings:
      (1)   Whether the housing which is the subject of the request will be
used by an individual or a group of individuals considered disabled or
handicapped under the Acts.
      (2)   Whether the accommodation requested is financially,
therapeutically, or otherwise necessary to make specific housing available to
the individual or group of individuals with a disability or handicap under the
Acts.
      (3)   Whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations available
that would provide an equivalent level of benefit.
      (4)   Whether alternative accommodations would be suitable based on the
circumstances of this particular case.
      (5)   If applicable, whether the requested reasonable accommodation would
be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan land use designation of the property
which is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and with the
general purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the use is located.
      (6)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation substantially
affects the physical attributes of the property.
      (7)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an
undue financial or administrative burden on the city.
      (8)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a
fundamental alteration to the zoning, building, fire, or safety codes of the
city.
   (B)   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the city may
impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure
that the reasonable accommodation would be consistent with the Acts and the
findings required above.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
§ 99.06 APPLICATION FORM.
   The application shall be substantially in the form set forth in Appendix A
following this chapter.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
APPENDIX A: REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
This request is per Wahoo Municipal Code
Chapter 99, The Rehabilitation Act, The Americans with Disabilities Act, the
Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act & The Nebraska Fair Housing Act.
Purpose: To provide or secure equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling
and/or otherwise receive services or participate in programs or activities
provided by the city when the application of a City of Wahoo building code,
fire or safety code, zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or
practice acts as a barrier to such equal opportunities.
A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception
to rules, standards and practices when such modification or exception is
necessary to eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a
disability or handicap with equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling and/
or to otherwise receive services or participate in programs or activities
provided by the city.
RETURN APPLICATION TO: City Clerk’s Office, 605 N. Broadway, Wahoo, Nebraska
68066. Questions? Contact the City Clerk at (402) 443-3222.
APPLICANT
NAME:
                                                                                                                            
STREET ADDRESS:
                                                                   
CITY/STATE/ZIP:
                                                                                                            
EMAIL ADDRESS:
                                                                                                           
PHONE #:
(
   )                                                                                                                     PROPERTY
REQUEST IS BEING MADE FOR
STREET ADDRESS:
                                                                                                              
LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
                                                                                                          
ASSESSOR’S PARCEL #:
                                                                                                      
CURRENT ACTUAL USE OF THE PROPERTY:
                                                                           
                                                
LAW, PROVISION, REGULATION OR POLICY FROM WHICH REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IS
BEING REQUESTED:
ATTACHMENTS
   The following items must be ATTACHED to the application.
      •   A statement from the applicant describing the basis for the claim
that the individual (or group of individuals, if application is made by an
entity acting on behalf of a person or persons with disabilities or handicaps)
is considered disabled or handicapped under the Acts.
      •   A statement as to why the requested accommodation is financially,
therapeutically, or otherwise necessary to afford a handicapped or disabled
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling and/or to otherwise
receive services or participate in programs provided by the city.
      •   Documentation supporting the financial, therapeutic, or other
necessity for the accommodation.
   Dated this                 day of                                   ,
20     .
                                                                            
                           Printed Name of Applicant
                                                                            
                           Signature of Applicant
NOTE: Upon the filing of the application, together with all information
required above, the City Council shall refer a request for reasonable
accommodation to the City Administrator and Mayor who will then together issue
a written recommendation to the City Council at a public hearing.
(Ord. 2336, passed 12-26-19)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
         
111.   PROFESSIONAL LICENSES
         
112.   OCCUPATION TAXES
         
113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
114.   AMUSEMENTS
         
115.   LOTTERY
         
116.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Tobacco
   
110.01   Tobacco; license for sale
   
110.02   Re-issuance of revoked and forfeited license
   
110.03   Rights of licensee
   
110.04   License application
Fireworks
   
110.10   Definitions
   
110.11   License required
   
110.12   Application for license
   
110.13   Requirements for license
   
110.14   Fire extinguisher
   
110.15   Requirements of State of Nebraska
   
110.16   Display of license
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, And Solicitors
   
110.20   Definitions
   
110.21   License requirement
   
110.22   Application procedure
   
110.23   Standards for issuance
   
110.24   Revocation procedure
   
110.25   Standards for revocation
   
110.26   Appeal procedure
   
110.27   Exhibition of identification
   
110.28   City policy on soliciting
   
110.29   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.30   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
110.31   Prohibited solicitation
Sidewalk Café License
   
110.50   Definition
   
110.51   License required
   
110.52   Application for license
   
110.53   Conditions
   
110.54   Display of license
   
110.55   Revocation procedure
 
   
110.99   Penalty
TOBACCO
§ 110.01 TOBACCO; LICENSE FOR SALE.
   Every person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation
desiring a license to sell tobacco, vapor nicotine products or alternative
nicotine products at retail shall file with the City Clerk a written
application, on forms provided by the city, stating the name of the person,
partnership, limited liability company, or corporation for whom the license is
desired and the exact location of the place of business and shall deposit with
the application a license fee as provided in the City of Wahoo master fee
resolution. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall include
the applicant’s social security number.
(Neb. RS 28-1422, 28-1423) (Ord. 1662, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 2344, passed 4-
9-20)
§ 110.02 RE-ISSUANCE OF REVOKED AND FORFEITED LICENSE.
   (A)   If a license issued under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 is revoked
and forfeited as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425 for a violation of Neb. RS 28-
1429.04 or 28-1429.05, no new license shall be issued to such licensee until
the expiration of five years after the date of such revocation and forfeiture.
   (B)   If a license issued under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 is revoked
and forfeited as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425 for any other violation of Neb. RS
28-1418 through 28-1429.03, 28-1429.06, and 28-1429.07, no new license shall be
issued to such licensee until the expiration of one year after the date of such
revocation and forfeiture except as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 28-1423.
(Ord. 2482, passed - -25)
§ 110.03 RIGHTS OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   The license provided for in §§
110.01 and
110.02 shall, when issued, authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, electronic
nicotine delivery systems, cigarettes, and cigarette material by the licensee
and employees to persons 21 years of age or over, at the place of business
described in the license for the term therein authorized, unless the license is
forfeited as a result of court action as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425.
   (B)   If the license is revoked and forfeited pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1425,
all rights under the license shall at once cease and terminate and a new
license shall not be issued until the expiration of the period provided for in
Neb. RS 28-1429.
(Ord. 2482, passed - -25)
Statutory reference:
   Rights of tobacco sales licensee, see Neb. RS 28-1424
§ 110.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation
desiring a license under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 shall file with the
City Clerk a written application stating:
      (1)   The name of the person, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation for whom the license is desired;
      (2)   An email address for contacting such person, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation; and
      (3)   The exact location of the place of business.
   (B)   Each applicant shall also deposit with the application the amount of
the license fee provided in §
112.03.
   (C)   If the applicant is an individual, the application shall include the
applicant’s Social Security number.
   (D)   Any Clerk or Finance Department that grants such a license shall
notify the Tax Commissioner of such granting and transmit all applicable
application materials received to the Tax Commissioner.
(Ord. 2482, passed - -25)
FIREWORKS
§ 110.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter words phrases and terms shall be construed
as defined in Neb. RS Chapter 28 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)
§ 110.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or offer
for sale at retail any permissible fireworks in the city unless such person has
first obtained a license from the city as a retailer.
   (B)   No person or organization may receive more than one license during any
one calendar year. Each license shall be granted for one specific location
identified by an address or suitable area description on the application.
Licenses shall be considered personal to the applicant and may not be assigned
in any manner.
('72 Code, § 7-401) (Ord. 1577, passed 6-12-97; Am. Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a license required under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be made in the office of the City Clerk only between January 1
and April 1 of each year on an application form prescribed and furnished by the
City Clerk. The application form shall require of the applicant the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, and if applicant
is a corporation, or a similar type organization, then in addition to the
aforenoted information, the name, address, and telephone number of a contact
person who shall be responsible for the fireworks license;
      (2)   A plot plan showing the location of the stand, address, legal
description, setback from street right-of-way, distance to nearest building or
structure, and occupancy of nearest structure or structures, said plot plan
also to include the area 100 feet on either side of said area to be utilized
and the nature of the structures within said area;
      (3)   The zoning district in which the area to be utilized by the
applicant for the sale of permissible fireworks at retail is located;
      (4)   A list of persons, over the age of l9 years, who will be employed
by the applicant and who, at any given time, will be in charge of the place of
sale of permissible fireworks;
      (5)   Such other information as may be required for the enforcement of
this subchapter.
      (6)   Agree to be bound by all ordinances of the city and to comply with
all laws, regulations and rules of the State of Nebraska;
      (7)   To be signed and acknowledged by the applicant.
   (B)   If the application is for a license for the sale of permissible
fireworks at retail at a location within the NRC Neighborhood Residential
Commercial, C-1 Central Business and C-2 Highway Commercial Districts of the
city, the City Clerk shall issue a written permit or denial thereof, with
reasons in writing, if denied, within 15 days from the date of the filing of
the application.
   (C)   If the application for a license for the sale of permissible fireworks
at retail is located within any other zoning district of the city for which a
Permitted Special Use is required, the City Clerk shall submit said application
to the Mayor and City Council at their next regular or special meeting for
discussion and action. Only the provisions of Article 6, Sections 6.1 and 6.2
of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable and all other provisions of Article
6 shall not be applicable to the permitted special use application for the sale
of permissible fireworks at retail. The Mayor and City Council shall issue a
written permit or denial thereof, with reasons in writing, if denied, within 15
days from the date of the meeting of the Mayor and City Council regarding said
application.
   (D)   Applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a nonrefundable application
processing fee as follows:
      (1)   $50 if the site of the fireworks location is in either the NRC, C-
1 or C-2 Zoning Districts;
      (2)   $100 if the site for the fireworks location is other than in the
NRC, C-1 or C-2 Zoning Districts.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)
§ 110.13 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All fireworks stands, booths, or other places of sale of fireworks
shall be located and setback at least 25 feet from the nearest right-of-way
line of any public right-of-way and be separated from any permanent building
structure by a minimum of 15 feet. Fireworks shall be sold within either:
      (1)   A temporary building structure utilizing a booth or stand allowing
for walkup sales;
      (2)   A temporary building structure which allows patrons to enter the
structure; or
      (3)   A tent;
   Provided, however, no structure or tent used for the sale of fireworks shall
exceed a maximum floor space of 1,250 square feet. In addition, structures or
tents used for the sale of fireworks must have a minimum of three entryways
which shall be a minimum of three feet across and be as remote from the other
entryways as is practicable giving the size and design of the structure or
tent. Tents used for the sale of fireworks shall be flame retardant and a
licensee using such shall keep proof at the sales location that the tent is
flame retardant.
   (B)   Stands and areas where fireworks are to be sold shall be located at
least 75 feet from any gasoline service station or automotive repair shop using
flammable materials. Such distances shall be measured from the closest point
where fireworks are sold or stored to the closest point where gasoline or
combustible material is dispensed or stored above ground.
   (C)   If the application is approved, the license may be obtained at the
office of the City Clerk only after the following:
      (1)   An inspection by personnel of the city of the fireworks stand or
place of sale to determine if such stand or place of sale conforms to all city
laws, standards, building codes, and land use regulations. The applicant for a
license required by the provisions of thissubchapter shall request the city to
make such inspection not later than June 23 of each calendar year, and such
inspection shall be made by the city within 24 hours after the request;
      (2)   Payment of the city occupation tax as set forth in
Chapter 112 of this code;
      (3)   Execution of a consent form agreeing to abide by all regulations
imposed by the city pertaining to the sale of fireworks;
      (4)   Payment to the city of a cash bond in the amount of $500,
conditioned that the licensee shall abide by any and all regulations of by the
city pertaining to the sale of fireworks and that the licensee shall clean the
area in and around any stand where fireworks are sold and remove any portable
stand from its temporary location, such work to be done by July 7 of each year.
In the event any portable stand is not removed from its temporary location
within the allotted time, or the sale area is not cleaned and the debris and
trash not removed therefrom, then the cash bond shall be forfeited and the
proceeds used by the city to clean the area and remove the stand;
      (5)   Furnishing proof to the City Clerk that licensee has obtained a
valid License for Sale of Fireworks from the State of Nebraska for the sale of
permissible fireworks at retail for the fireworks site in the city.
   (D)   Cash bonds, as provided in division (C) above shall be returned to the
licensee when personnel of the city have certified that the conditions of the
bond have been satisfied.
   (E)   Licenses issued under the provisions of §§
110.10 through
110.16 shall be valid only for the calendar year in which issued.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.14 FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
   A minimum of a ten pound Class A fire extinguisher must be kept in each
fireworks stand at all times.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.15 REQUIREMENTS OF STATE OF NEBRASKA.
   In addition to all other requirements and regulations of the city, all
sellers of fireworks shall comply with all laws regulations and rules of the
State of Nebraska dealing with the sale and distribution of fireworks.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)
§ 110.16 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be displayed
at all times at the place of business of the licensee.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01) Penalty, see §
110.99
PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
§ 110.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the city.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a solicitor is not
a peddler.
§ 110.21 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the City Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.22 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk. This application shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a
corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning
the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock;
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the city, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C), a
statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to the
date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.23 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant's
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done the following will
constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application; or
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like; or
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 110.24 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
110.25. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address,
at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 110.25 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
or
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license; or
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter; or
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
§ 110.26 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
110.23 or
110.25 shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
110.24.
   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 110.27 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this chapter. The license shall contain the words "Licensed Peddler" or
"Licensed Solicitor," the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he is
engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.28 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the
residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 110.29 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   "NO SOLICITORS INVITED"
   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height. For the purpose of
uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to persons
requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 110.30 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in § 110.29 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the
solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.31 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m. or in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provisions of §
110.29 above.
(Ord. 2416, passed 1-24-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
SIDEWALK CAFÉ LICENSE
§ 110.50 DEFINITION.
   (A)   SIDEWALK CAFÉ shall mean an outdoor area, adjacent to a street level
eating or drinking establishment which derives 65% or more of its gross
proceeds from the sale of food, located upon a portion of the public pedestrian
walkway and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian  circulation.
The area shall be separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or
landscaping or a combination thereof.
   (B)   Any person or persons operating a sidewalk café whether or not as a
part of premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquors at retail, shall comply
with all zoning regulations, including obtaining a conditional use permit as
may be required, and comply with all conditions established by the City Council
as part of such conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.51 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A sidewalk café occupying any portion of the public space abutting the
record owner's property must obtain and meet the conditions of a sidewalk café
license.
   (B)   The annual fee for a sidewalk café license shall be $100 non pro-
rated, and every license shall terminate on the 30th day of April next
following the issuance of the same.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.52 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a sidewalk café license required under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be made in the office of the City Clerk on an
application form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk. The application
form shall require of the applicant the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant (the licensee
holding the State of Nebraska Class I Liquor License, if applicable);
      (2)   A plot plan showing the location, size and capacity of the sidewalk
café and adjoining licensed structure, entrances and exits, ground surface,
location, size and construction of surrounding walls, fences or barriers, and
surrounding properties and structures within 150 feet;
      (3)   The zoning district in which the use is located;
      (4)   Description of the food and drink (alcoholic and/or non-alcoholic)
to be offered for sale. If alcoholic drinks are to be offered for sale,
documentation must be included with the application demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the city that:
         (a)   The business has a licensed kitchen and offers a full menu
during the hours and days of operation of the sidewalk café;
         (b)   Gross sales from the sale of alcoholic drinks do not exceed 35%
of the gross sales of food and drink;
      (5)   The number of patrons which the proposed sidewalk café is designed
to accommodate;
      (6)   The hours of operation for the proposed sidewalk café;
      (7)   How the extended premises will be supervised and maintained;
      (8)   Proof of comprehensive general liability, broad form property
damage and blanket contractual liability insurance in a combined single limit
amount, per claim and aggregate, of at least $1,000,000 covering the
applicant's operations on the city's sidewalk. Such insurance shall name on a
special endorsement form, the city, its elected and appointed boards, officers,
agents and employees as additional insureds. The certificate of insurance shall
contain provisions that prohibit cancellations, modifications or lapse without
30 days’ prior written notice to the city.
      (9)   A statement by applicant that said applicant will, in consideration
of being issued a license for the use of sidewalk space, agree to hold harmless
the city and the officers and employees of the city for any loss or damage
arising out of the use, or the discontinuance of any use of the sidewalk space:
that said applicant understands that the use of the sidewalk space is to be
temporary, on a day-to-day basis; that applicant shall not acquire any right,
title, or interest in such sidewalk space; that applicant may be required by
the city at any time to vacate all or any part of the sidewalk said applicant
has been given permission to use: that upon demand to vacate such sidewalk
space, applicant shall promptly remove any personal property placed thereon and
return the sidewalk space to the same condition that it was prior to the
commencement of use by applicant, or reimburse the city for the cost of moving
such personal property and restoring the sidewalk space to its prior condition;
that said applicant shall have no recourse against either the city or its
officers or agents, either for any loss or damage occasioned by his or her
being required to vacate all or any part of the sidewalk space which applicant
has been granted permission to use;
      (10)   Agree to be bound by all ordinances of the city and to comply with
all laws, regulations and rules of the State of Nebraska;
      (11)   To be signed and acknowledged by the applicant.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.53 CONDITIONS.
   No sidewalk café shall be permitted, maintained, or operated on the public
right-of-way except in conformity with the following regulations:
   (A)   The sidewalk café area shall be particularly described and included
within the application for Class I Liquor License licensed premises, if
applicable.
   (B)   A minimum of six feet of clear path of travel is required on all
sidewalks located within the C-l Downtown Commercial District. A minimum of
five feet of clear path of travel is required on all other sidewalks in all
other zoning districts. The clear path of travel is measured from the outside
edge of the sidewalk café fencing or fence post base to the nearest obstruction
(i.e. light pole, bike rack, planting strip, etc.). If no obstruction exists,
the clear path of travel is measured to the back of the curb.
   (C)   Fencing, roping or railing may be required to ensure safety of
pedestrian traffic. Any such fencing must be detectable by cane to warn
visually impaired persons of potential hazards in the path of travel.
   (D)   All electrical wiring shall comply with national, state, and city
electrical codes. Electrical cords or strings of lights may not be strung over
or be placed on the pedestrian path of travel.
   (E)   The licensee shall ensure that all structures comprising the sidewalk
café including but not limited to chairs, tables, fencing, bollards, and
planters, will be removed during periods of non-use and at the expiration of
this license.
   (F)   No amplified sound or music is permitted outside the enclosed building
premises. Any noise emanating from the sidewalk café shall not violate the
regulations concerning noise.
   (G)   Sidewalk cafés shall not be used for smoking.
   (H)   The area shall be adequately illuminated by electric lights, but such
illumination shall be so arranged and shielded by the licensee so as to reflect
away from adjoining property and streets.
   (I)   Occupancy capacity shall be clearly posted.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.54 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be displayed
at all times at the place of business of the licensee.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.55 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any sidewalk café license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
City Council after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards of the above
conditions. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at its last known address,
at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing before the City
Council.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or any licensee who violates any of the provisions of §§
110.10 through
110.16 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and subject to a penalty as
provided in §
10.99 and in addition thereto, any person who is licensed shall be subject to
the revocation of such license. Upon a complaint being filed with the City
Clerk, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee in writing and shall order a
hearing before the City Council to show cause why said license should not be
revoked and the licensee's bond forfeited to city. The hearing shall not be
more than three days after the filing of the complaint. The City Council shall
conduct a special hearing for the purpose of determining whether such license
shall be revoked and the licensee's bond forfeited to the city. The licensee
shall appear in person or by his/her/its attorney, and if the City Council
revokes said license, no refund of any portion of the application fee or
occupation tax shall be made to the licensee and the licensee shall immediately
close all businesses at all places under such license and the bond of the
licensee shall be forfeited to city.
(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)
CHAPTER 111: PROFESSIONAL LICENSES
Section
Plumbers
   
111.01   License required; exceptions
   
111.02   Licensing requirements; examination; exceptions
   
111.03   Bond
   
111.04   Licensing of the firm
   
111.05   Expiration and renewal of licensing
   
111.06   Revocation of license
   
111.07   Unlawful use or transfer of license
   
111.08   Permit required
   
111.09   Permit application
   
111.10   Inspections
Electricians
   
111.25   License required; exceptions
   
111.26   Licensing requirements
   
111.27   Bond
   
111.28   Licensing of the firm
   
111.29   Expiration and renewal of licensing
   
111.30   Revocation of license
   
111.31   Unlawful use or transfer of license
   
111.32   Permit required
   
111.33   Inspections
HVAC Contractors
   
111.50   License required; exceptions
   
111.51   Licensing requirements; examinations
   
111.52   Bond
   
111.53   Licensing of the firm
   
111.54   Expiration and renewal of licensing
   
111.55   Revocation of license
   
111.56   Unlawful use or transfer of license
   
111.57   Permit required
   
111.58   Permit application
   
111.59   Inspections
Tree Contractor Licensing
   
111.70   License required; exceptions
   
111.71   Application for license
   
111.72   Authority to deny issuance of license
   
111.73   Revocation of licenses
   
111.74   Expiration and renewal of licensing
Lawn Sprinkler Installer Licensing
   
111.85   License required; exceptions
   
111.86   Application for license
   
111.87   Expiration and renewal of licensing
   
111.88   Authority to deny issuance of license
   
111.89   Revocation of licenses
PLUMBERS
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of a
master plumber in the city until he or she shall have been licensed as a master
plumber. Application for licensing shall be made in writing to the Building
Inspector, showing the name of the applicant, the business location of the
applicant, and such other information as may be required.
('72 Code, § 10-401)
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter relating to plumbers shall not apply
to any public utility company or companies serving the city and its inhabitants
under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents and employees, and
shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon any franchises
heretofore granted by the city.
(’72 Code, § 10-408) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1910 and 18-1911
§ 111.02 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; EXAMINATION; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Before the applicant shall be licensed as a master plumber, they shall
provide proof of passage of similar examination in another municipality, or ICC
certification. Without this they may have to submit to an examination to
determine his or her fitness and competency to engage in the business of a
master plumber which examination shall be given by the Building Inspector as
hereinafter provided. Upon the payment of the required licensing fee, as set by
resolution of the City Council, such applicant, after having by said
examination shown himself or herself to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector to be fit, competent, and qualified to engage in the business of a
master plumber and having gained final approval from the City Council, shall be
licensed and given a certificate of licensing signed by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The examination shall consist of two parts:
      (1)   Written examination which shall count as 50% percent;
      (2)   Personal interview and past experience, which shall count as 50%
percent.
   (C)   The examination shall be passed to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector. A grade of 70% shall be considered as passing. A licensing fee, as
set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City Clerk upon
application for a license, prior to the issuance of said examination.
   (D)   The Building Inspector may, at his or her discretion, waive the
written examination requirement. This may only be done where an applicant is
requesting a limited license, as for outdoor lawn sprinkler installations,
water softener installations or sewer and septic system installations. The
Building Inspector may, through a personal interview and review of the
applicant's past experience, determine the applicant to be fit, competent, and
qualified to engage in the limited business as stated in the application for
licensing. After gaining approval by the Building Inspector and final approval
from the City Council, said applicant shall be licensed and given a certificate
of limited licensing signed by the City Clerk. Said certificate shall clearly
state the limit of the license as stated on the application.
(’72 Code, § 10-402) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1907 and 18-1910
§ 111.03 BOND.
   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk a bond, in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the City
Council or a surety bond of the same amount issued by an approved corporate
surety company. Said bond shall contain the condition that the applicant shall
defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all liabilities,
claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of every nature and description
caused by the willful or negligent conduct of the plumber while engaged in the
business of plumbing. The provisions of this section may be satisfied by the
applicant depositing with the Clerk an insurance policy providing public
liability and property damage insurance to the city and the general public in
the same amount as the bond, executed by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of Nebraska; provided, an endorsement, approved as to
form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to and become part of each and
every such liability insurance policy deposited with the city. Said endorsement
shall contain each and every condition of said bond required by the City
Council. The obligee of said bond or the beneficiary of said insurance policy
shall be the city, and action may be maintained thereon by anyone injured by a
breach of the conditions of said bond or of the covenants contained in the
required endorsement on said policy of insurance for a period of one year after
the completion of any plumbing work.
(’72 Code, § 10-403) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-207 and 17-505
§ 111.04 LICENSING OF THE FIRM.
   Any firm may be licensed hereunder as a master plumber in the name of such
firm provided that such firm shall have a master plumber who is duly licensed
as provided in this subchapter. Such master plumber must be a bona fide officer
of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the firm and is
actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical installation of
plumbing and drainage. Said master plumber listed and licensed by such firm
shall be in actual charge of and responsible for the installation, removal, or
repair of any plumbing or drainage work done by such firm. Before the firm
shall be licensed as a master plumber, there shall be filed with the City Clerk
a certificate from the Building Inspector showing the fitness and competency of
the individual or individuals who are qualified as master plumbers and who
shall be in charge of the firm's plumbing and drainage laying activities. One
individual must qualify as a master plumber to enable said firm to hold a
master plumber's license. In the event said individual withdraws from or ceases
to be connected with the firm, the Building Inspector shall forthwith revoke
the license of the firm.
(’72 Code, § 10-404) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1907
§ 111.05 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.
   (A)   All licenses shall expire December 31 of each year after their
issuance and shall not be assignable. At the time of expiration, a license may
be renewed upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, without an
examination.
   (B)   Licensees shall have 90 days after the date of expiration of a license
to renew. In order to renew the license, licensee must file a current bond or
insurance policy as stated in § 111.03 with the City Clerk. Licensee must also
pay the renewal fee, as set by resolution of Council. If said conditions are
not met, the license will be considered expired. If a license is allowed to
expire, the initial licensing requirements must be met, and fees paid.
(’72 Code, § 10-405) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1908
§ 111.06 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any master
plumber's license, upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, if the
same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown
to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the
provisions of the City Plumbing Code. If a license is revoked, the holder of
the same shall not apply for license for one year after such revocation.
(’72 Code, § 10-406) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1909
§ 111.07 UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No licensed plumber shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation of any
work, and if any licensed plumber violates this provision, the City Council
shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such plumber. In addition to
having his or her license revoked, such master plumber may be prosecuted under
the violation section of this code.
(’72 Code, § 10-407) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-207 and 17-505
§ 111.08 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencing the construction, modification, or repair of any water
service, sewer, drain, or other plumbing work, the plumber shall first obtain a
written permit from the Building Inspector. Such permit shall be upon the
premises at all times during the progress of work and must be shown to any
officer in authority on demand
(’72 Code, § 10-409) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
§ 111.09 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Applications for a permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector
on blanks furnished by the city. Permit fees shall be charged in such amount as
may be set by resolution of the City Council and shall include the cost of
inspection. Applications shall show the exact location of the proposed work
and, when required, the plumber shall submit plans and specifications of the
proposed work to the Building Inspector for his or her approval. Applications
for permits shall be filed with the Building Inspector 24 hours before their
issuance.
(’72 Code, § 10-410) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
§ 111.10 INSPECTIONS.
   At the time of the issuance of the permit, the Building Inspector shall make
the applicant aware of the inspections required by the City Plumbing Code. Any
testing required shall be conducted in the presence of the Building Inspector
or his or her agent. No plumbing shall be covered or concealed until the same
has been inspected and approved in writing by the Building Inspector or his or
her agent. If a proper inspection cannot be made because plumbing has been
covered or concealed, expenses for the removal and replacement of property and
materials to allow for a proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the
master plumber of firm.
(’72 Code, § 10-411) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
ELECTRICIANS
§ 111.25 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of a
master electrician in the city until he or she shall have been licensed as a
master electrician. Application for licensing shall be made in writing to the
Building Inspector showing the name of the applicant, the business location of
the applicant, and such other information as may be required.
('72 Code, § 10-412)
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter relating to electricians shall not
apply to any public utility company or companies serving the city and its
inhabitants under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents and
employees, and shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon any
franchises heretofore granted by the city.
(’72 Code, § 10-419) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 81-2121
§ 111.26 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   Before the applicant shall be licensed as a master electrician, he or she
shall submit to the Building Inspector a copy of his or her current
electrician's license issued by the State of Nebraska. Upon the payment of the
required licensing fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, such
applicant having by said presentation of state electrician's license, shown
himself or herself to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector to be fit,
competent, and qualified to engage in the business of a master electrician and
having gained final approval from the City Council, shall be licensed and given
a certificate of licensing signed by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.27 BOND.
   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk a bond, in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council, signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the City
Council or a surety bond of the same amount issued by an approved corporate
surety company. Said bond shall contain the condition that the applicant shall
defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all liabilities,
claims, damages, judgements, costs and expenses of every nature and
description, caused by the willful or negligent conduct of the electrician
arising from his or her electrical work or violation of the City Electrical
Code. The provisions of this section may be satisfied by the applicant
depositing with the Clerk an insurance policy providing public liability and
property damage insurance to the city and the general public in the same amount
as the bond, executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Nebraska; provided, an endorsement, approved as to form by the City
Attorney, shall be attached to and become part of each and every such liability
insurance policy deposited with the city. Said endorsement shall contain each
and every condition of said bond or of the covenants contained in the required
endorsement on said policy of insurance for a period of one year after the
completion of any electrical work.
(’72 Code, § 10-414) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-207 and 17-505
§ 111.28 LICENSING OF THE FIRM.
   All firms may be licensed hereunder as a master electrician in the name of
the firm provided that such firm shall have a master electrician who is duly
licensed as provided in this subchapter. Such electrician must be a bona fide
officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the firm and is
actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical installation of
electrical work. Such master electrician listed and licensed by such firm shall
be in actual charge of and responsible for installation, removal, or repair of
any electrical work done by such firm. Before the firm shall be licensed as a
master electrician, there shall be filed with the City Clerk a certificate from
the Building Inspector showing the fitness and competency of the individual or
individuals who are qualified as master electricians and who shall be in charge
of the firm's electrical work. One individual must qualify as master
electrician to enable said firm to hold a master's electrician's license. In
the event said individual withdraws from or ceases to be connected with the
firm, the Building Inspector shall forthwith revoke the license of the firm.
(’72 Code, § 10-415) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-207 and 17-505
§ 111.29 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.
   (A)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall not be
assignable.
   (B)   Licensees shall have 90 days after the date of expiration of a license
to renew. In order to renew the license, licensee must file proof of insurance
as stated in § 111.71 with the City Clerk. Licensee must also pay the license
renewal fee. If said conditions are not met, the license will be considered
expired. If a license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing requirements
must be met, and fees paid.
(’72 Code, § 10-416) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 81-2115
§ 111.30 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any master
electrician's license, upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, if
the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is
shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of
the provisions of the City Electrical Code. If a license is revoked, the holder
of the same shall not apply for license for one year after such revocation.
(’72 Code, § 10-417) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 81-2104
§ 111.31 UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No licensed electrician shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation of any
work, and if any licensed electrician violates this provision, the City Council
shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such electrician. In addition to
having his or her license revoked, such master electrician may be prosecuted
under the penalty section of this code.
(’72 Code, § 10-418) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-207 and 17-505
§ 111.32 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencing the installation of wiring or other electrical work, the
electrician shall first obtain a written permit from the State of Nebraska, as
required, or if a state permit is not required, from the Building Inspector.
Such permit shall be upon the premises at all times during the progress of work
and must be to shown any officer in authority on demand.
(’72 Code, § 10-420) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
§ 111.33 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of all electricians to call for the necessary
inspections of all electrical work done, whether from the State Electrical
Inspector or from the Building Inspector. No electrical work shall be covered
or concealed until proper inspection can be made and approved in writing by the
State Electrical Inspector or Building Inspector or his or her agent. If a
proper inspection cannot be made because electrical work has been covered or
concealed, expenses for the removal and replacement of property and materials
to allow for a proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the master
electrician or firm.
(’72 Code, § 10-421) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-
22-22)
HVAC CONTRACTORS
§ 111.50 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of HVAC
installation and repair in the city until he or she shall have been licensed as
an HVAC contractor. Application for licensing shall be made in writing to the
Building Inspector, showing the name of the applicant, the business location of
the applicant, and such other information as may be required.
   (B)   The provision of this subchapter relating to HVAC contractors shall
not apply to any public utility company or companies serving the city and its
inhabitants under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents and
employees and shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon any
franchises heretofore granted by the city.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.51 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   Before the applicant shall be licensed as an HVAC contractor, they
shall provide proof of passage of similar examination in another municipality,
or ICC Certification. Without this they may have to submit to an examination to
determine his or her fitness and competency to engage in the business of HVAC
installation and repair, which examination shall be given by the Building
Inspector as hereinafter provided. Upon the payment of the required licensing
fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, such applicant, after having by
said examination shown himself or herself to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector to be fit, competent and qualified to engage in the business of HVAC
installation and repair and having gained final approval from the City Council,
shall be licensed, and given a certificate of licensing signed by the City
Clerk.
   (B)   The examination shall consist of two parts:
      (1)   Written examination which shall count as 50%;
      (2)   Personal interview and past experience, which shall count as 50%.
   (C)   The examination shall be passed to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector. A grade of 70% shall be considered passing. A licensing fee, as set
by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City Clerk upon
application for a license prior to the issuance of said examination.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.52 BOND.
   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk a bond, in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council, signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the City
Council or a surety bond of the same amount issued by an approved corporate
surety company. Said bond shall contain the condition that the applicant shall
defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all liabilities,
claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of the business of HVAC
installation and repair. The provisions of this section may be satisfied by the
applicant depositing with the Clerk an insurance policy providing public
liability and property damage insurance to the city and the general public in
the same amount as the bond, executed by an insurance company authorized to do
business with the State of Nebraska; provided, an endorsement, approved as to
form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to and become part of each and
every such liability insurance policy deposited with the city. Said endorsement
shall contain each and every condition of said bond or of the covenants in the
required endorsement on said policy of insurance for a period of one year after
the completion of any HVAC work.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.53 LICENSING OF THE FIRM.
   Any firm may be licensed hereunder as an HVAC contractor in the name of such
firm provided that such firm shall have an HVAC contractor who is duly licensed
as provided in this subchapter. Such HVAC contractor must be a bona fide
officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the firm and is
actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical installation of
HVAC installation and repair. Said HVAC contractor listed and licensed by such
firm shall be in actual charge of and responsible for the installation,
removal, or repair of any HVAC system done by such firm. Before the firm shall
be licensed as an HVAC contractor, there shall be filed with the City Clerk a
certificate from the Building Inspector showing the fitness and competency of
the individual or individuals who are qualified as HVAC contractors and who
shall be in charge of the firm's HVAC system activities. One individual must
qualify as an HVAC contractor to enable said firm to hold an HVAC contractor's
license. In the event said individual withdraws from or ceases to be connected
with the firm the Building Inspector shall forthwith revoke the license of the
firm.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.54 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.
   (A)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall not be
assignable.
   (B)   Licensees shall have 90 days after the date of expiration of a license
to renew. In order to renew the license, licensee must file proof of insurance
as stated in § 111.71 with the City Clerk. Licensee must also pay the license
renewal fee. If said conditions are not met, the license will be considered
expired. If a license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing requirements
must be met, and fees paid.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.55 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke an HVAC
contractor's license upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, if the
same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown
to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the
provisions of the City Mechanical Code. If a license is revoked, the holder of
the same shall not apply for license for one year after such revocation.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.56 UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No licensed HVAC contractor shall allow his or her name to be used by
another person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation
of any work, and if any licensed HVAC contractor violates this provision, the
City Council shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such HVAC contractor.
In addition to having his or her license revoked, such HVAC contractor may be
prosecuted under the violation section of this code.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.57 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencing the construction, modification, or repair of any
mechanical system, the HVAC contractor shall first obtain a written permit from
the Building Inspector. Such permit shall be upon the premises at all times
during the progress of work and must be shown to any officer in authority on
demand.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.58 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Applications for a permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector
on blanks furnished by the city. Permit fees shall be charged in such amount as
may be set by resolution of the City Council and shall include the cost of
inspection. Applications shall show the exact location of the proposed work and
when required, the HVAC contractor shall submit plans and specifications of the
proposed work to the Building Inspector for his or her approval. Applications
for permits shall be filed with the Building Inspector 24 hours before their
issuance.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.59 INSPECTIONS.
   At the time of the issuance of the permit, the Building Inspector shall make
the applicant aware of the inspections required by the City Mechanical Code.
Any testing required shall be conducted in the presence of the Building
Inspector or his or her agent. If a proper inspection cannot be made because
HVAC work done has been covered or concealed, expenses for the removal and
replacement of property and materials to allow for a proper inspection shall be
the responsibility of the HVAC contractor or firm.
(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
TREE CONTRACTOR LICENSING
§ 111.70 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of
cutting, pruning, or removing trees on public or private property within the
city for commercial gain or profit without employing a person to supervise such
work who is a licensee under this subchapter.
   (B)   All tree related work in the city must be performed in accordance with
all requirements of the City of Wahoo Tree Ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter
98: Trees and Shrubs. Any licensee not complying with the requirements of the
City Tree Ordinance may have his or her license suspended or revoked pursuant
to the provisions stated in “Revocation of Licenses.”
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter relating to licensing of tree
contractors shall not apply to any public service company including utilities
and their agents or contractors or city employees doing such work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.71 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a tree contractor license shall:
   (A)   Apply on the form provided by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Provide written evidence of possession of liability insurance coverage
in the minimum amounts of $1 million/occurrence, $2 million aggregate, $300,000
bodily injury and $100,000 property damage which indemnifies the City of Wahoo
or any person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as
herein described.
   (C)   Pay the annual license fee.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.72 AUTHORITY TO DENY ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The City Administrator and/or Parks and Recreation Director may deny an
application for a license under this subchapter upon determination that:
   (A)   The applicant has had any contractor's license revoked or suspended;
or
   (B)   The applicant has previously failed to comply with the ordinances and
regulations of the City of Wahoo relating to conducting any business licensed
by this code.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.73 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any tree
contractor's license, upon the recommendation of the City Administrator and/or
Parks and Recreation Director, if the same was obtained through error or fraud,
or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has
willfully violated any of the provisions of the City Tree Ordinance, or fails
to maintain required insurance. If a license is revoked, the holder of the same
shall not apply for license for one year after such revocation.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.74 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.
   (A)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall not be
assignable.
   (B)   Licensees shall have 90 days after the date of expiration of a license
to renew. In order to renew the license, licensee must file proof of insurance
as stated in § 111.71 with the City Clerk. Licensee must also pay the license
renewal fee. If said conditions are not met, the license will be considered
expired. If a license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing requirements
must be met, and fees paid.
(Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17; Am. Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
LAWN SPRINKLER INSTALLER LICESNING
§ 111.85 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of cutting,
pruning, or removing trees on public or private property within the city for
commercial gain or profit without employing a person to supervise such work who
is a licensee under this chapter.
(Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.86 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a lawn sprinkler installer license shall:
   (A)   Apply on the form provided by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Provide written evidence of possession of liability insurance coverage
in the minimum amounts of $1 million/occurrence, $2 million aggregate, $300,000
bodily injury and $100,000 property damage which indemnifies the City of Wahoo,
or any person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as
herein described.
   (C)   Pay the annual license fee.
(Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.87 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.
   (A)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall not be
assignable. At the time of expiration, a license may be renewed upon the
recommendation of the Building Inspector, without an examination.
   (B)   Licensees shall have 90 days after the date of expiration of a license
to renew. In order to renew the license, licensee must file a current bond or
insurance policy as stated in § 111.03 with the City Clerk. Licensee must also
pay the renewal fee, as set by resolution of Council. If said conditions are
not met, the license will be considered expired. If a license is allowed to
expire, the initial licensing requirements must be met, and fees paid.
(Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.88 AUTHORITY TO DENY ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The applicant has had any contractor's license revoked or suspended;
or
   (B)   The applicant has previously failed to comply with the ordinances and
regulations of the City of Wahoo relating to conducting any business licensed
by this code.
(Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
§ 111.89 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any master
electrician's license, upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, if
the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is
shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of
the provisions of the City Electrical Code. If a license is revoked, the holder
of the same shall not apply for license for one year after such revocation.
(Ord. 2407, passed 11-22-22)
CHAPTER 112: OCCUPATION TAXES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Amounts
   
112.02   Mechanical amusement devices
   
112.03   Electric utilities
   
112.04   Lodging
   
112.05   Fire insurance companies
   
112.06   Natural gas utilities
   
112.07   Collection
   
112.08   Certificates
   
112.09   Failure to pay
Telecommunication Services
   
112.25   Definitions
   
112.26   Amount
   
112.27   Gross receipts; exceptions
   
112.28   Payment
   
112.29   Statement of gross receipts
   
112.30   Use of funds
   
112.31   Economic Development Budget
Cross-reference:
   Gas division; occupation tax, see § 52.12
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 AMOUNTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of raising revenue, an occupation tax is hereby levied
on the following businesses:
   Alcoholic Beverages (Based on license class, except non-profits 
      Class A, Beer Only, on premise consumption               $100
      Class B, Beer Only, off premise consumption              $100
      Class C (not available in the city)                       
      Class D, Alcoholic Liquor, off premise consumption       $200
      Class I, Alcoholic Liquor, on premise consumption        $250
      Non-profits                                              $ 50
   Bowling Alley:                                                  
      First two alleys or less, per year                       $25
      For each additional alley, per year                      $10
   Buses, per year                                                $10
   Electricians, original license, per year                       $40
      Renewal License, per year                                $25
   Fire Insurance Companies, per year                             $5
   Fireworks                                                       
      Selling Permissable Fireworks at Retail, per day         $20
   Hawkers and Peddlers, per day                                  $10
      Per year                                                 $100
   HVAC Contractor (mechanical), original license, per year       $40
      Renewal License, per year                                $25
   Plumbers, original license, per year                           $40
      Renewal License, per year                                $25
   Tree Contractors, original license, per year                   $40
      Renewal License, per year                             $25
   Railroad Companies, per year                                   $25
   Trailer Camps, first 2 lots, per year                          $10
      Each additional lot, per year                            $5
 
   (B)   (1)   Garbage and refuse collectors. All garbage and refuse collection
haulers with whom the city has approved as permitted haulers within the city,
and who collect, remove, and dispose of garbage and refuse for residential
units, group dwellings, and commercial establishments within the city shall pay
an occupation tax in the amount of 5% of the charge for said service provided;
said occupation tax shall be payable to the city monthly, on or before the 20th
day of the subsequent month of the service provided. All monies received by the
city from the aforenoted occupation tax shall be utilized by the city for solid
waste management activities, at the discretion of the Mayor and Council of the
city.
(’72 Code, § 10-601) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 10-14-93; Am. Ord. 1562, passed 11-
14-96; Am. Ord. 1577, passed 6-12-97; Am. Ord. 1790, passed 2-13-02; Am. Ord.
1927, passed 4-27-06; Am. Ord. 2002, passed 9-11-08; Am. Ord. 2012, passed 2-
19-09; Am. Ord. 2033, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 2085, passed 2-9-12; Am. Ord.
2179, passed 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 2256, passed 10-26-17)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-525
§ 112.02 MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   Every person who owns or who operates, maintains for use, or permits the use
of, on any premises or place occupied by him or her, any mechanical amusement
device shall pay an annual occupation tax in the following amounts:
 
   Pool Tables                                       
      First Table                                $25
      Second Table                               $15
      Third Table                                $10
      Each additional table                      $5
   Shuffleboards, per table                         $25
   All other mechanical amusement devices, per machi$10
 
('72 Code, § 10-601.01) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)
§ 112.03 ELECTRIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   There is imposed an occupation tax upon any electric utility utilizing
the public right-of-way of the city for the distribution of electricity of two
mills per kilowatt hour.
   (B)   The City Electric Division, a part of the City Utilities Department,
any other electric utility which utilizes the City Electrical Division
distribution system, or installs its own electric distribution system in the
public right-of-way of the city, shall install and maintain, at their expense,
electric meter or meters at the site or sites where said electricity enters the
City Electrical Division distribution system or first enters the public right-
of-way of the city.
   (C)   Said meter or meters shall be accessible to employees of the city for
reading, inspection, and testing.
   (D)   Said meter or meters shall be read by employees of the city at least
on a monthly basis. The city shall, within ten days of the reading of said
meter or meters, cause to be sent to the electric utilities which are utilizing
the Electric Utility Distribution System or public right-of-way a statement for
the occupation tax due. Said statement shall be paid by said electric utility
within 15 days thereafter. Failure to pay in full said statement within the
time period shall be grounds for the city to proceed against the electric
utility pursuant to §
112.08.
('72 Code, § 10-601.02) (Ord. 1535, passed 5-9-96)
§ 112.04 LODGING.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an occupation tax of 4% upon the total
consideration charged for occupancy of any space furnished by any hotel in the
city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSIDERATION. The monetary charge for the use of space in a hotel only
if the space is one ordinarily used for accommodations and shall not include
the charge for any food or beverage served or personal services rendered to the
occupant of such space.
      HOTEL. Any facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations. The term shall include, but not be limited to hotels,
motels, tourist homes, campgrounds, courts, lodging houses, inns, state
operated hotels, and nonprofit hotels, but HOTEL shall not be defined so as to
include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or
dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly
used to house students.
      OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession,
of any space in a hotel if the space is one ordinarily used for accommodations
and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to the use or possession does
not exceed a period of 30 days.
      OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a
right to use or possess any space in a hotel if the space is one ordinarily
used for accommodations.
   (C)   The imposition of said occupation tax shall commence on December 1,
1996.
   (D)   All hotels affected by this section shall compute and pay the
occupation tax to the city on a monthly basis. The occupation tax for each
month shall be due and owing within 30 days after the last day of the month for
which the occupation tax is due.
   (E)   All hotels shall, at the time they make their monthly payment of the
occupation tax levied pursuant to this section, file with the City Clerk a
full, complete, and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such
occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the
manager in charge of the hotel or by a higher managerial employee of said
hotel. The city shall have the right, at any time, to inspect, through its
officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any hotel for the
purpose of verifying the reports submitted pursuant to the requirements of this
section.
   (F)   That all funds received by the city from the aforenoted occupation tax
upon hotels shall be given to the Wahoo Area Economic Development office for
economic development within the corporate limits of the city and/or its zoning
jurisdiction.
('72 Code, § 10-601.03) (Ord. 1551, passed 7-25-96; Am. Ord. 1849, passed 10-9-
03)
§ 112.05 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   For the use, support, and maintenance of the City Fire Department all
revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies shall be
appropriated to the Fire Department Fund.
('72 Code, § 10-602)
§ 112.06 NATURAL GAS UTILITIES.
   (A)   There is imposed an occupation tax upon any natural gas utility
utilizing the public right-of-way of the city for the distribution of natural
gas, based on the following schedule:
      (1)   Residential, Commercial and Industrial Customers:
         (a)   $.025 per CCF from October 1 to March 31.
         (b)   $.060 per CCF from April 1 to September 30.
      (2)   City Power Plant Generation:
         (a)   $.03 per CCF all year.
   (B)   The City Natural Gas Division, a part of the Board of Public Works or
any other natural gas utility which utilizes the City Natural Gas Division
distribution system or installs its own natural gas distribution system in the
public right-of-way of the city, shall install and maintain, at their expense,
a gas metering system so as to accurately record usage of customers.
   (C)   Monthly reports, which document usage of customers, shall be
accessible to employees of the city for reviewing, inspection and testing.
   (D)   Said occupation tax shall be submitted to the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer within 15 days after the end of the month.
(Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)
§ 112.07 COLLECTION.
   All occupation taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of May of
each year, except in the event that the said tax is levied daily or monthly,
and upon the payment thereof by any person or persons to the City Clerk, the
said Clerk shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying the person
paying the said tax, and the amount paid; provided, occupation taxes collected
from Class C liquor licensees shall be due and payable on the first day of
November. The revenue collected shall then be immediately deposited into the
General Fund by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate
account of all revenue turned over to him or her. All forms and receipts herein
mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall then be kept by each
party in the transaction.
('72 Code, § 10-603) (Am. Ord. 1090, passed 2-24-77; Am. Ord. 1908, passed 11-
10-05)
§ 112.08 CERTIFICATES.
    The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The said certificate shall specify the amount of
the tax and the name of the person, and business that paid the said tax. The
occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or
carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being
conducted.
('72 Code, § 10-604) (Am. Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)
§ 112.09 FAILURE TO PAY.
   If any person, company, or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable, the
city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due. All delinquent
taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until paid.
('72 Code, § 10-605) (Am. Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
§ 112.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICES. The access and transmission of two-way
switched communications within the city, including local telephone and
telecommunication services.
   INTER-EXCHANGE SERVICES. The access and transmission of communications
between two or more local exchange areas, provided that such inter-exchange
service either originates from an end user within the city or terminates with
an end user within the city and is charged to a service address within the city
regardless of where the charges are actually paid.
   MOBILE SERVICES. Any radio or similar communication services provided
pursuant to license or authority granted by the Federal Communications
Commission, charged to a service address within the city regardless of where
the charges are actually paid, including cellular, radio paging, and mobile
radio services.
   OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Similar telecommunication services
involving any electronic or electromagnetic transmission of messages
originating and terminating in the State of Nebraska and charged to a service
address in the city, regardless of where the charges are actually paid.
(’72 Code, § 10-601.04) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed 4-
10-97; Am. Ord. 2073, passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. 2460, passed 8-27-24)
§ 112.26 AMOUNT.
   There is hereby levied upon every person, firm, partnership, corporation, or
association engaged in the business of offering or providing telecommunication
services to the public for hire in the city, an occupation tax of 4% of the
gross receipts resulting from any toll services and charges on basic local
exchange services air-exchange services; mobile services; and other
telecommunication services as defined in §
112.25.
(’72 Code, § 10-601.05) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed 4-
10-97; Am. Ord. 2073, passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. 2460, passed 8-27-24)
§ 112.27 GROSS RECEIPTS; EXCEPTIONS.
   Gross receipts shall include all receipts of every person, firm,
partnership, corporation, or association engaged in the business of offering or
providing telecommunication services to the public for hire in the city, except
for the following:
   (A)   Interstate telecommunications between persons in the city and persons
outside of the state;
   (B)   Local carrier access charges, transmission facilities, and switching
services provided to telecommunication companies;
   (C)   Account of:
      (1)   City of Wahoo, Nebraska, or any of its agencies or departments.
      (2)   All public, private, denominational, and parochial schools which
have met State of Nebraska accreditation or approval requirements.
      (3)   Saunders County, Nebraska, or any of its agencies or departments.
      (4)   State of Nebraska, or any of its agencies, subdivisions, or
departments.
      (5)   United States Government, or any of its agencies or departments.
   (D)   Sales of equipment, repairs, and installation charges, advertising
revenues, and rental fees from customers’ premises equipment.
(’72 Code, § 10-601.07) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed 4-
10-97; Am. Ord. 2073, passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. 2460, passed 8-27-24)
§ 112.28 PAYMENT.
   All telecommunication companies engaged in the business of offering or
providing telecommunication services to the public for hire in the city shall
compute and pay the occupation tax to the city on a monthly basis. The
occupation tax for each month shall become due and owing within 30 days after
the last day of the month in which service is billed by the telecommunications
company.
(’72 Code, § 10-601.09) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 2073, passed 10-
13-11; Am. Ord. 2460, passed 8-27-24)
§ 112.29 STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS.
   All telecommunication companies shall, at the time they make their monthly
payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to §§
112.25 et seq., file with the City Clerk a full, complete, detailed statement
of the gross receipts subject to such occupation tax, which statement shall be
duly verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the
particular company in the city or by a higher managerial employee of such
company. The city shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its
officers, agents, or representatives, the books and records of any
telecommunications company for the purpose of verifying any reports submitted
pursuant to the requirements of this section.
(’72 Code, § 10-601.10) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 2073, passed 10-
13-11; Am. Ord. 2460, passed 8-27-24)
§ 112.30 USE OF FUNDS.
   All funds received by the city from the aforementioned occupation tax upon
telecommunication companies shall be utilized by the city for economic
development within the corporate limits of the city and its zoning
jurisdiction.
('72 Code, § 10-601.11) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)
§ 112.31 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BUDGET.
   Sixty days before the beginning of each fiscal year of the city, the Greater
Wahoo Development Foundation, a Nebraska nonprofit corporation, shall submit to
the Mayor and Council of the city a proposed budget for the office of Economic
Development Director, including, but not limited to salaries, benefits,
administrative expenses, and other related expenses.
('72 Code, § 10-601.12) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Liquor license application; city examination
   
113.02   Hours of sale
Beer Garden License
   
113.10   Definition
   
113.11   License required
   
113.12   Application for license
   
113.13   Conditions
   
113.14   Display of license
   
113.15   Revocation procedure
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICATION; CITY EXAMINATION.
   Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors
at retail shall file with the Liquor Control Commission. The Commission shall
then notify by registered or certified mail the City Clerk. The City Council
shall then meet and determine the desirability of the application and report in
writing or in person to the Commission within 30 days. The City Council may
examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause
to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant; to hear testimony,
and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired, the City Council may
authorize its agent, or the City Attorney, to act on their behalf. The City
Council may hold the said examination and hearing upon the receipt from the
Commission of the notice and copy of the application. The City Council shall
fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the
City Council may receive competent evidence under oath, either orally, or by
affidavit, from the applicant or any other person concerning the propriety of
the issuance of such license. Notice shall be published in a legal newspaper
in, or of general circulation in the city one time not less than seven nor more
than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not
be limited to a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the
local City Council in support of or protest against the issuance of such
license may do so at the time of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not
more than 21 days after the receipt of the Commission's letter of notice, and
after such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be spread at large in the
minute record of their proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or
refusal of said applicant. The City Clerk shall thereupon mail to the
Commission a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published
notice, except that failure to hold a hearing and to examine the said applicant
shall not render void any license issued by the Commission. In the event the
Commission refuses to issue a license, the cost of the publication of notice as
herein required shall be paid by the Commission.
(Neb. RS 53-131, 53-134) ('72 Code, § 10-307) (Am. Ord. 1255, passed 5-8-86;
Am. Ord. 1328, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 1386, passed 2-27-92)
§ 113.02 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OFF SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container
for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.
      ON SALE. Alcoholic beverages sold at retail by the drink for consumption
on the premises of the licensed establishment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their
agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the city except during the hours
provided herein except for those nonprofit corporations holding either a Class
C and/or Class I licenses pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124 who have requested of the
City Council and received approval on a case by case basis, to serve alcoholic
liquors before 12:00 p.m. noon on Sundays.
   HOURS OF SALE
   Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
      Secular Days
         Off Sale                  6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
         On Sale                   6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
      Sundays
         Off Sale                  12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.
         On Sale                   12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.
   Beer and Wine
      Secular Days
         Off Sale                  6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
         On Sale                   6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
      Sundays
         Off Sale                  6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
         On Sale                   6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
 
   (C)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed
herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said premises.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for business on days and hours during which the sale
or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.
('72 Code, § 10-318) (Am. Ord. 1178, passed 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 9-
22-83; Am. Ord. 1369, passed 9-12-91) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to alter statutory hours, see Neb. RS 53-179
BEER GARDEN LICENSE
§ 113.10 DEFINITION.
   (A)   (1)   A BEER GARDEN is defined as an outdoor open air, roofed or
unroofed area adjacent to and included in the licensed premises of a tavern,
bar, or brewpub, which is used for the service and consumption of alcoholic
liquors, and which is bounded by a fence or wall preventing the uncontrolled
entrance or exit of persons from the premises, and preventing the passing of
alcoholic liquors to persons outside the premises. Said outdoor area shall not
exceed 75% of the gross floor area of the adjoining licensed premises. Beer
gardens shall not be used for smoking.
      (2)   The following are excluded from this definition if such are
included within the licensed premises:
         (a)   A sidewalk café adjacent to a street level eating or drinking
establishment which derives 65% or more of its gross proceeds from the sale of
food:
         (b)   Recreational facilities which include a golf course.
   (B)   Beer gardens as allowed by a Special Designated License of the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, as the statute exists as of the date of the
adoption of Ordinance 2042, shall not be included within the above definition
of beer garden.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
§ 113.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit the consumption of alcoholic liquors on any
part of the licensed premises not enclosed within the building except under a
beer garden license. Any person or persons operating a beer garden as a part of
a premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquors at retail shall comply with all
zoning regulations, including obtaining a conditional use permit as may be
required, and comply with all conditions established by the City Council as
part of such conditional use permit.
   (B)   The annual fee for a beer garden license shall be $100, non pro-rated,
and every license shall terminate on April 30 next following the issuance of
the same.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
§ 113.12 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a beer garden license required under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be made in the office of the City Clerk on an application
form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application form shall require of the applicant the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the licensee holding the
State of Nebraska Class I Liquor License;
      (2)   A plot plan showing the location, size and capacity of the beer
garden and adjoining licensed structure, entrances and exits, ground surface,
location, size and construction of surrounding walls, fences or barriers; and
surrounding properties and structures within 150 feet;
      (3)   The zoning district in which the use is located;
      (4)   The number of patrons which the proposed beer garden is designed to
accommodate;
      (5)   How the premises will be supervised and maintained;
      (6)   The hours of operation for the proposed beer garden;
      (7)   Agree to be bound by all ordinances of the city and to comply with
all laws, regulations and rules of the State of Nebraska;
      (8)   To be signed and acknowledged by the applicant.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
§ 113.13 CONDITIONS.
   No beer garden shall be permitted, maintained, or operated except in
conformity with the following regulations:
   (A)   The beer garden area shall be particularly described and included
within the application for Class I Liquor License licensed premises.
   (B)   The beer garden area shall not exceed 75% of the gross floor area of
the adjoining licensed structure.
   (C)   Construction of the beer garden shall be as follows:
      (1)   The ground area shall be of a fire-resistant material.
      (2)   There shall be maintained a fence surrounding the beer garden area
as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   All electrical wiring shall comply with national, state, and city
electrical codes.
   (E)   All combustible rubbish shall be stored in non-combustible covered
containers.
   (F)   No amplified sound or music is permitted outside the enclosed building
premises. Any noise emanating from the beer garden shall not violate the
regulations concerning noise.
   (G)   The area shall be adequately illuminated by electric lights, but such
illumination shall be so arranged and shielded by the licensee so as to reflect
away from adjoining property and streets.
   (H)   Occupancy capacity shall be clearly posted.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
§ 113.14 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be displayed
at all times at the place of business of the licensee.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
§ 113.15 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any beer garden license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
City Council after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards of the above
conditions. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at the last known address,
at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing before the City
Council.
(Ord. 2042, passed 5-27-10; Am. Ord. 2062, passed 5-12-11)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Bingo
   
114.01   Regulation
   
114.02   Incorporated regulations
Mechanical Amusement Devices
   
114.50   Definitions
   
114.51   Permit required
   
114.52   Application for permit; contents
   
114.53   Permit fee
   
114.54   Information on permit
   
114.55   Permit to be posted
   
114.56   Substitute machines
   
114.57   Permit not transferable
   
114.58   Revocation of permit
   
114.59   Location; designation in permit
   
114.60   Expiration of permit
   
114.61   Prohibited practices
   
114.62   Seizure and impounding of equipment; procedure; fee
BINGO
§ 114.01 REGULATION.
   Games of bingo shall be conducted within the city in accordance with all
laws of the city and the state of Nebraska if the game of bingo is played for
or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed by the state of
Nebraska to conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written permit from the
City Council before commencing operation of the game. Application shall be made
to the City Clerk for such permit. The application form shall contain such
information and documents or copies thereof as the City Council deems necessary
to determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the determination
that granting the application would be proper, the City Council shall
immediately direct the City Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon
the payment of an annual permit fee of $10.
   The license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any
person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any other fees, rules, and
regulations which the City Council may designate. All permits so issued will
automatically expire on September 30 following their issuance or renewal. The
fee for each renewal unless otherwise prescribed shall be in the sum of $10.
The fee shall be credited to the General Fund. The permit shall be on display
at any place where a game of bingo is conducted.
('72 Code, § 10-211) (Am. Ord. 1249, passed 10-10-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Permit required, see Neb. RS 9-236
§ 114.02 INCORPORATED REGULATIONS.
   All applicable state statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended
shall be and will constitute a part of this subchapter as if repeated verbatim
herein, and violation of any state statute will be a distinct and separate
offense against the city as well as against the state. Violators thereof shall
be separately prosecuted by the city for each of such offenses and, if
convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 9-201 through 9-266) ('72 Code, § 10-214) Penalty, see §
10.99
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 114.50 DEFINITIONS.
   The term "mechanical amusement device" hereinafter referred to as "machine,"
shall mean any machine, table, device, or contrivance which, upon insertion of
a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or by any other method of payment of money or
other consideration, may be operated, played upon, or used by a person for
amusement and entertainment only, and which does not dispense any form of
merchandise, ticket, card, prize, award, or payoff. Such term shall include by
way of example, but not by way of limitation, pinball, fooseball, pool tables,
electronic arcade games, juke box machines, and shuffleboards and shall apply
to both operational and nonoperational machines. Such term shall not include
any machine, device, or contrivance now or hereafter made unlawful by the
ordinances of the city or laws of the state of Nebraska, nor any gambling
device or contrivance, and shall not include mechanical kiddie amusement rides.
The term "person" shall include persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, and
associations.
(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-215) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)
§ 114.51 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall display for the use or permit to be used any machine as
defined in §
114.50 hereof without first securing a permit therefore and paying an
occupation tax thereon as provided in
Ch. 112.
(’72 Code, § 10-216) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.52 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk upon a
form to be furnished by the
city, which application shall set forth the following:
      (1)   Full name, age, and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name of business and address where such machines are to be located
and operated;
      (3)   Description of any other business to be conducted on the premises
referred to in division (2);
      (4)   Description of each machine and the number of machines at the
location for which a permit is desired; and
      (5)   Name and address of owner(s) of such machines.
   (B)   Such application shall include such other information as the City
Council may require by resolution.
(’72 Code, § 10-217) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.53 PERMIT FEE.
   The City Clerk shall issue a permit to the application upon payment by the
applicant of a permit fee of $25 and upon payment of the occupation tax
provided in Ch. 112; provided, that no such permit shall be issued upon any
application made by a person under 19 years of age.
(’72 Code, § 10-218) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.54 INFORMATION ON PERMIT.
   Such permit shall set forth the name of the permittee, the premises for
which issued, the date of issuance and expiration of such permit, and the
number of machines for which it is used.
(’72 Code, § 10-219) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.55 PERMIT TO BE POSTED.
   Such permits shall be conspicuously posted at all times in that part of the
premises wherein such
machines are located.
(’72 Code, § 10-220) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.56 SUBSTITUTE MACHINES.
   The permittee may substitute machines under such permit, provided the
occupation tax required by
Ch. 112 is paid on such machines. The number of machines in any premises shall
at no time exceed the
number set forth on the permit for the premises.
(’72 Code, § 10-221) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-
25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.57 PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Such a permit shall not be transferable from one person to another or from
one location to another.
(’72 Code, § 10-222) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.58 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit so granted shall be subject to revocation by the City Council for
good cause after notice has been served and the permittee has been allowed a
hearing.
(’72 Code, § 10-223) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.59 LOCATION; DESIGNATION IN PERMIT.
   No machine shall be displayed or operated on or in any premises except the
premises described in a permit issued under this chapter.
(’72 Code, § 10-225) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.60 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Each permit shall expire on and shall be renewed by the first day of May of
each year.
(’72 Code, § 10-226) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.61 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To use slugs, tokens, plates, discs, or any objects other than United
States coins to operate such machines, except for slugs, tokens, plates, discs,
or any other object furnished by the owner of such machines at the location of
the owner's machines for use in the owner's machines only and having no
redemption in cash value other than play or amusement;
   (B)   To give or furnish or permit the giving or furnishing of any
merchandise, ticket, card, prize, reward, money, or payoff to any person
playing or operating any such machines;
   (C)   To permit the free operation of any such machines unless such machine
is so constructed that it automatically provides for or permits free games upon
the securing of a certain score thereon; or
   (D)   To use or permit the use of any such machines as a gambling device or
for or in connection with gambling.
(’72 Code, § 10-224) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
§ 114.62 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF EQUIPMENT; PROCEDURE; FEE.
   If any such machine is found being operated, kept, displayed, or maintained
in violation of this subchapter, it may be seized by the police together with
the money in such machine, which machine and money shall be conveyed to the
headquarters of the Police Department and there be kept in the custody of the
Chief of Police who shall be responsible therefore, until the owner has paid
all necessary fees and has otherwise fully complied with this chapter. An
additional fee of $75 to cover the cost of removing and caring for said
machines shall be charged by the Police Department for each such machine taken
to the Police Department Headquarters. Upon proof of payment of all of said
fees and a full compliance with provisions of this subchapter, such machines
shall be returned to the owner, otherwise such machines, together with the
money therein, shall be disposed of as provided by state law for the disposal
of other property held by the Police Department. Any person violating this
section shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor. Each day on which any person
engages in or conducts the business of operating or distributing the machines
or devices subject to this section, without having obtained a permit or being
in violation thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
(’72 Code, § 10-227) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 4-25-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-120
CHAPTER 115: LOTTERY
Section
   
115.01   Participation; restrictions
   
115.02   Sales outlet locations; approval required; qualification standards
§ 115.01 PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person under 19 years of age shall play or participate in any way
in the lottery established and conducted by the city.
(Neb. RS 9-646(1))
   (B)   No owner or officer of a lottery operator with whom the city contracts
to conduct its lottery shall play the lottery conducted by the city. No
employee or agent of the city, lottery operator, or authorized sales outlet
location shall play the lottery of the city for which he or she performs work
during such time as he or she is actually working at such lottery or while on
duty.
(Neb. RS 9-646(3))
   (C)   No person or employee or agent of any person or the city shall
knowingly permit an individual under 19 years of age to play or participate in
any way in the lottery conducted by the city.
(Neb. RS 9-646(4))
   (D)   Nothing shall prohibit:
      (1)   Any member of the City Council, a city official, or the immediate
family of such member or official; or
      (2)   An owner or officer of an authorized sales outlet location for the
city from playing the lottery conducted by the city as long as such person is
19 years of age or older.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY OF A MEMBER OF THE
GOVERNING BODY OR A MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL shall mean:
      (1)   A person who is related to the member or official by blood,
marriage, or adoption and resides in the same household; or
      (2)   A person who is claimed by the member or official, or the spouse of
the member or official, as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
('72 Code, § 10-443) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-13-92; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 7-23-98)
Statutory reference:
   Authority not to restrict municipal employees and officers or relatives
thereof, see Neb. RS 9-646
§ 115.02 SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lottery operator with whom the City Council contracts to conduct
its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than
the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet
location by the City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove each
sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery at its
sales outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards
prescribed in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an
authorized sales outlet location shall:
      (1)   First obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on the
premises pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 53, Article 1;
      (2)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful
failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any
level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar offense or
offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving gambling
activity or moral turpitude;
      (3)   Not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under the
Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery
and Raffle Act, or the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act; and
      (4)   Be fit, willing, and able to provide properly the service proposed
in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the Nebraska County and
City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the act.
   (C)   If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized
sales outlet location is a partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such
partnership, every member of such limited liability company, every officer of
such corporation, and stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of such
corporation.
   (D)   The City Council shall notify the Department of Revenue of all
approved lottery locations within 30 days of approval.
('72 Code, § 10-444) (Ord. 1382, passed 2-13-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Location regulated, see Neb. RS 9-642.01
CHAPTER 116: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Section
   
116.01   Findings and purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Application
   
116.05   Issuance or denial
   
116.06   Renewal
   
116.07   Sales regulations
   
116.08   Revocation or suspension
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Mobile food vendors provide a beneficial service to the general public
within the city while, due to their distinct manner of operation, also
presenting substantial differences of circumstances from other food retailers
and vehicle users which suggest the expediency of diverse legislation. It is,
thus, desirable to regulate, and require licenses for, mobile food vendors so
that their transitory use of various properties and right-of-way locations can
occur in a fair and safe manner, and so that public safety and welfare can be
protected. The purpose of this chapter is to enact regulations to serve those
goals.
   (B)   While the city wishes to encourage the business of mobile food
vendors, the city also recognizes the benefits of permanent food
establishments. The owners of permanent food establishments make substantial
and long-lasting capital investments in buildings, infrastructure, and the
built environment. These investments benefit the city, improve real property,
and provide consistent locales for the entertainment and enjoyment of city
residents and visitors. The city wishes to cultivate and encourage the creation
and maintenance of permanent food establishments. Accordingly, it is also the
purpose of this chapter to encourage the co-existence of mobile food vendors
and permanent food establishments, to provide appropriate places for each
within the fabric of the city, and to accommodate the interests of each, toward
the goal of achieving a rich and diverse community.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
   ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator, or his or her authorized designee.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance or beverage used or
intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person who by traveling from place to place upon the
public ways sells or offers for sale food from public or private property to
consumers for immediate delivery and consumption upon purchase. The following
activities are excluded from such definition, and, alone, do not subject a
vendor to being covered by such definition: the sale or offer for sale of farm
products produced or raised by such a vendor from land either occupied or
cultivated by him or her or purchased directly from a Nebraska farmer; an ice
cream truck operator who is otherwise required to obtain a separate peddlers
permit; and/or a minor who is selling liquid refreshments on a temporary basis
in a manner akin to a lemonade stand.
   PERMANENT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A fixed building which a person occupies on a
continual basis and from which such person sells or offers to sell food for
immediate delivery and consumption upon purchase. Such term shall not include a
location where a mobile food vendor sells or offers to sell food, convenience
stores, grocery stores or automotive fueling stations.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale food as a
mobile food vendor or operate as a mobile food vendor within the city unless
such person complies with the requirements and regulations of this chapter,
including holding a valid and active mobile food vendor license issued by the
Administrator under this chapter.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 APPLICATION.
   An applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter shall file with the
Administrator a signed application on a form to be furnished by the
Administrator, which shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The applicant's business name, address, and phone number; and e-mail
address, if any;
   (B)   If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other entity, the
names of all officers and managers of such entity;
   (C)   If food is to be sold from any motor vehicle, the vehicle license
numbers and descriptions of all vehicles from which the applicant proposes to
sell food, and the names of all persons expected to drive such vehicles;
   (D)   The description of the general type of food items to be sold;
   (E)   A copy of the State of Nebraska sales tax permit, or proof of an
applicable sales tax exemption, for the applicant together with their food and
dairy permit;
   (F)   A general description of the types of locations the applicant
anticipates selling from;
   (G)   Such other information as the Administrator may require and as
requested in the said application form.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.05 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a license pursuant to this
chapter, the Administrator shall make or cause to be made any inquiry or
investigation that may be necessary to determine whether the applicant is in
compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws and this code. The
Administrator may request and take into consideration the recommendations of
other affected departments of the city.
   (B)   After receipt of the completed application and application fee, the
Administrator shall either approve or deny the application. Grounds for denial
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A finding that the application is incomplete;
      (2)   The nonpayment of applicable fees;
      (3)   A finding that the application is not in conformance with any
applicable laws or this code including, but not limited to,
Chapter 116 of this code.
      (4)   A finding that the applicant has been convicted of three or more
separate violations of the provisions of this chapter within the 12 months
preceding the submission of a complete application.
   (C)   An application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable processing fee of $100 unless the applicant is seeking a
one-day permit in which case the processing fee shall be $50.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.06 RENEWAL.
   A license issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each
year, unless renewed for the following year by the permittee. The permittee
shall renew the license for the following year by filing with the
Administrator, by December 31, a registration updating or confirming the
information provided in the immediately preceding license application or
registration. The registration shall be on a form provided by the
Administrator. At the time of registration, the permittee shall pay a renewal
fee of $50 per year for each motor vehicle, trailer, cart, or other piece of
mobile equipment to be utilized in the business.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.07 SALES REGULATIONS.
   Mobile food vendors shall comply with the following regulations:
   (A)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell nor offer to sell food from a
location within 150 feet of a permanent food establishment's properly line,
unless each such permanent food establishment within such area has provided
written consent.
   (B)   A motor vehicle from which a mobile food vendor sells or offers to
sell food shall not exceed 40 feet in length and 96 inches in width. A mobile
food vendor selling or offering the sale of food from or using a trailer or
other auxiliary equipment shall, during such operations, keep the trailer or
auxiliary equipment hitched to an operable motor vehicle towing it, unless
otherwise permitted by the city in association with an authorized street show,
festival, parade, block party, or similar event. An attached trailer or other
auxiliary equipment shall not exceed 96 inches in width, and the combined
length of the motor vehicle and trailer or auxiliary equipment shall not exceed
60 feet. The requirements of this subsection may be relaxed, if approved by the
Administrator upon a mobile food vendor's application for a waiver.
   (C)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell or offer to sell food from a motor
vehicle at a location in a city right-of-way or public parking unless approved
by the Administrator upon a mobile food vendor's application for a waiver. This
necessarily shall include a location which would involve customers being waited
on or served while standing in a portion of a street.
   (D)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell or offer to sell food from an area
that is not zoned either C-l (Downtown Commercial), C-2 (Highway Commercial),
C-3 (General Commercial), NRC (Neighborhood Residential Commercial), 1-1 (Light
Industrial) or 1-2 (Heavy Industrial) in its form unless approved by the
Administrator upon a mobile food vendor’s application for a waiver.
   (E)   A mobile food vendor who sells or offers to sell food from a location
on private property shall first obtain and possess, and be able to exhibit upon
request, written consent of the owner of such property.
   (F)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell nor offer to sell food from city
park property unless approved by the Administrator upon a mobile food vendor's
application for a waiver.
   (G)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell nor offer to sell food from a
school property unless he or she possesses the written consent of an authorized
representative of the school.
   (H)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell nor offer to sell food from county
public property unless he or she possesses the written consent of an authorized
representative of the county.
   (I)   A mobile food vendor shall not sell nor offer to sell food from a
location within an area authorized for a street show, festival, parade, block
party, or similar event, or within 500 feet of any boundary of such authorized
area, unless the mobile food vendor is in possession of the written consent of
the event permittee to sell or offer to sell food from that location.
   (J)   A mobile food vendor shall possess and be able to exhibit his or her
license under this chapter, a State of Nebraska sales tax permit or proof of
sales tax exemption, approvals from the Nebraska Department of Agriculture as
required, and any other written consents or documentation required under this
chapter, at all times during which the mobile food vendor is selling or
offering to sell food.
   (K)   An authorized employee of the city or police departments may order a
mobile food vendor to move from or leave a specific location, if the operation
of the mobile food vendor at that location causes an obstruction to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endangers the health, safety, or welfare of
the public. The city may tow or otherwise move a mobile food vendor's vehicle
or other auxiliary equipment to another location if the vehicle or equipment
presents a danger to public safety and the mobile food vendor fails to move the
same.
   (L)   An individual representative of the mobile food vendor shall be
present with the motor vehicle and other auxiliary equipment operated by the
mobile food vendor at all times where food is or will be offered for sale.
   (M)   A mobile food vendor may sell or offer to sell food seven days a week,
but only from 7:00 a.m. to midnight. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food
vendor to sell or offer to sell food at any other times. Notwithstanding this
subsection, upon evidence of endangerment of public safety, the Chief of Police
or his or her designee may further limit hours of operation for all mobile food
trucks, as needed for the protection of public safety.
   (N)   A mobile food vendor using a motor vehicle shall maintain a motor
vehicle liability insurance policy for such motor vehicle as required by state
law, and shall exhibit proof of such policy when requested.
   (O)   A mobile food vendor shall maintain in operable condition all fire
suppression equipment or devices as required by local, state or federal law.
   (P)   It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to sell or offer to sell
alcoholic drinks.
   (Q)   A mobile food vendor shall provide trash receptacles for the
collection of trash and recyclable materials, in sizes sufficient to serve his
or her customers. Prior to leaving a location, the mobile food vendor shall
pick up and properly dispose of any trash, litter, or recyclable materials
within 30 feet of the location. Receptacles and their contents shall be removed
from the location for proper disposal or recycling, and contents shall not be
deposited in public trash or recycling containers.
   (R)   A mobile food vendor shall not place on city right-of-way or city
property any freestanding sign, table, chair, umbrella, electric generator, or
other fixture or equipment; provided, that a mobile food vendor may place one
identification or menu sign on the sidewalk or other area directly adjacent to
his or her parked motor vehicle or other equipment.
   (S)   A mobile food vendor shall comply with all city ordinances regulating
noise.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.08 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Grounds. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Administrator for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the selling of food;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or any applicable laws or provisions
of this code including, but not limited to,
Chapter 116 of this Code; or
      (4)   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace
to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Conviction of violation of chapter. The Administrator shall revoke a
license issued under this chapter for any mobile food vendor who is convicted
of two or more separate violations of the provisions of this chapter within any
consecutive 12-month period. For purposes of this section conviction shall mean
any finding of guilt or liability on the part of the mobile food vendor by a
court of competent jurisdiction, and shall include any conviction that has
previously been set aside.
   (C)   Notice. To revoke or suspend a license, the Administrator shall
provide written notice to the license holder stating the revocation or
suspension action taken, the grounds for such action, and the availability of
an appeal under this section. Such notice shall be sent by both regular U.S.
mail and certified mail (although return receipt is not required to prove
service) to the license holder's address as stated in his or her application.
   (D)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the decision of the
Administrator under this section may file an appeal with the city to be heard
either before a hearing officer or the City Council as the Administrator deems
appropriate.
   (E)   Re-application. A person whose license has been revoked under this
chapter may not re-apply for a new license for a period of 12 months after the
effective date of the revocation.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this
chapter. Any violation shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2352, passed 7-23-20)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Curfew
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Weapons; discharge
   
130.04   Public nudity
   
130.05   Aiding and abetting public nudity
   
130.06   Public nudity; definitions
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any of the streets, roads,
alleys, or parks of the city, or other places of public amusement or recreation
therein after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and until the hour of 5:00 a.m. of the
following day on Sunday through Thursday, and after the hour of 12:30 a.m. and
until the hour of 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or any adult person
having the legal care, custody, or control of any minor under the age of 18
years to allow or permit such minor to loiter, wander, stroll, idle, or play in
or about any of the places designated in division (A) of this section after the
hour of 11:00 p.m. and until the hour of 5:00 a.m. of the following day on
Sunday through Thursday, and after the hour of 12:30 a.m. and until the hour of
5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) and (B) that the
minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
legal care, custody, or control of such minor;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or
other adult person having the legal care, custody, or control of such minor and
was using a direct route;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, including but not limited to
newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police officer about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school or religious activity or returning
home by a direct route from an official school or religious activity;
      (8)   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with the laws of the state of Nebraska.
('72 Code, § 6-343) (Ord. 1478, passed 3-2-95) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   General ordinance making authority, see Neb. RS 17-505
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT. Conduct that results in or is likely to result in
serious bodily injury to a person or substantial damage to property.
   UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. An assembly of five or more persons whose common object
is to commit an unlawful act, or a lawful act by unlawful means. Prior concert
is not necessary to form an unlawful assembly.
   (B)   Prohibitions. No person shall recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally:
      (1)   Engage in fighting or in tumultuous conduct;
      (2)   Make unreasonable noise and continue to do so after being asked to
stop;
      (3)   Disrupt a lawful assembly of persons;
      (4)   Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
      (5)   Participate in unlawful assembly.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 WEAPONS; DISCHARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a crossbow, bow and arrow,
slingshot, air gun, BB gun, or the like loaded with rock or other dangerous
missiles at any time or under any circumstances within the city.
(Neb. RS 17-556) ('72 Code, § 6-322) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally appear in
a state of nudity in a public place, in any place open to the public, or while
employed in any providing service, product or entertainment in any business or
commercial establishment, except that the above shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any theater, concert hall, art center, museum or similar establishment
which is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances and which
receives less than 50% of its gross annual revenue from the sale of alcoholic
liquors, beer, wine, and/or similar alcoholic spirits, and in which any of the
circumstances contained in this section were lawfully permitted or allowed as
part of such art exhibit or performance; or
   (B)   Any dressing/changing room or restroom facility open to the public; or
   (C)   Any person under 12 years of age; or
   (D)   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding an
infant.
(Ord. 1753, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)
§ 130.05 AIDING AND ABETTING PUBLIC NUDITY.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to aid, abet, assist or direct another
person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a state of nudity in a public
place, in any place open to the public, or while employed in providing any
service, product or entertainment in any business or commercial establishment.
(Ord. 1753, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)
§ 130.06 PUBLIC NUDITY; DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area, with
less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less
than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple;
the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region, or
pubic hair region, or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the
nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives
the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms, or halls limited to specific
members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not
an admission charge is levied.
(Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   (Reserved)
   
131.02   (Reserved)
   
131.03   Removing dirt
   
131.04   (Reserved)
   
131.05   Toxic inhalants prohibited
Automobiles
   
131.20   Abandoned automobiles
Tobacco
   
131.50   Possession by minors
   
131.51   Sale to minors
   
131.52   Definitions
Drugs
   
131.60   Kratom definitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 (RESERVED).
§ 131.02 (RESERVED).
§ 131.03 REMOVING DIRT.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb, or take
away from any street, alley, or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones, or
other materials forming a part of such street, alley, or public grounds without
first having obtained written permission to do so from the City Council.
('72 Code, § 6-332) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.04 (RESERVED).
§ 131.05 TOXIC INHALANTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall induce or entice any person to breathe, inhale or
drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing acetate, acetone, benzene,
butyl alcohol, cyclphexanone, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethylene
dichloride, ethylene trichloride, hexane, isopropanol, isopropyl alcohol,
methyl alcohol, methyl cellosolve acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl
ketone, pentachlorophenal, petroleum ether, toulene, toluol, trichlorathane,
trichloroethylene, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing a
condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis,
inebriation, excitement or irrational behavior, or in any manner changing,
distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual, mental or nervous processes. For
purposes of this section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed an
intoxicated condition.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to
any person any compound, liquid or chemical or any other substance which will
induce an intoxicated condition as defined in division (A) above, when the
seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to know that such compound is
intended for use to induce such condition.
(Neb. RS 28-419, 28-420) ('72 Code, § 6-338) Penalty, see §
10.99
AUTOMOBILES
§ 131.20 ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described in division (B) of this section.
(Neb. RS 60-1907)
      (2)   No person other than one authorized by the municipality or
appropriate state agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle
which is left unattended on a highway or other public place without license
plates affixed or which is abandoned.
(Neb. RS 60-1908)
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid "in
transit" stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed
thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours after the parking of
the vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property on
which parking is legally permitted;
            4.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated; or
            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last registered
owner under division (E) of this section.
            6.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner under division (D) of this section; or
            5.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (c)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431
shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this division (B).
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or park
or other state, county, or city-owned property.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
   (C)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license
plates of the current year or valid "in transit" stickers issued pursuant to
Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration
the condition of the vehicle, of $250 or less, title shall immediately vest in
the municipality.
(Neb. RS 60-1902)
   (D)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (C) of this section,
the municipality shall make an inquiry concerning the last registered owner of
an abandoned vehicle as follows:
         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the
jurisdiction which issued the license plates; or
         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   The municipality shall notify the last registered owner, if any,
that the vehicle in question has been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and
that, if unclaimed, either:
         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five
days from the date the notice was mailed; or
         (b)   Title will vest in the municipality 30 days after the date the
notice was mailed.
      (3)   If the municipality is notified that a lien or mortgage exists, the
notice described in division (D)(2) of this section shall also be sent to the
lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming the vehicle shall be required to
pay the cost of removal and storage of the vehicle.
      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
municipality:
         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle
will be sold or offered at public auction under division (D)(2)(a) of this
section;
         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the
municipality will retain the vehicle; or
         (c)   If the last registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice
of that fact is received.
      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to division (D)
(4) of this section, the municipality may retain for use, sell, or auction the
abandoned vehicle. If the municipality has determined that the vehicle should
be retained for use, the municipality shall, at the same time that the notice,
if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the
jurisdiction an announcement that the municipality intends to retain the
abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will vest in the municipality 30
days after publication.
(Neb. RS 60-1903)
   (E)   (1)   If the municipal law enforcement agency has custody of a motor
vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in
custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the last registered owners
stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the agency, that the vehicle is
no longer needed for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30 days the
agency will dispose of the vehicle.
      (2)   This division shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.
      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this division
unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it
is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the
offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If
a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken
into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted, the
registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)
   (F)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses
incurred by the municipality, shall be held by the municipality without
interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of the vehicle, for a
period of two years. If not claimed within that two-year period, the proceeds
shall be paid into the general fund of the municipality.
(Neb. RS 60-1905)
   (G)   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any
abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the municipality, shall be liable for any
loss or damage to the vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in the
possession of the municipality or its contractual agent or as a result of any
subsequent disposition.
(Neb. RS 60-1906)
   (H)   The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to
the municipality for the costs of removal and storage of the vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-1909)
   (I)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or
park, or other state, county, or municipally owned property.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
   (J)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of an
offense.
('72 Code, § 6-337) (Am. Ord. 1089, passed 2-24-77) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional regulations, see Neb. RS 60-1901 through 60-1911
TOBACCO
§ 131.50 POSSESSION BY MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor, as defined by Neb. RS 28-1418, to
transport, possess knowingly, or have under his or her control, in any motor
vehicle, tobacco products, vapor nicotine products, alternative nicotine
products or kratom on any public street, alley, roadway, or property owned by
the state of Nebraska or any subdivision thereof or any other place within the
city limits.
(’72 Code, § 6-344) (Ord. 1586, passed 8-14-97; Am. Ord. 2343, passed 3-12-20)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Tobacco use by minors prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1418
§ 131.51 SALE TO MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, deliver, distribute or
furnish in any way any tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes,
cigarette paper, vapor nicotine products, alternative nicotine products or
kratom, to any person under the age defined by Neb. RS 28-1419.
(Neb. RS 28-1419) (’72 Code, § 10-442) (Am. Ord. 2343, passed 3-12-20) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 131.52 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. Any noncombustible product containing
nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does
not include any vapor product, cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, or
any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug
Administration under Chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   TOBACCO. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited
to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping
tobacco (this term shall be used interchangeably with nicotine.
   VAPOR NICOTINE PRODUCTS. Vapor nicotine products shall mean any
noncombustible product, that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means,
regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce nicotine vapor. VAPOR
NICOTINE PRODUCT shall include any vap pen, electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, hookah, or similar product or
device and any vapor cartridge or other container of solution that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. VAPOR NICOTINE
PRODUCT does not include an alternative nicotine product, cigarette, cigar, or
other tobacco product, or any product regulated as a drug or device by the
United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(Ord. 2344, passed 4-9-20)
KRATOM
§ 131.60 KRATOM DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this Code, the following words have the meanings as
hereinafter provided:
   DELIVER.  The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer from one person to
another of kratom whether or not there is an agency relationship, and including
the sale of kratom.
   DISTRIBUTE. To deliver other than by administering or dispensing kratom.
   KRATOM. Includes any product, material, compound, mixture or preparation
containing any quantity of the following substances having a stimulant effect
on the central nervous system, 7-Hydroxymitragynine, Mitragynine and
Epicatechin. It is believed that said substances have a dangerous effect upon
anyone using said substances and have no practical medicinal or beneficial
purpose.
(Ord. 2345, passed 3-12-20)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Swimming pools; enclosure
   
150.002   Egress windows, required
Adoption of Codes
   
150.015   Building Code adopted by reference; conflicts
   
150.016   Housing Code adopted by reference; conflicts
   
150.017   Plumbing Code adopted by reference; prohibition of lead pipes,
solder, and flux; conflicts
   
150.018   Electrical Code adopted by reference; conflicts
   
150.019   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference
   
150.020   Mechanical Code adopted by reference; conflicts
   
150.021   Energy Code adopted by reference; conflicts
Moving of Buildings
   
150.030   Regulation
   
150.031   Deposit
Building Regulations Enforcement
   
150.045   Building Inspector; powers
   
150.046   Unsafe buildings
   
150.047   Permits required
   
150.048   Plans and specifications
   
150.049   Fees
   
150.050   Inspection
   
150.051   Permits to repair within fire limits
   
150.052   Violations
   
150.053   Building permits; duplicate to County Assessor
Building Inspector
   
150.080   Power and authority
   
150.081   Right of entry
   
150.082   Permit fees
   
150.083   Liability
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SWIMMING POOLS; ENCLOSURE.
   (A)   (1)   Every outdoor private, residential, or family pool containing at
least 24 inches of water shall be enclosed at ground level by a barrier or
fence with a minimum height of four feet and a maximum height of six feet.
There shall be no opening in the fence that permits passage of an object of
four inches in diameter or larger. All gates must have locking hardware to
prevent access when not in use. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such
as masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except
for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
      (2)   In addition to the above requirement, when the wall of a dwelling
serves as part of the barrier, one of the following conditions shall also be
met:
         (a)   The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in
compliance with ASTM F 1346; or
         (b)   Doors with direct access to the pool through the wall of the
dwelling shall be equipped with an audible alarm; or
         (c)   Other means of protection, such as self- closing doors with
self-latching devices, which are approved by the governing body, shall be
acceptable, so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the
protection afforded by divisions (a) and (b) above.
         (d)   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier, or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of
access is a ladder or steps:
            1.   The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked
or removed to prevent access; or
            2.   The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier or fence
with locking hardware to prevent access when not in use.
      (3)   The intent of this barrier requirement is to prevent the
uncontrolled access to a pool or spa from adjacent properties, and from the
home.
   (B)   All fences enclosing private, residential, or family pools shall be
constructed to conform to the requirements of the City Building Code
regulations.
   (C)   All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times.
   (D)   This section shall be applicable to all existing outdoor private,
residential, or family pools, and to all new outdoor private, residential, or
family pools hereinafter constructed, other than indoor pools, and shall apply
to all pools which have a minimum depth of 24 inches of water. No person in
possession of land within the city or the jurisdiction of its zoning ordinance,
either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated
an outdoor private, residential, or family pool, having a depth of 24 inches or
more, shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or wall as herein provided.
   (E)   Drainage of said swimming pool must not be onto any adjoining
property. There shall be no drainage of said swimming pool into the sanitary
sewer of the city. Drainage may be permitted into the storm sewer provided the
chemicals contained in said swimming pool are first diluted. All chemicals for
said swimming pool must be stored in a secure area.
   (F)   All newly constructed swimming pools must be inspected by the City
Building Inspector prior to being filled with water for the first time.
(’72 Code, § 9-106) (Ord. 1307, passed 5-11-89; Am. Ord. 1874, passed 7-8-04;
Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.002 EGRESS WINDOWS, REQUIRED.
   All new basements and additions that include new basement areas must also
have an escape/rescue window included in the scope of work whether finished or
not. Refer to Section R310 of the International Residential Code, latest
edition for further information.
(Ord. 1890, passed 2-10-05)
Cross reference:
   International Residential Code, see §
150.016
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 150.015 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in
buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
relocated, and converted, the current edition, of the International Building
Code (IBC) 2009 Edition issued by the International Code Council and printed in
book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference as though printed in
full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the
State of Nebraska. One copy of the International Building Code 2009 is on file
at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the International Building Code shall be
controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(’72 Code, § 9-201)
   (B)   Where provisions of the International Building Code conflict with the
provisions of other portions of this chapter or with the provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
(’72 Code, § 9-202)
(Am. Ord. 1017, passed 4-25-74; Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1855,
passed 11-13-03; Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12)
§ 150.016 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in
houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated,
and converted, the current edition of the International Residential Code (IRC)
2009 Edition issued by the International Code Council and printed in book or
pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein insofar as said code does not
conflict with the statutes of the state of Nebraska. One copy of the
International Residential Code 2009 is on file at the office of the City Clerk
and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions
of the International Residential Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-901, 19-922) (’72 Code, § 9-301)
   (B)   The following sections of the International Residential Code are
hereby adopted and made a part of the Wahoo building requirements as follows:
SECTION R324
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS
R324.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors. New Construction. The following subsections
shall govern the requirements on carbon monoxide detectors in new construction.
R324.1.1 Location. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed on every floor
level of new construction dwelling. If a floor level contains bedrooms, at
least one (1) detector shall be located in the immediate vicinity but outside
of the bedrooms. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. Carbon monoxide
detectors shall be listed and installed in accordance with their listing.
Combination carbon monoxide/smoke detectors are acceptable as long as they meet
all requirements.
Exceptions:
1.   Carbon monoxide detectors are not required in dwelling units with no
combustion appliances and without an attached garage.
2.   Carbon monoxide detectors are not required in dwelling units with only
direct vent combustion appliances and without an attached garage.
R324.1.2 Interconnection. In new construction, carbon monoxide detectors
located within a single dwelling unit shall be interconnected in such a manner
that the actuation of one alarm shall activate all of the alarms in the
individual dwelling unit.
R324.1.3 Power Source. In new construction, carbon monoxide detectors shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is
served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery back-up.
Wiring shall be permanent and without disconnecting switch other than those
required for overcurrent protection.
R324.2 Carbon Monoxide Detectors, in Alterations, Repairs or Additions. The
following subsections shall govern the requirements on carbon monoxide
detectors when existing dwellings are altered, repairs or have additions.
R324.2.1 Location. When interior alterations, repairs, or additions requiring a
permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in
existing dwellings, the individual unit shall be provided with carbon monoxide
detectors as required in Section R324.1.1.
R324.2.2 Interconnection. When interior alterations, repairs, or additions
requiring a permit occur, carbon monoxide detectors are required to be
interconnected. In the event that alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space, or basement available which could provide
access for interconnection, interconnection is not required.
R324.2.3 Power Source.  When interior alterations, repairs, or additions
requiring a permit occur, carbon monoxide detectors are required to be hard
wired to a primary power source from the building wiring and shall receive
backup power from a battery source. In the event that alterations or repairs do
not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which
could provide access for hard wiring to a primary power source, hard wiring is
not required. In this case, carbon monoxide detectors shall be permitted to be
battery operated.
   (C)   Where the provisions of the International Residential Code conflict
with the provisions of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of
Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
('72 Code, § 9-302)
(Am. Ord. 1017, passed 4-25-74; Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1855,
passed 11-13-03; Am. Ord. 1921, passed 3-9-06; Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12)
§ 150.017 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES,
SOLDER, AND FLUX; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in the
installation of plumbing and heating, the current edition of the IAPMO “2009
Uniform Plumbing Code,” issued by the International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials, printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated
by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed in full
herein, insofar as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the state
of Nebraska. One copy of the Plumbing Code is on file at the office of the City
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of the Plumbing Code shall be controlling throughout the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 71-5301) ('72 Code, § 9-401, 9-403) (Am. Ord. 1082, passed 12-9-76;
Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1292, passed 5-12-88; Am. Ord. 1508,
passed 8-24-95)
   (B)   The following sections of the Plumbing Code are hereby revised:
      Section 1209.5.1.1 Materials. Materials used for piping systems shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter of shall be acceptable to the
authority having jurisdiction. Specifically, materials used from the point of
delivery to inside the structure shall meet the standards spelled out in
Section 1209.5.2.2 Steel and wrought-iron pipe specifications. (Ord. 1911A,
passed 11-22-05)
   (C)   Where the provisions of the Plumbing Code conflict with the provisions
of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of Chapter 151 of this
code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent provisions shall govern.
(’72 Code, § 9-402)
(Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.018 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and fire proof installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials
in the installation of electrical wiring and appliances, the current edition of
the “National Electrical Code,” issued by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein, insofar as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the
state of Nebraska. One copy of the Electrical Code is on file at the office of
the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the Electrical Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
('72 Code, § 9-501) (Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1471, passed 12-
12-94)
   (B)   Where provisions of the Electrical Code conflict with the provisions
of other portions of this chapter or with the provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
('72 Code, § 9-502)
§ 150.019 FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for the
safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from the hazards of
fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous
substances, materials, and devices in the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises by the 2009 edition of the “Life Safety Code,” issued by the National
Fire Protection Association, printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein. A copy of the most current edition will be on file at the
office of the City Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. The provisions of the 2009 “Life Safety Code” shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(’72 Code, § 9-601) (Ord. 1193, passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 1-14-93;
Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12)
Cross reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §
91.25
§ 150.020 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in the
installation of mechanical equipment, the current edition of the IAPMO 2009
Uniform Mechanical Code, issued by the International Association of Plumbing
and Mechanical Officials, printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein, insofar as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the
State of Nebraska. One copy of the Mechanical Code is on file at the office of
the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the Mechanical Code shall be controlling through the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
   (B)   Where the provisions of the Mechanical Code conflict with provisions
of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
(Ord. 1856, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12)
§ 150.021 ENERGY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2003 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Energy Code of this
municipality for regulating and governing energy efficient envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as
herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of
the Municipal Clerk are hereby adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this code, insofar as such code does not conflict with the statues of
the State of Nebraska. One copy of the Energy Code in on file at the office of
the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the Energy Code shall be controlling through the city and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
   (B)   Where the provisions of the Energy Code conflict with provisions of
other portions of this chapter or with provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
(Ord. 1901, passed 6-9-05; Am. Ord. 2106, passed 9-27-12)
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.030 REGULATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any
building or structure within the city without a written permit to do so.
Application may be made to the City Clerk and shall include the present and
future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the equipment
to be used, and such other information as the City Council may require. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the County
Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the moving of
buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the building is presently located. The City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Chief of Police for approval of the proposed route over
which the building is to be moved. Upon approval of the City Council, the City
Clerk shall then issue the permit, provided that a good and sufficient
corporate surety bond, check, or cash in an amount set by motion of the City
Council and conditioned upon moving the building without doing damage to any
private or city property is filed with the City Clerk prior to the granting of
any permit. In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover
to interfere with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line,
the company or companies owning, using, or operating the poles, wires, or line
shall upon proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by
disconnecting the poles, wires, or line relative to the building moving
operation. All expense of the disconnection, removal, or related work shall be
paid in advance by the licensee unless such disconnection or work is furnished
on different terms as provided in the company's franchise. Whenever the moving
of any building necessitates interference with a water main, sewer main, pipes,
or wire belonging to the city, notice in writing of the time and route of the
building moving operation shall be given to the various city officials in
charge of the city utility departments who shall proceed in behalf of the city
and at the expense of the mover to make such disconnections and do such work as
is necessary.
('72 Code, § 10-431) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate moving of buildings, see Neb. RS 17-142
   Vehicle size, weight, and load regulations, see Neb. RS 60-6,288 through 60-
6,299
   Taxes, removal or demolition, and liens, see Neb. RS 77-1725.01
§ 150.031 DEPOSIT.
   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the city police
shall inspect the premises and report to the City Clerk as to the extent of
damages, if any, resulting from the relocation and whether any city laws have
been violated during the operation. Upon a satisfactory report from the city
police, the City Clerk shall return the corporate surety bond, cash, or check
deposited by the applicant. In the event the basement, foundation, or portion
thereof is not properly filled, covered, or in a clean and sanitary condition,
the City Council may apply the money deposited for the purpose of defraying the
expense of correcting the conditions. If the expense of correcting the
hazardous condition is greater than the amount of the deposit set by the City
Council as required herein, the City Council may recover such excess expense by
civil suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.
('72 Code, § 10-432)
BUILDING REGULATIONS ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.045 BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWERS.
   The Building Inspector shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. For such purpose, he or she shall have
the powers of a police officer. In accordance with the procedure and with the
approval of the City Council, the Building Inspector may appoint such number of
officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized
from time to time. He or she may deputize such employees as may be necessary to
carry out the enforcement functions. Upon presentation of proper credentials,
the Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized representatives may enter
at any reasonable time any building, structure, or premises in the city to
perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this code. Whenever any building
work is being done contrary to the laws of this city, the Building Inspector
may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged
in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith
stop work until authorized by the Building Inspector to proceed with the work.
Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of this code or
the Building Code, the Building Inspector may order such use discontinued and
the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person
causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within
ten days after receipt of such notice to make the structure, or portion
thereof, comply with the requirements of this code except as otherwise
hereinafter provided. The Building Inspector, or any employee acting in good
faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of his or her duties,
shall not thereby render himself or herself liable personally and he or she is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
person or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the
Building Inspector or an employee, because of such act or omission performed by
him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of this code or the Building
Code, shall be defended by the legal department until final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive so far as
may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the city.
('72 Code, § 3-601)
§ 150.046 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   All buildings or structures or portions thereof, hereafter called
"premises" which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress,
or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous to human
life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal as set forth herein.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined every
premise reported to be a public nuisance as defined in division (A) above.
   (C)   If such premise is found to be a public nuisance, the Building
Inspector shall give to the owner of such premises written notice stating the
defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the
premises to commence within a reasonable time either the required repairs of
improvements or demolition and removal of the premises, and all such work shall
be completed within 90 days from the date of the notice unless otherwise
stipulated by the Building Inspector. If necessary, such notice shall also
require the premises to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the
Building Inspector. The notice shall also set forth a date, time, and place of
a meeting of the City Council at which the City Council shall hear the
testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify respecting the condition
of the premise constituting the public nuisance, including the owner thereof,
which testimony shall include the estimated costs of abatement and other
matters which may be pertinent.
   (D)   Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service upon the
owner of record if he or she shall be found within the corporate limits. If he
or she is not found within the city limits, such service may be made upon said
owner by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period within which
said owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the
Building Inspector shall begin as of the date he or she receives such notice.
   (E)   The Building Inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such premises a notice to read:
   "DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.
   City of Wahoo."
Such notice shall remain posted until the required repair, demolition, or
removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the Building Inspector, and no person shall enter the premises
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
premises.
   (F)   At the conclusion of the hearing of the City Council as set forth in
division (C) above, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare its
findings. If the City Council so concludes, it may declare the condition
existing to be a public nuisance and direct the Mayor and/or the Building
Inspector to proceed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the notice
as set forth in division (C) above or as modified by the City Council and set
forth within said resolution. Further, at the conclusion of the hearing of the
City Council, if the premise poses an immediate danger to the health, safety,
or general welfare of any person or persons, and the City Council so finds and
if the owner fails to remedy the situation in a reasonable time, the City
Council may summarily cause the repair or demolition or removal of such
building or structure. Such determination shall be considered a final order of
the city. The city shall thereafter file a copy of such resolution in the
office of the Saunders County Register of Deeds. No fee shall be charged for
such recording or the release of such recording.
   (G)   In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
notice and/or resolution to repair, rehabilitate, or demolish and remove said
premises, the City Council may order the owner of the premises prosecuted as a
violator of the provisions of this code and may order the Building Inspector to
proceed with the work specified in such notice and/or resolution.
   (H)   If the city/Building Inspector proceeds to abate the nuisance, a
statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the City Council.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises by the City Council,
after giving notice to the owner of the premises and the opportunity of the
owner to be heard regarding said costs. Such costs shall be charged to the
owner of the premises involved as a special assessment on the land on which the
premises is located and shall be collected in the manner provided for special
assessments and/or collected from the owner of the premises and the city may
enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 18-1722) ('72 Code, § 3-602)  (Am. Ord. 2007, passed 10-16-08)
§ 150.047 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure in the city, or
cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit
for each such building or structure from the Building Inspector.
   (B)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such
application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract, and house and street address or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
      (3)   Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building.
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications.
      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work.
      (6)   List of all subcontractors.
      (7)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent, who may
be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
      (8)   Give such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Building Inspector.
('72 Code, § 3-604) (Am. Ord. 1857, passed 11-24-03)
§ 150.048 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work
proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the
Building Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. Plans
shall include a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building and of
every existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed specifications,
the Building Inspector may approve references on the plans to a specific
section or part of the Building Code or other ordinances or laws. Computations,
stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans
shall be submitted when required by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Every permit issued by the Building Inspector shall be for a twelve
month period and shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned any time
after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before such work can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee
therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work;
provided, no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work; and provided further, that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year. The Building Inspector may, in writing,
suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this code whenever the
permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or
in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
code.
('72 Code, § 3-605)
§ 150.049 FEES.
   For new construction, the fee for a permit is based upon the number of
square feet of floor space, all floors except basements included, which the new
structure occupies, including attached and detached garages. All fees charged
shall be set by the Building Inspector and when approved by the City Council
shall be on file at the office of the Building Inspector and the office of the
City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time.
('72 Code, § 3-606)
§ 150.050 INSPECTION.
   (A)   All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector, and certain types of
construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors. Work
requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or
his or her agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a conspicuous
place on the front of the premises and in such position as to allow the
Building Inspector conveniently to make the required entries thereon regarding
inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained in such position by the
permit holder until the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (B)   No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure beyond
the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
written approval of the Building Inspector. Such written approval shall be
given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in
the construction. A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Inspector
to verify compliance of the structure with approved plans. There shall be a
final inspection and approval on all buildings when completed and ready for
occupancy.
   (C)   No reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any
building or structure shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatever
without first obtaining the approval of the Building Inspector.
   (D)   The Building Inspector upon notification from the permit holder or his
or her agent shall make the following inspections and shall either approve that
portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or
his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the Building Code.
      (1)   Footing inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and
structural steel is set.
      (2)   Foundation inspection. To be made after forms and structural steel
are in place and before pouring.
      (3)   Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing,
fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys, and vents are
complete.
      (4)   Insulation inspection. To be made after all wall insulation is
installed but not yet covered.
      (5)   Occupancy inspection. To be made after the building is completed
and ready for occupancy.
      (6)   Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified
above, the Building Inspector may make any other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the Building
Code and other laws which are enforced by the Building Inspector.
('72 Code, § 3-607) (Am. Ord. 1858, passed 11-24-03)
§ 150.051 PERMITS TO REPAIR WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.
   Permits to repair, alter, improve, or add to existing frame structures
within the fire limits shall be granted where the repairs, alterations, or
improvements to be made would cost not more than 50% of the value of the
original structure, exclusive of the foundation and where such improvements,
alterations, or additions are made of fire-resistant materials; provided,
however, if the application to repair, alter, improve, or add to existing frame
buildings within the fire limits costs more than 50% of the value of the
original structure, exclusive of foundation, such application shall be denied
until the applicant shall request a permit to erect a new building or structure
of noncombustible materials. Repairs, alterations, or improvements to existing
noncombustible buildings or structures in the fire limits shall be allowed only
on condition that fire-resistant materials are used in the making thereof.
Permits for minor repairs such as roof patching may be permitted regardless of
type of materials used.
('72 Code, § 3-608)
§ 150.052 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or
maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this code or the Building
Code. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the said provisions
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
('72 Code, § 3-603) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.053 BUILDING PERMITS; DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or repair
of any building within the city's jurisdiction and the improvement is $2,500 or
more, a duplicate of such permit shall be issued to the County Assessor.
(Neb. RS 18-1743) (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)
BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.080 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the duty of
enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He or she
shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in the city as
often as necessary to insure compliance with all city ordinances. He or she
shall have the power and authority to order, at the direction of the City
Council, all work stopped on any construction, alteration, or relocation which
violates any provisions prescribed herein. He or she shall, at the direction of
the City Council, issue permission to continue any construction, alteration, or
relocation when the City Council is satisfied that no provision will be
violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within one hour. Such written order may be served by any city police
officer. In the event that the City Council fails to appoint a Building
Inspector, the Chief of Police shall be the Building Inspector ex officio.
('72 Code, § 9-101)
§ 150.081 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
('72 Code, § 9-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.082 PERMIT FEES.
   No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the permit fee
shall have been paid. Nor shall any amendment to a permit be approved until the
additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building or structure, shall have been paid. The fee or fees established by
resolution may be based upon estimated costs, construction costs, costs per
square foot, or any other basis as specified and defined within said
resolution.
('72 Code, § 9-104) (Am. Ord. passed 4-26-73)
§ 150.083 LIABILITY.
   The Building Inspector, or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge
of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself liable
personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for
any himself or herself liable personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building Inspector
or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him or her in the
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, shall be defended by the legal
department of the city until final termination of the proceedings.
('72 Code, § 9-105)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Comprehensive Development Plan Update adopted by reference
   
151.02   Conflicts
Subdivisions
   
151.20   Subdivision regulations incorporated by reference
Zoning
   
151.35   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN UPDATE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   In order to accommodate anticipated long-range future growth, the
Comprehensive Development Plan 2017 for the city, as prepared by JEO Consulting
Group, Inc., is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amendments
which may now or in the future be made as though printed in full herein. Such
plan and study shall consist of maps, graphs, and text. Three copies of the
herein adopted plan and study shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and
available for inspection by any member of the public during office hours.
(’72 Code, § 11-101) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1885A, passed 2-
10-05; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 7-23-09; Am. Ord. 2258, passed 2-8-2018)
§ 151.02 CONFLICTS.
   Where the provisions adopted by this chapter conflict with one another or
with the provisions of
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.
('72 Code, § 11-401)
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.20 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide for harmonious development of the city and its environs; for the
integration of new subdivision streets with other existing or planned streets
or with other features of the Comprehensive Plan; for adequate open spaces for
traffic, recreation, light, and air; for the distribution of population and
traffic in a manner which will tend to create conditions favorable to health,
safety, convenience, or prosperity; and insure conformance of subdivision plans
with capital improvements programs of the city; and to secure equitable
handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards
for observance by subdividers and the Planning Commission and City Council, the
Subdivision Regulations for the city, as prepared by the city and adopted by
Ordinance 2114 adopted November 8, 2012, including any amendments thereto as
may be made therein from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference
herein as if set out in full. One copy of the Subdivision Regulations shall be
kept on file with the City Clerk and available for public inspection during
regular office hours.
(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-922) (’72 Code, § 11-301) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-28-83;
Am. Ord. 1574, passed 5-8-97; Am. Ord. 2114, passed 11-8-2012)
ZONING
§ 151.35 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the
community, and to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, and other public requirements, the Zoning Regulations for the city, as
prepared by JEO Consulting Group, Inc. and published in pamphlet form, is
hereby incorporated by reference, and Transportation Corridor Design Standards
as prepared by Five Rule Rural Planning and SSH Architects, in addition to all
amendments which may now or in the future be made as though printed in full
herein. Three copies of the adopted Zoning Regulations shall be kept on file
with the City Clerk and available for inspection by any member of the public
during office hours.
(’72 Code, §§ 11-201 and 11-202) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-23-83; Am. Ord. 1503,
passed 7-13-95; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 2-10-05; Am. Ord. 2307, passed 5-23-19)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a franchise to the Cengas to construct, maintain,
- -      - -         and operate a gas transmission and distribution system
                     within the city.
1360     2-28-91     Charging and collecting a filing fee from Natural Gas
                     Companies for a rate filing.
                     Granting a franchise to the Lincoln Telephone and
- -      - -         Telegraph Company, Inc. to maintain and operate a
                     telephone system within the city.
                     Granting a franchise to Harmon Cable Investment, Inc., to
1468     10-27-94    own, operate, and maintain a community antenna television
                     system in the city.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Statutes
References to 1972 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA STATUTES
Neb. RS Section Code Section
Neb. RS Section       Code Section
9-201 - 9-266         114.02
9-236                 114.01
9-345.03              114.50
9-642.01              115.02
9-646                 115.01
9-646(1)              115.01
9-646(3)              115.01
9-646(4)              115.01
10-101 - 10-143       35.11
10-201 - 10-209       35.11
10-301 - 10-305       35.11
10-401 - 10-411       35.11
10-606 - 10-614       35.11
Ch. 11, Art. 1        34.30
11-101                32.26
11-103 - 11-118       32.25
12-401 - 12-403       92.01
12-1001 - 12-1004     35.11
13-310                95.035
13-312                95.035
13-314                95.035
13-403                95.010
13-503(7)             35.55
13-504                35.52
13-505                35.52,
                      35.54
13-506                35.53
13-507                35.53
                      35.54,
13-508                35.58,
                      35.73,
                      35.75
                      35.54,
13-509                35.73,
                      35.74
13-509.01             35.51
13-518 - 13-522       35.53,
                      35.54
13-519                36.07
13-606                35.02
13-609                35.14
13-903                35.03
13-1802               34.31
13-2001 et seq.       50.12
13-2020(4)            50.05
13-3401 et seq.       35.58,
                      35.74
16-691.01             35.13
16-714 - 16-716       35.10
17-102                11.02,
                      36.12
17-103                36.14
                      30.17,
17-104                32.13,
                      36.14
17-105                32.13
17-106                32.14
                      30.01,
                      31.01,
                      31.19,
17-107                31.25,
                      31.28,
                      31.29,
                      34.32,
                      36.14
                      30.19,
17-108.02             31.02,
                      32.40,
                      36.14
17-110 - 17-117       30.01
17-118                31.20,
                      34.30
17-119                31.25
                      114.50,
17-120                114.51 -
                      114.62
                      31.18,
                      31.19,
17-121                33.04,
                      94.01,
                      94.03
17-123                94.23,
                      94.27
17-123.01             94.23,
                      94.27
17-124                31.20
17-142                95.004,
                      150.030
17-147                31.21,
                      34.01
17-148                30.16
17-150                31.22,
                      31.23
                      94.99,
                      111.03,
17-207                111.07,
                      111.26,
                      111.27,
                      111.30
17-208                31.18
17-213                31.20
17-214                31.25
17-401 - 17-426       33.07
17-405                31.22,
                      31.23
17-501 - 17-560       33.07
17-502                11.01
17-503                95.006
17-503.01             95.006
17-503.02             95.0061
                      30.30,
                      31.21,
                      111.03,
17-505                111.07,
                      111.26,
                      111.27,
                      111.30,
                      131.01
17-509                95.056
17-510                95.038,
                      95.064
17-511                95.063
                      95.034 -
17-522                95.036,
                      95.061
17-523                95.036
17-524                95.035,
                      95.063
17-525                112.01
17-526                96.05 -
                      96.08
17-529.01             35.11
17-529.08             35.11
17-540                35.13
17-541                31.01
17-548                96.04,
                      96.11
                      91.01,
                      91.27,
17-549                91.34,
                      91.40,
                      91.42
                      94.21,
17-555                95.004,
                      98.16
                      91.34,
17-556                91.39,
                      91.40,
                      130.03
                      95.004,
                      95.031,
17-557                95.032,
                      95.058,
                      95.059
17-557.01             95.004
17-558                95.002,
                      95.067
17-559                95.002,
                      95.067
17-563                94.99,
                      95.005
17-567                95.057,
                      95.080
17-567(1)             95.001
17-568                31.23
                      31.22,
17-568.01             31.23,
                      33.07,
                      35.01
17-568.02             35.01
17-602                36.11
17-604                32.25
17-607                35.09
17-608                35.13
17-609                35.13
17-610                31.15
17-612                32.40
                      10.15,
                      30.32,
17-613                30.35 -
                      30.37,
                      35.01
                      30.33,
17-614                30.34,
                      30.38
17-615                30.36
17-616                30.34,
                      32.07
17-702                35.71
17-706                35.57
17-708                35.04
17-710                35.07
17-711                35.04
17-714                35.03
17-715                35.03
17-718                34.01
17-720                35.10
17-803                35.13
17-905                35.11
17-908                35.11
17-911                35.11
17-919                31.22,
                      31.23
17-939                35.11
17-941                92.02
17-948 - 17-952       35.16
17-953                34.01
17-958                35.11
17-968                35.11
17-1001               94.22,
                      150.016
17-1237 et seq.       35.13
17-1269 et seq.       35.13
                      91.25,
18-132                94.02,
                      150.016,
                      151.20
18-305 - 18-312       32.41
18-412                36.43
18-412.01             35.01
18-412.02             36.43
18-1001 - 18-1006     95.006
18-1201 - 18-1202     35.11
18-1214               35.12
18-1216               35.06
18-1706 et seq.       34.58
                      94.21,
                      94.22,
18-1720               94.27,
                      94.55,
                      94.99
18-1722               94.99,
                      150.046
18-1729               70.20
18-1743               150.053
18-1748               95.066
18-1751               95.007
18-1755               95.009
18-1801 - 18-1805     35.11
18-1907               111.02,
                      111.04
18-1908               111.05
18-1909               111.06
18-1910               111.01,
                      111.02
18-1911               111.01
18-2101 - 18-2144     33.05
18-2101.01            33.05
18-2145 - 18-2154     33.05
18-2442 et seq.       95.037
18-2501               36.30
18-2503 - 18-2511     36.30
18-2512               36.31
18-2513               36.31
18-2514               36.32
18-2515               36.32
18-2516               36.33
18-2517               36.34
18-2518               36.35,
                      36.41
18-2519               36.36
18-2520               36.37
18-2521               36.38
18-2522               36.39
18-2523               36.40
18-2524               36.40,
                      36.41
18-2525               36.40
18-2526               36.40,
                      36.41
18-2527               36.41
18-2528               36.41
18-2529               36.41,
                      36.42
18-2530               36.41,
                      36.42
18-2531               36.42
18-2532 - 18-2535     36.43
18-2536               36.43
18-2537               36.43
18-2538               36.321
19-901                150.016
19-901 - 19-914       33.03
19-901 - 19-933       91.25
19-902                94.02
19-905                36.41
19-907 - 19-912       33.03
19-908                33.02
19-910                33.03
19-912.01             33.03
19-922                150.016,
                      151.20
19-924 - 19-929       33.02
19-929                33.02
19-1301 - 19-1304     35.08
19-1302               35.08
19-1309               35.70
19-1309 - 19-1312     35.70
19-1401 - 19-1404     33.07
19-2427               95.008
19-2428               95.065
19-2428 - 19-2431     95.007,
                      95.063
19-2429               95.065
19-2430               95.065
19-2431(1)            95.065
19-2431(2)            95.065
19-2901 - 19-2909     35.02
19-3101               30.18
19-3701               10.15,
                      30.37
20-203                96.30
20-301 - 20-322       90.03
20-301 - 23-344       90.01
23-186                35.12
23-3513               35.11
25-505.01             36.13
25-510.02             36.32
25-21,149 - 25-21,164 36.321
Ch. 28                110.10
28-109                96.33
28-401                90.02
28-419                131.05
28-420                131.05
28-431                131.20
28-512                92.05
28-519                34.61,
                      91.03
28-520                96.30
28-521                96.30
28-907                34.62,
                      91.09
                      91.02,
28-908                91.04,
                      91.06,
                      91.10
28-1008               96.30
28-1012               96.12,
                      96.13
28-1012.01            96.12,
                      96.13
28-1213               91.34
28-1229               91.34
28-1233               91.34
28-1233(3)            91.34
28-1321               94.55
28-1418               131.50
28-1418 - 28-1429.03  110.02
28-1419               131.51
28-1420 - 28-1429     110.02,
                      110.04
28-1422               110.01
28-1423               110.01,
                      110.02
28-1424               110.03
28-1425               110.02,
                      110.03
28-1429               110.03
28-1429.04            110.02
28-1429.05            110.02
28-1429.06            110.02
28-1429.07            110.02
28-1465               34.31
28-1466               34.31
28-1472               34.31
29-215                34.31
32-101 et seq.        36.01,
                      36.07
32-109                30.19
32-110                36.11
32-115                36.11
32-401                36.01
32-404                36.01
32-404(1)             36.01
32-405                36.07,
                      36.13
                      30.01,
32-533                30.15,
                      36.14
32-554                36.14
32-556                36.01
32-559                36.07
32-560                30.18
32-561                30.18
32-562                36.13
32-564                36.07,
                      36.08
36-567 - 32-570       36.13
32-567 - 32-572       30.18
32-568                30.18
32-574                36.13
32-603                30.19
32-604                30.19
32-606                36.08
32-606.01             36.13
32-607                36.08
32-607(2)             36.08
32-608                36.06
32-615                36.09
32-616                36.09
32-616 - 32-618       36.09
32-617                36.09
32.618                36.09
32-621                36.09
32-625(2)             36.09
32-627                36.09
32-628                36.09,
                      95.006
32-628 - 32-631       35.72
32-629                36.09,
                      36.13
32-630                36.09,
                      36.13
32-632                36.13
32-710                36.09
32-801 - 32-822       36.01
32-802                35.72
32-811                36.02
32-952 - 32-959       36.07
32-1122               36.03
32-1201 - 32-1208     36.01
32-1202               36.07
32-1301 - 32-1303     36.13
32-1304               36.13
32-1305               36.13
32-1306               36.13
32-1307               36.13
32-1308               36.13
32-1309               36.13
33-139.01             34.02
35-101 - 35-103       34.02
35-102                31.21
                      31.21,
35-108                34.02,
                      34.53
35-520                91.09
35-901                34.63
37-1254.01            34.31
37-1254.02            34.31
                      34.50,
38-1201 et seq.       34.52,
                      34.64
Ch. 39                70.08,
                      70.09
39-835 - 39-842.01    35.11
44-4301 - 44-4339     32.70
44-4303               32.70
45-104.01             95.063
46-1212               95.011
48-115                34.53
48-1503               35.01
49-801(16)            10.05
49-14,102             32.41
49-14,103.01          32.41
49-14,103.02          32.41
49-14,103.03          32.41
49-14,103.04          32.41
49-14,103.05          32.41
49-14,103.06          32.41
49-1408               32.41
49-1425               32.41
49-1499.04            32.41
51-201                35.72,
                      93.06
51-201 - 51-219       93.01
51-202                33.01
51-204                33.01
51-205                93.02
51-207                93.03
51-209                93.07
51-211                93.04,
                      93.05
51-212                93.06
51-214                93.02
51-501                35.72
52-601.01 et seq.     34.42
Ch. 53, Art. 1        115.02
53-124                113.02
53-131                113.01
53-134                113.01
53-179                113.02
54-601                96.10
54-602                96.10
                      96.05 -
54-603                96.07,
                      96.16
54-605                96.08,
                      96.09
54-606                96.01
54-617                96.30
54-618                96.31
54-619                96.32
54-620                96.33
54-621                96.33
54-622.01             96.33
54-623                96.33
Ch. 60                70.08,
                      70.09
                      70.03,
60-103                70.08,
                      70.09
60-135.01             70.03,
                      70.08
60-376                131.20
                      70.03,
60-4,126              70.08,
                      70.09
60-4,163              34.31
60-4,164              34.31
60-4,182              70.02
60-6,166              91.05
60-6,166(1)(a)(ii)    70.04
60-6,183              91.08
60-6,184              91.07
60-6,250              95.060
60-6,196              34.31
60-6,197              34.31
60-6,211.01           34.31
50-6,211.02           34.31
60-6,288 - 60-6,299   150.030
60-6,288(2)(j)        95.060
60-6,294(10)          95.060
                      70.03,
60-509                70.08,
                      70.09
60-699                70.08,
                      70.09
60-1901               131.20
60-1902               131.20
60-1903               131.20
60-1903.01            131.20
60-1905               131.20
60-1906               131.20
60-1907               131.20
60-1908               131.20
60-1909               131.20
64-118                11.01
70-504                36.43
70-624.04             32.41
70-650.02             36.43
70-1012,2             38.20
71-1637               35.72
71-4401               96.01
71-4406               96.14
71-4408               96.11
71-5301               150.017
73-101 et seq.        35.01
77-1343               95.065
77-1601               35.73,
                      35.74
77-1601.02            35.73
77-1606               35.72,
                      35.73
77-1632               35.74
                      35.58,
77-1633               35.74,
                      35.75
77-1702               35.14
77-1725.01            150.030
77-2304               35.10
77-2337               35.08
77-2339               35.08
77-2341               35.13
77-2362               35.09
77-2365.01            35.09
77-2366               35.09,
                      35.10
77-2386 - 77-23,106   35.10
77-3001               114.50
                      35.70,
77-3442               35.71,
                      35.72
77-3442 - 77-3444     35.72
77-3443               35.72
77-3444               35.72,
                      36.07
77-23,109 et seq.     35.13
79-3401 et seq.       35.58,
                      35.74
80-202                35.72
80-203 - 80-205       36.43
81-145 - 81-162       35.01
81-502                91.25
81-506                31.21
                      31.21,
81-512                34.08,
                      91.28
81-520.01             91.40;
                      91.41
81-829.39             34.56,
                      34.58
81-829.48             34.56,
                      34.58
81-829.65             34.31
81-1438               31.01
81-1444               34.30
81-2104               111.30
81-2115               111.29
81-2121               111.25
81-3401 - 81-3455     31.22,
                      31.23
81-3423               95.011
81-3445               95.011
81-3449 - 81-3453     95.011
81-3449(3)            95.011
81-3449(9)            95.011
81-3449(11)           95.011
81-3449(13)           95.011
81-3449(14)           95.011
81-3453(3)            95.011
81-3453(4)            95.011
81-3453(6)            95.011
81-3453(7)            95.011
81-3453(10)           95.011
81-3453(12)           95.011
81-3453(13)           95.011
81-3453(15)           95.011
84-712.05             10.20
84-1407 et seq.       32.02,
                      32.09
84-1408               32.02
84-1408 - 84-1414     32.031
                      32.03,
84-1409            35.58,
                      35.75
84-1409(1)            32.01
84-1409(2)            32.01
84-1410               32.04
84-1411               32.02,
                      32.03
84-1411(3)            32.031,
                      32.08
84-1411(4)            32.05
84-1412               32.06,
                      32.09
84-1413               32.06
84-1413(2)            32.07
84-1413(3)            32.07
                      
 
REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE
1972 Code Section 2001 Code Section
1972 Code Section 2001 Code Section
1-101             30.01
1-102             30.16
1-103             30.15
1-104             30.17
1-105             30.18
1-106             30.02
1-107             30.19
1-201             31.01
1-202             31.02
1-203             31.03
1-204             31.15
1-209             31.18
1-210             31.19
1-211             31.20
1-212             31.21
1-213             31.22
1-214             31.23
1-216             31.25
1-217             31.26
1-218             31.27
1-219             31.28
1-220             31.29
1-301             32.25
1-302             32.26
1-401             11.01
1-501             32.01
1-502             32.01
1-504             32.04
1-505             32.05
1-506             32.06
1-507             32.07
1-508             32.08
1-509             32.09
1-510(part)       32.13,
                  32.14
1-511             32.10
1-512             32.11
1-513             32.12
1-515             32.03
1-601             30.30
1-602             30.31
1-603             30.34
1-604             30.35
1-605             30.32
1-606             30.33
1-607             30.37
1-608             30.36
1-609             30.38
1-610             30.39
1-701             36.01
1-703             36.02
1-704             36.02
1-705             36.03
1-706             36.04
1-707             36.05
1-708             36.06
1-709             36.07
1-711             36.09
1-713             36.11
1-714             36.12
1-715             36.13
1-716             36.14
1-801             35.50
1-801.01          35.55
1-802             35.52
1-803             35.53
1-804             35.54
1-804.01          35.51
1-805             35.56
1-806             35.57
1-807             35.71
1-808             35.04
1-809             35.01
1-810             35.02
1-812             35.04
1-814             35.07
1-815             35.08
1-817             35.09
1-818             35.13
1-819             35.11
1-820             35.12
1-821             35.30
1-822             35.31
1-823             35.32
1-824             35.33
1-825             35.06
1-826             35.73
1-901             32.40
1-902             32.41
1-903             32.42
1-904             32.43
1-1001            32.55
1-1002            32.56
1-1003            32.57
1-1101            37.01
1-1102            37.02
1-1103            37.03
1-1104            37.04
1-1201            36.30
1-1202            36.31
1-1203            36.32
1-1204            36.33
1-1205            36.34
1-1206            36.35
1-1207            36.36
1-1208            36.37
1-1209            36.38
1-1210            36.39
1-1211            36.40
1-1212            36.41
1-1213            36.42
1-1215            36.43
1-1301            32.70
2-101             30.20
2-102             30.20
2-103             30.20
2-201             33.01
2-202             33.02
2-203             33.03
2-204             33.04
2-206             33.05
3-101             34.01
3-102             34.02
3-103             34.03
3-104             34.14
3-105             34.15
3-106             34.08
3-107             34.09
3-108             34.04
3-109             34.05
3-110             34.06
3-111             34.07
3-112             34.10
3-113             34.11
3-114             34.12
3-115             34.13
3-201             93.01
3-202             93.03
3-203             93.02
3-204             93.04
3-205             93.05
3-206             93.06
3-207             93.07
3-208             93.08
3-209             93.09
3-301             92.01
3-302             92.02
3-304             92.03
3-305             92.04
3-310             92.05
3-401             35.16
3-601             150.045
3-602             150.046
3-603             150.052
3-604             150.047
3-605             150.048
3-606             150.049
3-607             150.050
3-608             150.051
3-1101            34.30
3-1102            34.31
3-1103            34.32
4-101             94.01
4-102             94.03
4-103             94.02
4-104             94.04
4-302             94.21
4-303             94.23
4-304             94.22
4-305             94.24
4-306             94.25
4-307             94.26
4-308             94.27
4-309             94.28
4-311             94.30
4-312             94.31
4-313             94.32
4-314             94.33
4-315             94.34
4-316             94.35
4-317             94.36
4-319             94.37
4-501             94.55
4-502             94.56
4-503             94.57
5-417             70.21
5-417.01          70.22
5-417.02          70.20
5-418             70.23
5-419             70.24
5-711(part)       70.24
5-714.02          70.02
5-223(2)          70.24
6-101             96.05
6-102             96.06
6-103             96.07
6-104             96.01
6-105             96.08
6-106             96.09
6-108             96.10
6-109             96.11
6-110             96.04
6-111             96.14
6-114             96.30
6-115             96.31
6-116             96.32
6-117             96.34
6-118             96.33
6-119             96.34
6-322             130.03
6-332             131.03
6-337             131.20
6-338             131.05
6-343             131.01
6-344             131.50
7-101             91.01
7-102             91.02
7-103             91.03
7-104             91.04
7-105             91.05
7-106             91.06
7-107             91.07
7-108             91.08
7-109             91.09
7-110             91.10
7-201             91.25
7-202             91.26
7-203             91.27
7-204             91.28
7-205             91.29
7-206             91.30
7-207             91.31
7-208             91.32
7-209             91.33
7-211             91.35
7-212             91.36
7-213             91.37
7-214             91.42
7-215             91.38
7-216             91.39
7-217             91.40
7-218             91.41
7-301             91.34
7-401             110.10
8-101             95.001
8-102             95.002
8-105             95.003
8-106             95.004
8-107             95.004
8-108             95.005
8-109             95.006
8-110             95.007
8-111             95.008
8-112             95.009
8-113             95.010
8-201             95.030
8-202             95.030
8-204             95.032
8-205             95.033
8-206             95.034
8-207             95.035
8-208             95.036
8-209             95.037
8-210             95.038
8-211             95.039
8-212             95.040
8-301             95.055
8-302             95.056
8-303             95.057
8-304             95.058
8-305             95.059
8-306             95.060
8-307             95.061
8-308             95.062
8-309             95.063
8-310             95.064
8-311             95.065
8-312             95.066
8-313             95.067
8-314             95.067
8-401             95.080
9-101             150.080
9-102             150.081
9-104             150.082
9-105             150.083
9-106             150.001
9-201             150.015
9-202             150.015
9-301             150.016
9-302             150.016
9-401             150.017
9-402             150.017
9-403             150.017
9-501             150.018
9-502             150.018
9-601             150.019
10-211            114.01
10-214            114.02
10-215            114.50
10-216            114.51
10-217            114.52
10-218            114.53
10-219            114.54
10-220            114.55
10-221            114.56
10-222            114.57
10-223            114.58
10-224            114.60
10-225            114.59
10-226            114.60
10-227            114.62
10-307            113.01
10-318            113.02
10-401            111.01
10-402            111.02
10-403            111.03
10-404            111.04
10-405            111.05
10-406            111.06
10-407            111.07
10-408            111.01
10-409            111.08
10-410            111.09
10-411            111.10
10-412            111.25
10-414            111.26
10-415            111.27
10-416            111.28
10-417            111.29
10-418            111.30
10-419            111.25
10-420            111.31
10-421            111.32
10-431            150.030
10-432            150.031
10-442            131.51
10-443            115.01
10-444            115.02
10-601            112.01
10-601.01         112.02
10-601.02         112.03
10-601.03         112.04
10-601.04         112.25
10-601.05         112.26
10-601.07         112.27
10-601.09         112.28
10-601.10         112.29
10-601.11         112.30
10-601.12         112.31
10-602            112.05
10-603            112.07
10-604            112.08
10-605            112.09
10-701            90.01
10-702            90.02
10-703            90.04
10-704            90.05
10-705            90.06
10-706            90.07
10-707            90.08
10-708            90.03
11-101            151.01
11-201            151.35
11-202            151.35
11-301            151.20
11-401            151.02
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
–      - -         T.S.O. I
–      4-26-73     150.082
–      10-11-73    70.02
1017     4-25-74     150.015,
                     150.016
1038     6-12-75     95.034,
                     95.039
1040     10-9-75     95.034,
                     95.039
1045     12-11-75    30.01
1046     12-11-75    30.17
1047     12-11-75    30.02,
                     30.18
1049     12-11-75    31.21
                     32.01,
1050     12-11-75    32.02,
                     32.05 -
                     32.09
1051     12-11-75    32.12
                     36.01 -
1052     12-11-75    36.06,
                     36.10
1054     12-11-75    33.01
1055     12-11-75    34.02
1056     12-11-75    94.21,
                     94.23
1066     3-11-76     96.08
1080     11-11-76    91.25,
                     91.30
1082     12-9-76     150.017
1086     2-24-77     31.01
1089     2-24-77     131.20
1090     2-24-77     112.07
1099     10-13-77    92.02
1163     12-11-80    36.12
1166     4-23-81     150.015 -
                     150.018
1174     9-24-81     70.20 -
                     70.22
1176     10-8-81     33.01
1178     10-8-81     113.02
1179     10-8-81     32.13,
                     32.14
1182     1-14-82     33.01
                     112.02,
1191     4-14-83     114.50 -
                     114.62
1193     6-9-83      150.019
                     151.35,
1194     7-23-83     151.01,
                     151.20
1196     9-8-83      32.42,
                     32.43
1199     9-22-83     31.23
                     32.01,
1200     9-22-83     32.03 -
                     32.05,
                     32.09
1201     9-22-83     35.01
1202     9-22-83     32.41
1204     9-22-83     95.064
1205     9-22-83     95.065
1208     9-22-83     113.02
1210     9-22-83     91.40
1213     9-22-83     36.30 -
                     36.43
1214     9-22-83     95.006
                     94.23 -
1238     3-28-85     94.28,
                     94.30 -
                     94.36
1242     7-25-85     96.05
1246     10-10-85    30.01
1248     10-10-85    70.24
1249     10-10-85    114.01
1255     5-8-86      113.01
1256     7-10-86     70.20
1261     11-13-86    30.18
1262     11-13-86    31.02
                     36.07,
1263     11-13-86    36.09,
                     36.13,
                     36.14
                     36.31 -
1264     11-13-86    36.34,
                     36.37 -
                     36.42
1265     11-13-86    95.066
1266     11-13-86    30.35
1267     11-13-86    32.41
1268     11-13-86    34.30
1269     11-13-86    95.067
1270     11-13-86    95.067
1274     3-12-87     95.032
1281     9-24-87     32.09
1282     9-24-87     32.70
1283     9-24-87     95.065
1285     9-24-87     95.007
1286     9-24-87     95.008
1292     5-12-88     150.017
1307     5-11-89     150.001
1321     12-28-89    70.24
1322     12-28-89    35.13
1323     12-28-89    35.12
1327     12-28-89    91.34
1328     12-28-89    113.01
1344     5-24-90     96.34
1345     6-28-90     96.34
1346     7-5-90      96.05
1359     1-10-91     70.23
1361     1-24-91     30.18
1362     1-24-91     31.02
1360     2-28-91     T.S.O. I
1361A    2-28-91     94.37
1369     9-12-91     113.02
1381     2-13-92     115.01
1382     2-13-92     115.02
1386     2-27-92     113.01
1396     6-9-92      90.01 -
                     90.08
1417     1-14-93     150.019
1421     2-25-93     32.01
1422     2-25-93     32.04
1434     8-26-93     35.30 -
                     35.33
1442     10-14-93    112.01
1445     12-9-93     30.20
1459     7-28-94     35.52
1461     7-28-94     35.57
1465     8-11-94     94.21
1466     8-11-94     94.21
1468     10-27-94    T.S.O. I
1471     12-12-94    150.018
1478     3-2-95      131.01
1481     3-9-95      32.04
1482     3-9-95      30.34
1483     3-9-95      35.55
1484     3-9-95      35.51
1485     3-9-95      33.02
1486     3-9-95      34.31
1488     3-9-95      95.009
1489     3-9-95      95.010
1503     7-13-95     151.35
1505     7-27-95     70.24
1508     8-24-95     150.017
1515     1-25-96     35.50
1516     1-25-96     35.54
1517     1-25-96     35.57
1518     1-25-96     33.02
1519     1-25-96     33.03
1520     1-25-96     50.03
1532     1-25-96     95.006
1535     5-9-96      112.03
1551     7-25-96     112.04
                     112.01,
1562     11-14-96    112.25 -
                     112.31
1569     4-10-97     112.25 -
                     112.27
1572     4-24-97     34.32
1574     5-8-97      151.20
1577     6-12-97     110.10,
                     112.01
1586     8-14-97     131.50
1589     9-25-97     70.24
1593     9-25-97     31.01
1594     9-25-97     32.03
1595     9-25-97     30.30
1596     9-25-97     30.31
1597     9-25-97     30.34
1598     9-25-97     30.35
1599     9-25-97     30.37
1600     9-25-97     30.38
1601     9-25-97     36.07
1602     9-25-97     35.52
1603     9-25-97     35.54
1604     9-25-97     35.06
1605     9-25-97     35.73
1606     9-25-97     33.04
1619     11-13-97    33.05
1635     7-23-98     30.19
1637     7-23-98     35.52
1638     7-23-98     35.53
1639     7-23-98     35.54
1640     7-23-98     35.71
1641     7-23-98     35.72
1642     7-23-98     35.73
1643     7-23-98     35.70
1645     7-23-98     35.09
1646     7-23-98     35.10
1647     7-23-98     35.01
1648     7-23-98     35.14
1649     7-23-98     33.02
1651     7-23-98     34.31
1657     7-23-98     95.006
1658     7-23-98     95.011
1661     7-23-98     115.01
1662     7-23-98     110.01
1670     11-23-98    35.15
1672     - -         32.40
1677     4-8-99      70.20
1695     9-23-99     32.55 -
                     32.57
1712     1-27-00     10.99
1715     2-10-00     94.21
1749     12-28-00    35.01
1753     3-22-01     130.04.
                     130.05
                     32.031,
1762     3-22-01     35.52,
                     36.41
                     97.01 -
1766     6-14-01     97.15,
                     97.99
                     110.10 -
1780     10-25-01    110.16,
                     110.99
1789     1-24-02     Adopting Ordinance
1790     2-13-02     112.01
1791     2-13-02     32.13
1792     2-13-02     10.99
1795     3-14-02     Repealing 150.065, 150.066
1796     3-14-02     Ch. 71, Sch. I
                     96.11,
1804     5-23-02     96.15,
                     96.30 
1811     8-8-02      70.04
                     30.20,
1815     10-24-02    31.22,
                     31.23,
                     33.07, Repealing 31.24
1817     10-10-02    70.04
1818     10-10-02    70.05 -
                     70.07
1819     10-10-02    Ch. 71, Sch. II
                     111.01 -
                     111.10,
1829     1-23-03     111.25 -
                     111.33,
                     111.50 -
                     111.59
1834     4-10-03     Ch. 71, Sch. II
1841     6-12-03     70.06
                     32.55,
1844     7-24-03     32.56,
                     32.57,
                     32.58
1848     9-25-03     95.067
1849     10-9-03     112.04
1850     10-23-03    Ch. 71, Sch. II
1855     11-13-03    150.015,
                     150.016
1856     11-24-03    150.020
1857     11-24-03    150.047
1858     11-24-03    150.050
                     30.18,
                     32.09,
                     32.41,
                     33.01,
                     34.02,
                     34.31,
                     35.09,
                     35.10,
                     35.14,
                     35.52,
                     35.53,
1862     1-8-04      35.72,
                     36.07,
                     36.09,
                     36.13,
                     36.32,
                     36.321,
                     36.41,
                     95.002,
                     95.006,
                     95.0061,
                     95.067,
                     150.053
1865     1-8-04      32.40
1866     1-22-04     95.032
                     130.04,
1870     3-25-04     130.05,
                     130.06
1874     7-8-04      150.001
1878     11-23-04    35.15
1881     12-9-04     70.20
1885A    2-10-05     151.01
1886     2-10-05     151.35
1890     2-10-05     150.002
1891     2-10-05     33.05
                     31.25,
1898     5-12-05     92.01 -
                     92.05
1901     6-9-05      150.021
1908     11-10-05    112.06 -
                     112.09, Repealing 52.12
1910     11-10-05    Repealing 31.16, 31.17
1911A    11-22-05    150.017
1921     3-9-06      150.016
1926     4-13-06     Ch. 71, Sch. I
1927     4-27-06     112.01
1932     5-25-06     70.06
1937     7-27-06     35.16
1942     9-28-06     70.20
                     94.21,
                     94.25,
                     94.27,
1943     11-9-06     94.28,
                     94.30,
                     94.31,
                     94.35,
                     94.36, Repealing 94.7 - 94.40, 131.01, 131.02, 131.04
1952     12-14-06    34.40 -
                     34.42
1969     4-12-07     Repealing 95.031
                     98.01 -
                     98.09,
1988     12-27-07    98.15 -
                     98.17,
                     98.20 -
                     98.25
1999     7-24-08     94.21
2002     9-11-08     112.01
2007     10-16-08    150.046
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2010     2-19-09     38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.41,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
                     50.01 -
2011     2-19-09     50.17,
                     50.99
2012     2-19-09     112.01
2017     5-28-09     Ch. 71, Sch. I
2021     7-23-09     30.18, Repealing 32.15
2022     7-23-09     151.01
2026     9-24-09     38.31
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2030     11-24-09    38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.41,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
2033     2-11-10     112.01
                     110.50 -
2042     5-27-10     110.55,
                     113.10 -
                     113.15
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2043     6-24-10     38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
2047     9-23-10     95.100 -
                     95.112
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2051     11-18-10    38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
2062     5-12-11     113.10 -
                     113.15
2073     10-13-11    112.25 -
                     112.29
2076     11-22-11    11.02 
2077     11-22-11    36.12
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2080     1-26-12     38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
2085     2-9-12      112.01
2099     8-12-12     33.07
                     150.001,
2106     9-27-12     150.015 -
                     150.021
2114     11-8-12     151.20
                     38.01,
                     38.10,
                     38.11,
                     38.30 -
2121     2-28-13     38.33,
                     38.40,
                     38.50,
                     38.51,
                     38.57
                     10.19,
2123     3-26-13     10.20,
                     10.99
2144     11-14-13    98.06
2174     1-22-15     35.15
2178     3-12-15     33.01
2179     3-12-15     112.01
                     94.21 -
2192     8-27-15     94.37,
                     94.99
2195     9-24-15     113.02
2208     12-22-15    50.12
2219     8-25-16     34.50 -
                     34.64
2220     8-11-16     70.04
                     98.10,
2256     10-26-17    111.70 -
                     111.74,
                     112.01
2258     2-8-18      151.01
                     30.20,
2269     2-8-18      31.01,
                     31.16, Repealing 33.08
2273     2-22-18     31.01,
                     31.21
2281     6-14-18     35.15
2282     8-9-18      70.03
                     31.24,
2290     10-25-18    31.30,
                     31.31
2291     10-25-18    33.07
2296     11-29-18    31.01
2302     3-14-19     30.20
                     96.01 -
                     96.19,
2305     4-11-2019   96.30 -
                     96.34,
                     96.99
2307     5-23-19     151.35
                     99.01 -
2336     12-26-19    99.06,
                     Ch. 99 Appendix
                     38.01,
                     38.10 -
                     38.19,
                     38.21,
2339     12-26-19    38.30 -
                     38.34,
                     38.40 -
                     38.44,
                     38.50 -
                     38.57
2343     3-12-20     131.50,
                     131.51
                     91.38,
2344     4-9-20      110.01,
                     131.52
2345     3-12-20     131.60
                     116.01 -
2352     7-3-20      116.08,
                     116.99
2356     10-8-20     96.30 -
                     96.35
2362     11-24-20    96.99
2365     2-25-21     70.04
2370     8-10-21     151.35
2372     8-10-21     151.35
2373     8-24-21     70.04
2378     11-23-21    36.12
2380     12-28-21    151.35
                     38.01,
2386     3-22-22     38.50 -
                     38.55,
                     38.57
2387     3-8-22      70.20
2392     5-10-22     151.35
                     111.01 -
                     111.10,
                     111.25 -
                     111.33,
2407     11-22-22    111.50 -
                     111.59,
                     111.70 -
                     111.74,
                     111.85 -
                     111.89
2408     11-22-22    95.100 -
                     95.112
                     38.01,
2413     12-13-22    38.50 -
                     38.55,
                     38.57
2416     1-24-23     110.31
2419     2-28-23     35.52
2420     2-28-23     35.53
2421     2-28-23     35.54
2422     2-28-23     35.58
2423     2-28-23     35.72
2424     2-28-23     32.06
2425     2-28-23     36.07
2426     2-28-23     36.13
2427     2-28-23     95.006
2429     4-25-23     70.08
2431     4-25-23     151.35
2433     4-25-23     38.21
2434     4-25-23     114.50 -
                     114.62
2436     5-23-23     151.35
2440     8-22-23     70.09
                     38.01,
                     38.10 -
                     38.21,
                     38.30 -
2447     1-9-24      38.34,
                     38.40 -
                     38.44,
                     38.50 -
                     38.57
2449     1-23-24     35.74
2450     1-23-24     35.75
2451     1-23-24     30.34
2452     1-23-24     30.01
2456     4-23-24     151.35
2457     4-23-24     151.35
2460     8-27-24     112.25 -
                     112.29
                     94.20 -
                     94.28,
2474     - -         94.31 -
                     94.37,
                     94.99
                     35.01,
                     35.13,
2480     - -25       35.14,
                     35.58,
                     35.74
2482     - -25       110.02 -
                     110.04
2484     - -25       32.09
2485     - -25       32.02
2486     - -25       91.41
                     36.01,
4779     - -25       36.07 -
                     36.09,
                     36.13
4781     - -25       30.18
                    
 
