TOWN OF HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-28 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord.- -, passed 4-22-25
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
OF
HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT
HAMDEN MEMORIAL TOWN HALL
HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT 06518

TELEPHONE: (203) 287-2500
 
2023-2025
MAYOR         Lauren Garrett
TOWN CLERK    Karimah Mickens
TOWN ATTORNEY Susan Gruen
 
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
COUNCIL PRESIDENT              Dominique Baez
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Bob Anthony
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Tasha Hunt
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Katie Kiely
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Dominique Baez
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Tom Figlar
COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE         Laurie Sweet
                               
FIRST DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER   Sean Caldwell
SECOND DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER  Jeron Alston
THIRD DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER   Abdul Osmanu
FOURTH DISTRIC COUNCILMEMBER   Sarah Gallagher
FIFTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER   Rhonda Caldwell
SIXTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER   Paula Irvin
SEVENTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER Adrian Webber
EIGHTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER  Ted Stevens
NINTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER   Jim Anthony
                               
CLERK OF THE COUNCIL           Romealia Rampersaud
                               
 
ANNOTATED CHARTER
OF THE
TOWN OF HAMDEN
CONNECTICUT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a345e8b4e85fcdc43bd56cd2b99f2b4a75466906/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2263.png]
 
 
Hon. Lauren Garrett
Mayor
Hon. Karimah Mickens
Town Clerk
Adopted by the electors of the Town of Hamden on November 8, 2022
and effective thereupon, unless otherwise set forth herein.
Amended on April 22, 2025 by the Legislative Council and effective thereupon,
in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
pertaining to the modification of budget adoption dates.
 
PREAMBLE
CHAPTER I: CONSTRUCTION OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF HAMDEN
   Section
1-1:   Title
   Section
1-2:   Definitions and Titles Generally
   Section
1-3:   Time of Appointments and Meetings Generally
   Section
1-4:   Definitions
CHAPTER II: INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS
   Section
2-1:   Territory
   Section
2-2:   Incorporation
   Section
2-3:   General Grant of Powers
   Section
2-4:   Continuance of Rights and Obligations
CHAPTER III: ELECTIONS, ELECTORS, ELECTED OFFICIALS AND TERMS OF OFFICE
   Section
3-1:   Application of the General Statutes
   Section
3-2:   Electors
   Section
3-3:   Date of Election and Terms of Office for Elected Offices
   Section
3-4:   Eligibility
   Section
3-5:   Vacancies in Elected Offices
   Section
3-6:   Temporary Disability or Absence of the Mayor
   Section
3-7:   Reapportionment of Voting Districts
   Section
3-8:   Public Officials to Deliver Records to Successors
   Section
3-9:   Conflict of Interest and Ethics
   Section
3-10:   Removal of Elected and Appointed Officials
CHAPTER IV: LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
   Section
4-1:   Legislative Power
   Section
4-2:   Officers of the Council
   Section
4-3:   Procedures of the Legislative Council - Public Participation in Council
Proceedings
   Section
4-4:   Clerk of the Council
   Section
4-5:   General Powers
   Section
4-6:   Counsel to Council
   Section
4-7:   Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions, Resolutions, Orders or Motions: the
Role of the Legislative Council and the Mayor
   Section
4-8:   Public Notice of Final Action
   Section
4-9:   Petition for Overrule
   Section
4-10:   Selection of Independent Auditors
   Section
4-11:   Approval of Mayoral Appointments
   Section
4-12:   Interlocal Agreements and Regional Cooperation
CHAPTER V: THE MAYOR
   Section
5-1:   Election and Qualifications
   Section
5-2:   Duties
   Section
5-3:   Appointments, Terms of Office and General Powers
   Section
5-4:   Emergency Powers
CHAPTER VI: OTHER ELECTED OFFICIALS
   Section
6-1:   Town Clerk
   Section
6-2:   Registrars of Voters
CHAPTER VII: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   Section
7-1:   General Requirements for Appointed Boards and Commissions
   Section
7-2:   Boards and Commissions Established by the Charter
         A.   Finance Commission
         B.   Civil Service Commission
         C.   Board of Ethics
         D.   Police Commission
         E.   Fire Commission
         F.   Zoning Board of Appeals
         G.   Planning and Zoning Commission
         H.   Building Board of Appeals
         I.   Personnel Appeals Board
         J.   Library Board
         K.   Inland Wetlands Commission
         L.   Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Commission
   Section
7-3:   Appointed Boards and Commissions Required by the Charter
   Section
7-4:   Appointed Boards and Commissions Established by Ordinance or as
Otherwise May Be Prescribed by the General Statutes
   Section
7-5:   Boards Appointed by the Legislative Council
         A.   Board of Assessment Appeals
   Section
7-6:   Continuance of Boards and Commissions
   Section
7-7:   Merger or Consolidation of Boards and Commissions
CHAPTER VIII: THE TOWN GOVERNMENT: DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
   Section
8-1:   The Authority to Establish the Departments of Town Government
   Section
8-2:   Appointment of Department Heads and Other Mayoral Departmental
Appointees; General Requirements
   Section
8-3:   The Legal Department - Town Attorney
   Section
8-4:   Government Administration
         A.   The Department of Finance
         B.   The Tax Collector
         C.   The Assessor
         D.   The Purchasing Agent
         E.   Human Resources
   Section
8-5:   Public Safety, Health and Community Services
         A.   The Police Department
         B.   The Fire Department
         C.   C.   Health and Human Services Departments
   Section
8-6:   Government Operations and Infrastructure
         A.   Department of Public Works and Parks
         B.   Engineering Department
   Section
8-7:   Town Planning, Zoning Enforcement, Environment and Economic Development
         A.   Town Planning and Zoning Enforcement Responsibilities
         B.   Building Department
         C.   The Town Planning and Zoning Department
         D.   Other Departments
CHAPTER IX: EDUCATION
   Section
9-1:   Board of Education
   Section
9-2:   Budget
   Section
9-3:   Compliance and Cooperation
   Section
9-4:   Reporting Requirements
CHAPTER X: BUDGET
   Section
10-1:   The Budget Process
   Section
10-2:   Formulation and Submission of Town Budgetary Requests
   Section
10-3:   Mayor Submits Proposed Town Budget to the Legislative Council and
Finance Commission
   Section
10-4:   Deliberations on the Proposed Town Budget
   Section
10-5:   Legislative Action on the Proposed Town Budget
   Section
10-6:   Approval, Veto, Acceptance and Veto Override of the Adopted Town Budget
   Section
10-7:   Petition for Budget Overrule
   Section
10-8:   Fiscal Year
   Section
10-9:   Expenditures and Accounting
   Section
10-10:   Public Funds and Finance
   Section
10-11:   Referendum on Borrowing of Funds
CHAPTER XI: TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   Section
11-1:   Legal Proceedings
   Section
11-2:   Periodic Review of the Charter
   Section
11-3:   Existing Laws and Ordinances
   Section
11-4:   Amendment of Charter
   Section
11-5:   Saving Clause
   Section
11-6:   Effective Date
   Section
11-7:   "Transition Provision A" Pertaining to § 3-3.B(2) of this Charter - The
General Election Scheduled for 2012
   Section
11-8:   "Transition Provision B" Pertaining to § 3-3.C(3) of this Charter - The
Term of Office for the Registrars of Voter Elected in the General Election
Scheduled for 2012
   Section
11-9:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Regular Members of the
Board of Ethics Derived from § 19-5.A of the Prior Revision of the Charter
(Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-10:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Alternate Members of
the Board of Ethics Derived from § 19-5.A of the Prior Revision of the Charter
(Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-11:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Regular Members of
the Planning and Zoning Commission Derived from § 13-1 of the Prior Revision of
the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-12:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Alternate Members of
the Planning and Zoning Commission Derived from § 13-2 of the Prior Revision of
the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-13:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Members of the
Personnel Appeals Board Derived from § 17-5 of the Prior Revision of the
Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-14:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Members of the
Library Board Derived from § 14-1 of the Prior Revision of the Charter (Rev.
November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-15:   "Transition Provision E" Pertaining to § 7-2.J of this Charter - The
Inland Wetlands Commission
   Section
11-16:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for Members of the Board
of Tax Review Derived from § 4-1 of the Prior Revision of the Charter (Rev.
November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-17:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for the Six Members of
the Board of Education Derived from § 12-1 of the Prior Revision of the Charter
(Rev. November 8, 1983)
   Section
11-18:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for the Three Members of
the Board of Education Derived from § 12-1 of the Prior Revision of the Charter
(Rev. November 8, 1983)
CHAPTER XII: SUNSET PROVISIONS
   Section
12-1:   Generally
   Section
12-2:   Ethics Commission
   Section
12-3:   Parks and Recreation Commission
CHAPTER XIII: HISTORICAL PROVISIONS
   Section
13-1:   Status of Present Employees
ANNOTATED CHARTER
TOWN OF HAMDEN
PREAMBLE1
1   2022 modification of Charter Revision of 2011.
                                        
   Hamden's strength, inclusiveness, and innovation are the foundation of our
community. To ensure our continued growth and that future generations reap the
rewards of our unique spirit, we embrace the provisions of this Charter which
is a blueprint for ethical, professional, and honest government. The words of
this Charter create structures designed to meet the needs of the people in a
framework of accountability and transparency, conserve our natural and public
resources, make efficient use of technology and enhance our economy. To these
ends, and in recognition of the sacrifices by those who came before us and by
those who will follow us on this journey of self-governance, we, the Electors
of the Town of Hamden, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 99 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, do approve this Charter for the Town
of Hamden.
   We acknowledge that the land on which Hamden was founded was part of the
Sachemdom of the Quinnipiac Peoples who thrived and prospered here for
thousands of years and thank them for their strength, resilience, and vision in
protecting and stewarding this land. We further acknowledge the many people and
neighborhoods that have come since and have established Hamden as the diverse
and vibrant town it is today.
   Preamble adopted by the Electors of the Town of Hamden on November 8, 2011
and amended November 8, 20222
                                        
2    General Historic Note (2025): This version of the Charter amends the
Charter that was amended and adopted on November 8, 2022. This revision was a
limited to modification of budget adoption dates in accordance with C.G.S. §7-
191b by a 2/3rds vote of the Legislative Council on April 22, 2025. The
Legislative Council was comprised of the following members: Dominque Baez,
President, Katie Kiely, President pro tempore, Ted Stevens, Majority Leader and
Bob Anthony, Minority Leader; At-Large Representatives Tom Figlar, Tasha Hunt
and Laurie Sweet; and, District Representatives Sean Cardwell, Jeron Alston,
Abdul Osmanu, Sarah Gallagher, Rhonda Caldwell, Adrian Webber and Jim Anthony.
Steven G. Mednick served as Counsel to the Council and Sue Gruen served as the
Town Attorney. 2022 Charter Revision Commission Commentary: This version of the
Charter amends the Charter that was last amended and adopted on November 8,
2011. The 2011 version of the Charter replaced the Charter that was adopted on
November 8, 1983. The 1983 Charter was the most recent revision of the original
Charter which was effective January 1, 1966. The amended and revised Charter
was approved by the Legislative Council on August 24, 2022 and the electors on
November 8, 2022. The Legislative Council was comprised of the following
members: Dominque Baez, President, Justin Farmer, President pro tempore, Cory
O’Brien, Majority Leader and Bob Anthony, Minority Leader; At-Large
Representatives Lesley DeNardis, Katie Kiely, Laurie Sweet and Elizabeth S.
Wetmore; and, District Representatives Kristen Zaehringer, Jeron Alston, Abdul
Osmanu, Sarah Gallagher, Paula Irvin, Adrian Webber and Ted Stevens. The
Commission was comprised of the following members: Sarah Gallagher, Chair;
Frank Dixon, Vice Chair; Patricia C. Vener-Saavedra, Secretary; Jackie Downing;
Jay Kaye; Y’Isiah Lopes; and Laura Santino. Attorney Steven G. Mednick and
Kimberly Renta, served as Special Counsel and Clerk, respectively. Susan Gruen
was the Town Attorney. 2011 Charter Revision Commission Commentary. The amended
and revised Charter was recommended to the Legislative Council by the Charter
Revision Commission on July 21, 2011. The Commission was comprised of the
following members: Rev. K. Dexter Cheney, Chair; Michele Mastropetre, Vice
Chair, Cherie Gabrielle Phoenix, Secretary; Jennifer Cutrali; Richard
DePodesta; Laura Freebairn-Smith; James A. O’Brien; Richard Reilly; and, Walter
Rochow. Attorney Steven G. Mednick and Kimberly Renta, served as Special
Counsel and Clerk, respectively. Susan Gruen was the Town Attorney. The
Legislative Council which approved the proposed Charter on August 1, 2011 was
comprised of the following members: James J. Pascarella, President; Michael R.
Colaiacovo, Jr., President pro tempore; Kathleen M. Schomaker, Majority leader;
Raeann Curtis, Minority leader; At Large Representatives Al Gorman, Jack
Kennelly, Carol I. Noble and Elizabeth S. Wetmore; and, District
Representatives Michael W. Iezzi, Gabriel I. Lupo, Oswald Brown, David R.
Hennigan, R. Thomas Rousseau, John J. DeRosa and Lynn D. Campo. The electors of
the Town of Hamden approved the amended and revised Charter on November 8,
2011.
CHAPTER I: CONSTRUCTION OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF HAMDEN
SECTION 1-1: TITLE3.
   The title of this Act shall be the "Charter of the Town of Hamden".
                                        
3   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 1-2: DEFINITIONS AND TITLES GENERALLY4.
   The definitions contained in the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut shall govern the interpretation of this Charter; unless otherwise
defined herein. Articles and Sections are for the purpose of ready reference
and shall not be held to limit, extend or effect the interpretation and meaning
of the text.
                                        
4   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 1-3: TIME OF APPOINTMENTS AND MEETINGS GENERALLY5.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any appointment to office or
election by the Legislative Council to fill a Vacancy required herein to be
made on or before a certain Day shall be, if made after that Day, as valid and
effective as if made on the Day specified. If the day on which any meeting
specified to be held shall be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the meeting
shall be held on the first business day following. The Mayor shall designate
the place of all meetings provided for in this Charter, unless the place of
meeting is specified herein or fixed by Ordinance. However, in the absence of
any such designation by the Mayor, the person responsible for convening the
meeting shall designate the place thereof.
                                        
5   2022 modification of Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 1-4: DEFINITIONS6.
   Whenever used in this Charter:
   A.   "Board" or "Commission7". For the purposes of this Charter and except
as otherwise provided by Law, the terms "Board" and "Commission" means all
Boards, agencies, Commissions, authorities or like entities of the Town,
whether elected or appointed.
   B.   "Capital Expenditures8" means expenditures for (1) any physical
betterment or improvement or any preliminary studies or surveys relative
thereto; (2) the acquisition of real property or other property of a permanent
nature; (3) the purchase or acquisition of equipment for any public betterment
or improvement; (4) major alterations and repairs to existing buildings,
structures or equipment; or (5) any lease which commits the Town to more than
one year of aggregate payments in an amount set by the Legislative Council,
from time to time.
   C.   "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Town of Hamden.
   D.   "Classified Service9" means the employees of the Town, covered by the
Merit System of the Town (including civil service rules and regulations)
appointed to all positions now or hereafter created except those positions
excluded by this Charter (or collective bargaining agreement), Elected
Officials or other Officials whose appointments and terms are prescribed by the
General Statutes, and such other positions as the Civil Service Commission may
determine, after investigation, to be within an area intended for exclusion
from the classified service.
   E.   "Completion of Service10" means the end of employment in the position
in any manner whatsoever, including but not limited to retirement, resignation,
removal, termination, whether for cause or at will, under the provisions of
this Charter, collective bargaining or contract.
   F.   "Council" or "Legislative Council11" means the Legislative Council of
the Town, the legislative body of the municipality, as required by the General
Statutes.
   G.   "Day(s)12" means calendar days; unless, otherwise specifically set
forth in this Charter; or, as may be otherwise specifically required by the
General Statutes. Moreover, where a Day set forth in this Charter falls on a
weekend, holiday or day when the Town is closed for business, the deadline
shall be extended through the close of the next Town business day; unless
otherwise required by law.
   H.   "Department13" means any major functional or administrative division of
the Town, including any offices, agencies, bureaus or other descriptions
serving such purpose as may be set forth in the budget of the Town. When used
within the section establishing or describing the duties of the particular
department or its related Board or Commission, the term "Department" shall
apply exclusively to the functional division referred to in that section.
   I.   "Department Head14" means an employee who heads any Department in the
Town; has substantial supervisory control of a permanent nature over other
municipal employees; and, is directly accountable to the Mayor.
   J.   "Elected Official" or "Elected Official of the Town" means an
individual who holds an elected municipal office (as defined in C.G.S. § 9-372
but shall not include a justice of the peace or notary public) in the Town. The
Elected Officials of the Town are set forth in § 3-3.A(1) of this Charter.
   K.   "Elector15" shall have the meaning contained in the General Statutes.
   L.   "Final Action16" means the last acts taken by the Mayor or the
Legislative Council on an Ordinance or other measure that requires mayoral and
legislative action under the provisions of §§ 4-7.B or 4-7.C of this Charter;
and, §§ 10-4.A(1)(a) or (b) or 10-4.A(2) of this Charter. Final Action with
regard to Resolutions, with the exception of Statutory Resolutions, shall be
upon approval by a Majority Vote of the Legislative Council.
   M.   "General Statutes" shall mean the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended from time to time; also referred to as “C.G.S.”.
   N.   "Law" means, although is not limited to, decisions of courts and
administrative bodies, federal or state legislative enactments, rules and
regulations and local ordinances and regulations.
   O.   "Majority Vote of the Legislative Council17" means more than half of
the votes have been cast by the members at a meeting of the Council at which a
quorum is present.
   P.   "Mayor" shall mean the chief executive officer of the municipality, as
required by the General Statutes18.
   Q.   “Meeting19" shall have the meaning set forth in C.G.S. § 1-200(2),
including Meetings by means of electronic equipment, as may be amended from
time to time.
   R.   "Meeting (or Hearing) Notice20" means a notice posted as required by
Law, including posting of all Meetings with the Town Clerk, including regular,
special or emergency Meetings as well as public hearings, in the same manner as
set forth in § 1-4.W of this Charter and as may be established by Ordinance or
rules of the Legislative Council or any Board or Commission insofar as such
notice requirements are in accordance with the General Statutes. In addition to
the above-referenced postings, the Town may post notices on its web-site or
through other electronic media and, if practicable or otherwise required by
Law, may be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation distributed
in the Town. A Meeting Notice (including public hearings) shall state the time
and place thereof and shall be published at a minimum in compliance with the
General Statutes or by a more stringent requirement as may be set forth in this
Charter. Meeting or Hearing Notice may also be governed by regulatory practices
and procedures set forth in the General Statutes.
   S.   "Merit System21" shall mean the Civil Service and Merit System of the
Town, as required by this Charter and set forth in the Ordinances of the Town.
   T.   "Official" or "Public Official" means an individual who holds an
elected or appointed municipal office in the Town; including but not limited to
Elected Officials of the Town; employees appointed subject to § 8-2.A of this
Charter; and, members of Boards and Commissions. "Appointed Public Officials"
shall include all Public Officials to the exclusion of Elected Public
Officials. When the term "officer" is used, it shall be synonymous with the
term "Official".
   U.   "Order" or "Motion22" means a legislative action conferring authority
to do a specified act, including, but not limited to, the approval of Mayoral
appointments, proposed contracts or other matters upon which are conferred
temporary power or authority which when its purpose has been accomplished it
ceases to require further authority. Orders and Motions shall be enacted in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
   V.   "Ordinances" or "Ordinances of the Town" means the powers of the Town
to (1) establish rules or regulations of general municipal application, the
violation of which may result in the imposition of a fine or other penalty; (2)
create a permanent local law of general applicability; or (3) accomplish other
objectives permitted by the General Statutes as may be enacted in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter.
   W.   "Public Notice23" means a notice for matters other than public meetings
or hearings, including the public inspection or availability of any documents
or data, as may be required by this Charter. It specifically includes matters
where "publication" was required under the prior Charter or the General
Statutes. Said Public Notice shall be specifically set forth in this Charter or
may be governed by the requirements of the General Statutes, in the event the
requirement of the Charter is more stringent than the requirements of the
General Statutes, then the Charter shall prevail. Public Notice shall be posted
(1) in the Office of the Town Clerk and other public space or location in the
Town Hall designated by the Town Clerk in order to assure sufficient disclosure
to and access by the public; (2) in the central Town Library (and each branch
of the Town Library); (3) on the Town web-site, through other electronic media
by the Town Clerk or publication in a newspaper of general circulation
distributed in the Town; and, (4) if otherwise required by Law, by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the Town.
   X.   "Resolution24" means an action by the Legislative Council that (1)
expresses the sentiment or intent of the Council; (2) governs the business of
the Council; (3) expresses recognition by the Council; or, (4) complies with
the specific requirements of the General Statutes with regard to certain
legislative enactments. A declaratory statement of the Council on a given
matter.
   Y.    "Special Acts" or "Special Laws" means the acts of the General
Assembly pertinent to the Town.
   Z.   "State" or "Connecticut" shall mean the State of Connecticut.
   AA.   "State Constitution" shall mean the Constitution of the State of
Connecticut.
   BB.   "Statutory Resolution25" means a necessary legislative action required
by Law in order to utilize and comply with the provisions of federal or State
legislation. Statutory Resolutions shall be enacted in the same manner as an
Ordinance under the provisions of this Charter.
   CC.   "Town" means the Town of Hamden.
   DD.   "Vacancy26" or, in the alternative the use of the word "Vacant" means
whenever any Official of the Town, including Registrars of Voters, is unable to
complete the current term of office due to death, resignation, removal,
incapacity or other reason as may be defined by Ordinance.
   EE.   Where reference is made to "Action to be taken by a Department Head,"
the specified action may be taken by that Department Head or a designee.
   FF.   Where reference is made to "Mayor or designee," the identity of the
designee shall at all times be determined, in the sole discretion, of the
Mayor.
   GG.   Where reference is made to the words “shall” or “must” they shall be
construed interchangeable and synonymous. The legislative intention pertaining
to the meaning and use of either of the words is to deem the function a
mandatory or imperative obligation for the Official or entity charged with such
responsibility under this Charter or under the Code of Ordinances of the
Town27.
                                        
6   Charter Revision of 2011.
7   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
8   Charter Revision of 2011.
9   1983 Charter Revision of 2011.
10   Charter Revision of 2011.
11   Required by C.G.S. § 7-193(a)(1)(c).
12   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
13   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
14   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
15   C.G.S. § 9-1. Definitions. (e) “Elector” means any person possessing the
qualifications prescribed by the Constitution and duly admitted to, and
entitled to exercise, the privileges of an elector in a town”.
16   Charter Revision of 2011.
17   Charter Revision of 2011.
18   Required by C.G.S. § 7-193(a)(2)(C).
19   NEW (2022).
20   2022 modification of the Charter Revision of 2011.
21   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
22   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
23   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
24   Charter Revision of 2011. Term used in 1983 Charter yet not defined.
25   Charter Revision of 2011.
26   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-4 (first clause of first sentence),
by applying the standard to all elected office and by adding “...resignation,
removal or other reason as may be defined by Ordinance.”
27   NEW (2022).
CHAPTER II: INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS28
28   1983 Charter Chapter I.
                                        
SECTION 2-1: TERRITORY29.
   The territorial limits of the body politic and corporate under the name of
"The Town of Hamden" shall include all the land and territory situated within
the said Town.
                                        
29   2011 restatement of 1983 Charter § 1-1.
SECTION 2-2: INCORPORATION30.
   All the Electors of this State, dwelling within the said limits, shall
continue to be a body politic and corporate by the name of the Town of Hamden
and by that name they and their successors shall have perpetual succession and
may hold and exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by the
Town of Hamden and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, the
additional powers and privileges herein conferred and all powers and privileges
conferred upon towns under the State Constitution and the General Statutes.
                                        
30   2011 restatement of 1983 Charter § 1-1.
SECTION 2-3: GENERAL GRANT OF POWERS.
   A.   In addition to all powers granted to municipalities under the State
Constitution and the General Statutes, or which may hereinafter be conferred,
the Town shall have all powers31:
      (1)   specifically granted by this Charter and all powers fairly implied
in or incidental to the powers expressly granted by the State to the management
of the property, government and affairs of the Town, including the power to
enter into contracts with the United States Government or any agency thereof,
the State or any agency or any political subdivision thereof for services and
the use of facilities, the exercise of which is set forth by Law;
      (2)   conferred by the Special Acts, which the Town deems to be of
continued applicability; and,
      (3)   now granted or that may hereafter be granted to municipalities
under the State Constitution or the General Statutes.
   B.   The enumeration of particular powers in this and of any other chapter
of this Charter shall not be construed as limiting this general grant of power
but shall be considered as an addition thereto. Said Town shall exercise all
the rights, powers, privileges, functions and jurisdiction essential to a
proper exercise of its corporate functions, including all that may be
necessarily incident to, or may be fairly implied from, the powers specifically
conferred upon this corporation32.
                                        
31   2011 restructure of 1983 Charter § 1-3 (first sentence).
32   2011 restructure of 1983 Charter § 1-3 (second sentence).
SECTION 2-4: CONTINUANCE OF RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   A.   All property, both real and personal, all rights of action and rights
of every description and all securities and liens vested or inchoate, in said
Town as of the effective date of this Charter are continued in said Town and
said Town shall continue to be liable for all debts of every kind for which
said Town shall be liable on said date, whether accrued or not33.
   B.   Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the rights of said Town to
collect any assessment, charge, debt or lien34.
   C.   If any contract has been entered into by said Town prior to the
effective date of this Charter or any bond or undertaking has been given by or
in favor of said Town which contains a provision that the same may be enforced
by any Commission, Board, Department or Official therein named, which is
abolished by the provisions of this Charter, such contracts, bonds or
undertakings shall be in no manner impaired but shall continue in full force
and effect and the powers conferred and the duties imposed with reference to
the same upon any such Commission, Board, Department or Official shall, except
as otherwise provided in this Charter, thereafter be exercised and discharged
by the Mayor of said Town35.
   D.   The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon
any Commission, Board, Department or Official under the General Statutes or
special acts concerning the Town or any Ordinance or regulation in force at the
time this Charter shall take effect, shall, unless otherwise provided in this
Charter, thereafter be exercised and discharged by the Commission, Board,
Department or Official upon which are imposed such powers and duties under the
provisions of this Charter36.
   E.   All Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices abolished by this
Charter, whether elected or appointed, shall continue in the performance of
their duties until provisions shall have been made for the discontinuance of
such Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices and until the Mayor shall have
notified the members of such Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices as are
abolished by this Charter that their successors have been appointed37.
   F.   All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any Commission,
Board, Department or Official or part thereof, all the powers and duties of
which are assigned to any other Commission, Board, Department or Official by
this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered intact to the Commission,
Board, Department or Official to which such powers and duties are so
assigned38.
   G.   If part of the powers and duties of any Commission, Board, Department
or office or part thereof are by this Charter assigned to another Commission,
Board, Department or office, all records, property and equipment relating
exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered intact to the
Commission, Board, Department or office to which such powers and duties are so
assigned39.
                                        
33   1983 Charter § 1-2 entitled “Rights and Obligations” (first sentence).
34   1983 Charter § 1-2 entitled “Rights and Obligations” (second sentence).
35   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 1-2 entitled “Rights and Obligations,”
by changing “officer” to “Official” (third sentence).
36   1983 Charter § 19-1 entitled “Transfer of Powers” (first sentence).
37   1983 Charter § 19-1 entitled “Transfer of Powers” (second sentence).
38   1983 Charter § 19-2 entitled “Transfer of Records and Property” (first
sentence).
39   1983 Charter § 19-2 entitled “Transfer of Records and Property” (second
sentence).
CHAPTER III: ELECTIONS, ELECTORS, ELECTED OFFICIALS AND TERMS OF OFFICE40
40   1983 Chapter II, replaced “Officers” with “Elected Officials.”
                                        
SECTION 3-1: APPLICATION OF THE GENERAL STATUTES41.
   The General Statutes, as amended from time to time, relating to elections,
including, without limitation, residency requirements and nomination of
candidates, shall be applicable to all elections held in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter. The Legislative Council shall provide by Ordinance
for the manner of warning (or notice) of municipal elections and such
additional regulations in respect of elections, not inconsistent with the
General Statutes or this Charter, as may be necessary to accomplish the intent
of this chapter. The nomination and elections of all Federal, State and Town
elected officials shall be conducted as prescribed by the General Statutes42.
                                        
41   Charter Revision of 2011.
42   Derived from 1983 Charter § 2-1 entitled “State and Federal Officers”
(first sentence).
SECTION 3-2: ELECTORS.
   A.   Each Elector of this State who shall reside within the limits of the
Town upon the date of any election, and who shall be qualified to vote therein,
shall be an Elector of the Town. All such Electors whose names are legally
registered on the list of voters shall be entitled to vote at such elections43.
   B.   The Registrars of Voters shall prepare lists of Electors qualified to
vote therefore, in the manner prescribed by the State Constitution, the General
Statutes and any Special Acts applicable to the Town44.
                                        
43   Charter Revision of 2011.
44   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-1 entitled “State and Federal
Officers” (second sentence).
SECTION 3-3: DATE OF ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE FOR ELECTED OFFICES.
   A.   Commencement of the Term of Office.
      (1)   Elected Officials 45. The Elected Town Officials are: (a) Mayor;
(b) Town Clerk; (c) Fifteen (15) Members of the Legislative Council (six (6)
At-Large and one member from each of the nine (9) voting districts) 46; and (d)
Nine (9) members of the Board of Education 47. The Registrars of Voters are
also considered to be Elected Officials.
      (2)   Municipal Offices (including Board of Education) 48. The terms of
all Elected Officials declared elected hereunder shall commence at twelve noon
on the last Sunday of November following their election and until their
respective successors have been chosen and qualified 49.
      (3)   State Office - Registrars of Voters 50. The terms of the Registrars
of Voters shall commence on the date set forth in the General Statutes.
   B.   Date of Election of Elected Officials.
      (1)   Municipal Offices 51. Except as hereinafter provided, on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday,
         (a)   in November 2013 and in the odd numbered years thereafter, as
the term of office shall fall (as set forth in §
3-3.C (1) of this Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of
this Charter, the following officers: (i) Mayor; (ii) Town Clerk; (iii) Members
of the Legislative Council (six (6) At-Large and nine (9) District
Representatives); and, (iv) Six (6) members of the Board of Education; and,
         (b)   in November 2015 and in the odd numbered years thereafter, as
the term of office shall fall (as set forth in §
3-3.C of this Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of
this Charter, three (3) members of the Board of Education.
      (2)   State Office - Registrars of Voters 52. On the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November 2014 and in the even numbered years thereafter as
the term of office shall fall (as set forth in §
3-3.C (3) of this Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of
this Charter, Registrars of Voters (Transition Provision A: See, §
11-7 of this Charter pertaining to the transitional election scheduled for
2012).
   C.   Term of Office 53.
      (1)   Four Year Term:
         (a)   Members of the Board of Education 54. Commencing at twelve noon
on the last Sunday of November following the election of six members in 2013
(for those set forth in § 3-3.B(1)(a)(iv) of this Charter) and three members in
2015 (for those set forth in §
3-3.B(1)(b) of this Charter) and quadrennially thereafter, Members of the Board
of Education, shall hold their respective offices for a term of four (4) years.
         (b)   Mayor and the Town Clerk 55. Commencing at twelve noon on the
last Sunday of November following the election of 2025 and quadrennially
thereafter, the Mayor and the Town Clerk shall hold office for a term of four
(4) years.
      (2)   Two Year Term: Members of the Legislative Council 56.  Commencing
at twelve noon on the last Sunday of November following their election in 2013
and biennially thereafter, the Members of the Legislative Council shall hold
their respective offices for a term of two (2) years.
      (3)   Four Year Term: Registrars of Voters. Commencing at twelve noon on
the last Sunday of November following their election in 2014 and quadrennially
thereafter, the Registrars of Voters shall hold their respective offices for a
term of four (4) years (Transition Provision B: See, §
11-8 of this Charter pertaining to the transitional election scheduled for
2012).
   D.   The names of all candidates duly placed on the ballot shall be arranged
as set forth in the General Statutes. All elected offices shall be filled as a
result of the election process57.
   E.   Election of At-Large Members of the Legislative Council 58. The
Electors shall vote for no more than four (4) of the at-large candidates for
the Council 59. Each major or minor party, as defined by the General Statutes
60 and petitioning slates of candidates (if permitted by the General Statutes),
may nominate up to four (4) candidates for the members at large, and those six
(6) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected.
   F.   Election of Members of the Board of Education 61.
      (1)   Six Members of the Board of Education Elected Pursuant to §
3-3.B(1)(a) of this Charter. With regard to the six (6) members of the Board of
Education elected in accordance with §
3-3.B(1)(a) of this Charter, no more than four (4) members shall be from the
same political party.
      (2)   Three Members of the Board of Education Elected Pursuant to §
3-3.B(1)(b) of this Charter. With regard to the three (3) members of the Board
of Education elected in accordance with §
3-3.B(1)(b) of this Charter, no more than two (2) members shall be from the
same political party.
                                        
45   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-2 (second sentence). This provision
consolidates all the municipal officials in one section.
46   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-1 entitled “Composition” (first
sentence). This provision establishes the number of districts at nine.
47   Charter Revision of 2011.
48   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-2 entitled “Town Elections” (third
and eighth sentences).
49   1983 Charter section 12-1 (eleventh sentence) utilizes the term “elected
and qualified.”
50   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. § 9-190a entitled “Election of
registrars at state elections.”
51   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-2 entitled “Town Elections.” The new
provision includes reference to the number of Legislative Council Members as
established in § 3-3A(1), above; and moves the class of six members of the
Board of Education to this provision in order to commence the alignment of all
Elected Officials for a four-year term.
52   Charter Revision of 2011. This provision is designed to address the four-
year term for Registrar of Voters and the establishment the alignment to the
gubernatorial election cycle, as set forth in Transition Provision C in § 11-
9 of this Charter.
53   Revised (2011): Two-year term for Mayor, Council and Town Clerk; including
an alignment of the election cycles for Registrar of Voters and members of the
Board of Education, in accord with C.G.S. § 9-189a entitled “Four-year terms
for town clerks, registrars and treasurers.”
54   Charter Revision of 2011.
55   NEW (2022).
56   2022 recodification of 2011 § 3-3.C.(2).
57   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-2 entitled “Town Elections.”
Modified, in part, and repealed, in part, as follows: (1) The following portion
of § 2-2 (sixth sentence) was replaced by the proposed language: “The number of
persons sufficient to fill the offices to be filled shall be elected.” (2) The
following portion of § 2-2 (fifth sentence) was repealed: “The names of all
candidates duly nominated shall be arranged on the voting machines in
alphabetical order of their surnames within the party line after the title of
the office to be filled, except that all at large candidates for the
Legislative Council shall be listed before district candidates.” The issue is
addressed by C.G.S. §§ 9-251 entitled “Order of office on ballot labels,” 9-253
entitled “Order of names of party nominees for multiple-opening office
determined by lot. Order when candidate nominated by more than one party”; 9-
437 entitled “Form of ballot label. Position of candidates’ names on ballot.
Sample ballot labels. Voting instructions and information”; and, 9-453r
entitled “Position of candidates’ names on ballot.”
58   2011 modification of 1983 Charter section 3-1 (third sentence), replacing
"political party" with "major" or "minor" party reference and adding
"Petitioning slates of candidates (if permitted by the General Statutes)".
59   1983 Charter § 3-1 (second sentence).
60   At the time of adoption “major” and “minor” parties are defined in C.G.S.
§ 9-372(5) and (6).
61   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 12-1 (first sentence) entitled “Board
of Education.”
SECTION 3-4: ELIGIBILITY62.
   No person shall be eligible for nomination or election to any Town office
who is not an Elector63 of the Town, and, in the case of a district council
representative, a resident of that particular district. Any person ceasing to
be an Elector of the Town or a resident of a district where such residence is
required for holding said office, shall thereupon cease to hold elective office
in the Town or district.
                                        
62   2022 modification of Charter § 3-4 which modified 1983 Charter § 2-3 by
dividing into two sentences.
63   Chapter 143. ELECTORS: QUALIFICATIONS AND ADMISSION. Revised to January 1,
2010. C.G.S. § 9-12 entitled “Who may be admitted.”
SECTION 3-5: VACANCIES IN ELECTED OFFICES64.
   A.   Mayor 65. Whenever a Vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor, the
President of the Legislative Council shall serve the office on the date of
Vacancy and shall serve as Mayor until a successor is elected and certified
following the next biennial election, for the remainder of the term.
      (1)   Rights Power and Duties. Such successor shall have the rights,
powers and duties of Mayor and shall receive the same compensation otherwise
due the Mayor.
      (2)   Succession to the office of President 66. In the event the
President shall succeed to the office of Mayor, the office of the President of
the Legislative Council and a seat on the Legislative Council shall become
Vacant. The President Pro Tempore shall succeed to the Office of President and
shall preside and conduct the business of the Legislative Council.
      (3)   Election of President Pro Tempore 67. Upon succession to office of
Council President, the position of President Pro tempore shall be deemed vacant
and the Council shall elect a successor.
   B.   Legislative Council and Town Clerk.  Any Vacancy in any elected Town
office, except the Board of Education and the Office of the Mayor, from
whatever cause arising, except as hereinafter provided, shall be filled by a
Majority Vote of the Legislative Council for the unexpired portion of the term
68.
      (1)   All such Vacancies shall be filled by a person of the same
political party or affiliation as that of the person who just vacated the
office69. In the event there is no other member of the political party
appertaining to the vacating member, the appointment shall not be made from the
party containing the majority of members 70.
   C.   Board of Education.  Until the next Town election, any Vacancy in the
Board of Education shall be filled by election by the remaining members of the
Board of Education 71.
      (1)   All such Vacancies filled by election of the Board of Education
shall be filled by a person of the same political party or affiliation as that
of the person who just vacated the office72. In the event there is no other
member of the political party appertaining to the vacating member, the
appointment shall not be made from the party containing the majority of members
73.
   D.   Registrars of Voters 74. Any Vacancy in the Office of the Registrars of
Voters shall be filled as required by the General Statutes.
                                        
64   2022 modification of the 2011 revisions of the 1983 Charter (1) §§ 2-4 and
5-4. Add “office of the Mayor) which has its own line of succession; (2) § 5-4
(Second clause of first sentence). The President of the Council is designated
to serve as the Acting Mayor, to be temporarily replaced by the President Pro
tempore. The succession is broken into vacancies which occur in the final six
months of office and those which occur prior thereto. See, also, C.G.S. § 9-164
entitled “Regular and special municipal elections;” and (3) § 5-4 (first
sentence).
65   2011 modification of 1983 Charter.
66   NEW (2022).
67   NEW (2022).
68   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 2-4 (first sentence).
69   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-4 (second sentence).
70   Charter Revision of 2011.
71   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-4 (third sentence).
72   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 2-4 (fourth sentence).
73   Charter Revision of 2011.
74   See, C.G.S. § 9-192 entitled “Deputy registrar. Registrar vacancy.
Assistant registrars. Special assistant registrars.”
SECTION 3-6: TEMPORARY DISABILITY OR ABSENCE OF THE MAYOR.
   A.   In the event the Mayor notifies the President of the Council of an
inability to attend to the duties of office due to absence from the Town,
temporary disability or sickness or other cause, the President of the Council
shall serve as Acting Mayor at a rate of compensation to be determined by the
Council75. There shall be no Vacancy in the Office of the President of the
Legislative Council when the President serves as set forth in this sub-section
76.
   B.   In the event the Mayor fails to notify the President of the Council
under the provisions of § 3-6.A of this Charter, and it is determined that the
Mayor is unable to attend to the duties of office due to an unexplained and
sustained absence from the Town, temporary disability or sickness or absence or
other cause, the Legislative Council may determine the temporary disability or
absence of the Mayor by a vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council present
and voting; although there shall be, at least, nine (9) members voting in the
affirmative77.
                                        
75   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-4 (second sentence). Added “Acting”
Mayor and President of the Council as the Acting Mayor. Also adds (1) Mayoral
notification; and (2) “...inability to attend to the duties of office due
to...sickness or other cause,”
76   Charter Revision of 2011.
77   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 3-7: REAPPORTIONMENT OF VOTING DISTRICTS78.
   A.   Nine Voting Districts and Standards Pertaining to Reapportionment. The
Town shall be divided into nine (9) voting districts, each of which shall be
represented by a district representative on the Legislative Council and shall
be substantially equal in population consistent with federal constitutional
standards. Moreover, said voting districts shall be in as compact and
contiguous a form as practicable and shall follow geographical divisions
wherever practical in determining voting district boundaries.
   B.   Final Action on Adoption of a Reapportionment Plan. On or before the
date set forth in the General Statutes, the Legislative Council shall adopt a
reapportionment plan for such legislative body. At the time of the adoption of
this Charter, the reapportionment plan shall be adopted not later than the
first (1st) Day of June in the year after the first regular General Assembly
election following a reapportionment of the General Assembly.
   C.   Assembly of Census and State Reapportionment Information and Data.
Following the 2010 census and every ten (10) years thereafter, the Town shall
commence the process of reapportioning the voting districts. Upon issuance of
the reports of the applicable Federal Decennial Census, the Registrars of
Voters shall assemble information and data relating to the census and the State
redistricting process. Said information and data shall be transmitted at the
appropriate time to the participants in the reapportionment process.
   D.   First Reapportionment Commission. No later than the 1st Day of March of
the year following reapportionment of the General Assembly and every ten years
thereafter, a Reapportionment Commission shall be appointed by the Legislative
Council.
      (1)   The seven (7) member Commission shall be comprised of (a) the two
(2) Registrars of Voters; and, (b) five (5) Electors recommended by the
President of the Legislative Council and approved by the Council, no more than
two (2) of whom shall be from the same political party.
      (2)   The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed
Ordinance, Report and Reapportionment Plan (the "ORRP"), at least, one week
prior to approval and submission to the Council. Hearing Notice shall be
provided, at least, five (5) Days prior to the public hearing or as otherwise
required by Law (See, §
1-4.R); said Notice shall include the contents of the ORRP as well as a copy of
a map illustrating the boundary lines of each of the proposed voting districts.
On the basis of information elicited at the public hearing, the Commission may
thereafter alter the Report and Plan79.
      (3)   Approval of the ORRP shall require the affirmative votes of, at
least, five (5) members of the Commission80.
      (4)   The Commission shall file the ORRP with the Clerk of the Council
within six (6) months after appointment and may utilize demographic data (based
upon census data) assembled by the Town utilizing the technological resources
of the Town and such other resources, facilities and funding the Council may
deem desirable to carry out the purposes of this section. Receipt of the ORRP
shall be deemed to be the date upon which it is filed with the Clerk of the
Council81.
      (5)   The ORRP shall recommend and set forth the boundaries of each of
the proposed voting districts and, upon recommendation of the Registrars of
Voters, include an enumeration of suitable polling places within each
district82.
      (6)   In the event the Commission fails to submit the ORRP as set forth
in §
3-7.D(4) of this Charter, then a Second Reapportionment Commission shall be
established as set forth in §
3-7.F of this Charter83.
   E.   Action by the Legislative Council on the Proposal of the First
Reapportionment Commission, if any. Within sixty (60) Days following receipt of
the ORRP and after a public hearing thereon, the Legislative Council shall
accept, reject, or modify the ORRP. Within thirty (30) Days following said
legislative action:
      (1)   If the ORRP is accepted or modified, the Ordinance in conjunction
with the ORRP approved by the Legislative Council shall be deemed adopted in
compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes and have the full
force of law and become effective for the next municipal general election.
      (2)   If the ORRP is rejected, then a Second Reapportionment Commission
shall be established as set forth in §
3-7.F of this Charter. Approval of the ORRP and the Ordinance contained therein
shall require an affirmative vote of, at least, two-thirds (2/3rds) of the
Council, present and voting.
   F.   Second Reapportionment Commission. Within fourteen (14) Days following
the failure of the Reapportionment Commission to submit the ORRP, as set forth
in §
3-7.D(6) of this Charter; or, the rejection of the ORRP by the Legislative
Council, as set forth in §
3-7.E(2) of this Charter, the Mayor shall appoint a Second Reapportionment
Commission.
      (1)   The Commission shall be comprised of nine (9) Electors, as follows:
(a) two (2) recommended by the President of the Legislative Council; (b) two
(2) recommended by the Council Majority Leader; (c) two (2) recommended by the
Council Minority Leader; (d) one (1) upon the Mayor’s designation; and (e) the
two (2) Registrars of Voters, no more than four (4) of whom shall be from the
same political party.
      (2)   The Commission shall consider the reapportionment of districts in
accordance with the standards set forth herein and shall submit a
Reapportionment Plan and Ordinance ("RPO") to the Clerk of the Council within
ninety (90) Days of the appointment by the Mayor.
      (3)   The RPO shall not be submitted to the Clerk of the Council unless
it is approved by, at least, a majority vote of the entire membership of the
Commission84. In such an event, the Legislative Council shall act in accordance
with §
3-7.G(2) of this Charter.
   G.   Action by the Legislative Council on the Proposal of the Second
Reapportionment Commission.  Within sixty (60) Days following receipt of the
RPO and after a public hearing thereon, the Legislative Council may:
      (1)   Approve the RPO by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/
3rds) of the Council present and voting, and, following said approval, the
districts set forth in the accompanying Ordinance shall be deemed adopted in
compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes, and have the full
force of law and become effective for the next municipal general election; or,
      (2)   Reject the RPO; in which event the Council shall formulate and
approve by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council
present and voting a Redistricting Plan and Ordinance, in accordance with the
standards set forth herein and within the statutory time-frame established by
the General Statutes and as set forth in §
3-7.B. of this Charter. If approved, the Ordinance shall be deemed adopted in
compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes and shall have the
full force of law and become effective for the next municipal general election.
   H.   Failure of the Legislative Council to Adopt an Ordinance Pursuant to §
3-7.G(2) of this Charter. In the event the Legislative Council fails to approve
an Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of §
3-7.G(2) of this Charter, the Ordinance included in the RPO submitted by the
Second Reapportionment Commission (see, §
3-7.F(2) of this Charter) shall be deemed to be approved by the Legislative
Council and shall be deemed adopted in compliance with the requirements of the
General Statutes and shall have the full force of law and become effective for
the next municipal general election. The effective date shall be deemed to be
the final date permitted for enactment of municipal reapportionment by the
General Statutes.
   I.   Notwithstanding the adoption of a plan of redistricting, members of the
Legislative Council shall continue to represent the districts from which they
were elected for the balance of the term for which they were elected.
                                        
78   In lieu of 1983 Charter § 2-5. C.G.S. § 9-169f. Reapportionment required
for certain municipal legislative bodies. Not later than June first in the year
after the first regular General Assembly election following a reapportionment
of the General Assembly, each municipal legislative body whose members are
elected wholly or partially on the basis of a geographical division of the
municipality shall adopt a reapportionment plan for such legislative body. Any
such municipal reapportionment plan (1) shall be based on population data for
the municipality from the most recent decennial census of the United States and
(2) may provide for geographical divisions which use the same borders as
General Assembly districts in the municipality.
79   2022 recodification of Charter § 3-6.D(2).
80   2022 recodification of Charter § 3-6.D(3).
81   2022 recodification of Charter § 3-6.D(4).
82   2022 recodification of Charter § 3-6.D(5).
83   2022 recodification of Charter § 3-6.D(6).
84   NEW (2022).
SECTION 3-8: PUBLIC OFFICIALS TO DELIVER RECORDS TO SUCCESSORS85.
   A.   The General Rule. On or before the date a successor takes office, the
Mayor, Town Clerk, Registrars of Voters and each Department Head or other
Mayoral appointees, upon the expiration of the applicable term of office or
termination of employment, shall deliver to the successor all books, data,
documents, books of account (or equivalent) records, vouchers, papers of every
description and memoranda (in all existing formats including electronic media
of any and all types) ("Records") under the control of the named Official
relating to the business of the Town during the entire term of office or
employment by the Town. This general rule shall also apply to the
administrative offices of the Legislative Council; however, the individual
members of the Council shall be subject to the rules of the Legislative
Council, as set forth below.
   B.   Ordinance. The delivery of such Records shall be carried out in
accordance with an Ordinance establishing the parameters of this provision and
the rules necessary to comply with any related provisions of the General
Statutes.
   C.   The Legislative Council. The rules of the Legislative Council shall set
forth the parameters of the requirements to retain and deliver to their
successors Records assembled by individual members of the Council. Said rules
shall take into cognizance the provisions of §
3-8.A of this Charter as well as the record retention and public information
requirements of the General Statutes and other applicable Law.
   D.   Liability. The Officials set forth in this section shall be personally
liable to the Town for complete and safe delivery of all such Records to the
successor Official. Any Official who shall violate any provision of this
section shall be fined in an amount which shall be established by Ordinance.
                                        
85   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 3-9: CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND ETHICS86.
   A.   Statement of Purpose 87. Public office is a public trust. The trust of
the public is essential for government to function effectively. Public policy
developed by Officials affect every citizen of the municipality, and it must be
based on honest and fair deliberations and decisions. This process must be free
from threats, favoritism, nepotism, undue influence, and all forms of
impropriety so that the confidence of the public is not eroded. By setting
forth this Statement of Purpose, the Town of Hamden seeks to articulate a
policy that will continually strive to maintain and increase the confidence of
our citizens in the integrity and fairness of their government. Public
Officials and employees must discharge their duties impartially so as to assure
fair competitive access to government procurement by responsible contractors.
In turn, those contractors should conduct themselves in such a manner as to
foster public confidence in the integrity of the competitive process. In all
cases, the reality and appearance of impropriety should be addressed by the
Conflict of Interest Policy and Ethics Ordinance.
   B.   Conflict of Interest Policy and Ethics Ordinance 88. The Town shall
enact, by Ordinance, a code of ethics for all Officials and employees of the
Town, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, and individuals and
entities seeking to and conducting business with the Town. The purpose of such
code is to establish suitable ethical standards by prohibiting acts or actions
incompatible with the discharge of their public duties and the best interests
of the Town, and by directing disclosure of private financial interest or
personal interest 89 in matters affecting the Town by such elected and
appointed Officials or employees as well as such individuals and entities
seeking to and conducting business with the Town. The Ordinance shall designate
an Official to provide all Public Officials and employees of the Town with
copies of the provisions of §
3-9 of this Charter and the implementing Ordinances and policies enacted
hereunder, upon the commencement of their public service and/or employment.
      (1)    The Council shall enact a code of ethics by Ordinance (and
amendments thereto) following public review and comment by the Board of Ethics,
in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Charter90.
      (2)   Recusal 91. The Official or employee filing a disclosure under this
Charter or Ordinance with the Town Clerk shall refrain from voting,
participating or acting on matters which are the subject of such disclosures.
      (3)   Violation. In addition to any remedies or penalties set forth in
the Ordinance effectuating this provision of the Charter, any finding of a
violation by the Board of Ethics, as set forth in §
7-2.C(5) of this Charter:
         (a)   shall render any action, including but not limited to any
contract or agreement involved voidable at the option of the Town92;
         (b)   may result in the discipline of Officials and employees in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter and Ordinances93; and,
          (c)   may result in disqualifying individuals or entities from
engaging in business with the Town for a period of time to be established by
Ordinance94.
   C.   Conflict of Interest and Corrupt Practices 95. No Official shall
violate the provisions of the General Statutes 96, this Charter or Ordinances
pertaining to conflicts of interest and corrupt practices 97. The Ordinance
required by §
3-9.B of this Charter shall define and set forth the parameters of conflicts of
interest and corrupt practices 98.
                                        
86   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-3.
87   Charter Revision of 2011.
88   Charter Revision of 2011.
89   In lieu of 1983 Charter § 19-3 (first sentence).
90   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-3 (fifth sentence) which reads, as
follows: “The Council may, in accordance with the provisions of § 3-5, by
ordinance, supplement the provisions of this section.”
91   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-3 (second sentence) by repealing
the following: “...involving said contract with or sale to the Town as
aforesaid” and adding “participating” to the delineation.
92   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-3 (fourth paragraph) by replacing
“instance” with “option.”
93   Charter Revision of 2011.
94   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-3, by (1) broadening the standard
to any actions (including contracts and agreements); (2) adding the following
“...and may result in the discipline of public officials and employees in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter and Ordinances”; and, (3) adding
the following “...(c) may result in disqualifying individuals or entities from
engaging in business with the Town for a period of time to be established by
Ordinance.”
95   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 19-3 (first sentence) by deleting the
following language: “No member of the Council or other Official or employee of
the Town shall have any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract
with the Town or in the sale to the Town of any supplies, materials, services,
land, building or equipment, except on behalf of the Town as an Official or
employee thereof unless such member shall file with the Town Clerk a written
statement setting forth fully the nature and extent of such member’s interest
therein.”
96   Among the provisions is C.G.S. § 7-148h(b): Notwithstanding the provisions
of any special act, municipal charter or ordinance to the contrary, an elected
official of any town, city, district or borough that has established a board,
commission, council, committee or other agency under subsection (a) of this
section, has an interest that is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the official’s duties or employment in the public interest and of
the official’s responsibilities as prescribed by the laws of this state, if the
official has reason to believe or expect that the official, the official’s
spouse or dependent child, or a business with which he is associated, as
defined in § 1-79, will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct
monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of the official’s official
activity. Any such elected official does not have an interest that is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of the official’s duties in the
public interest and of the official’s responsibilities as prescribed by the
laws of this state, if any benefit or detriment accrues to the official, the
official’s spouse or dependent child, or a business with which he, his spouse
or such dependent child is associated as a member of a profession, occupation
or group to no greater extent than to any other member of such profession,
occupation or group. Any such elected official who has a substantial conflict
may not take official action on the matter.
97   Charter Revision of 2011.
98   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 19-3 (third sentence) by deleting the
following language: “...No member of the Council or other Official or employee
of the Town shall solicit or accept any compensation of gratuity in the form of
money or otherwise from any person, firm or corporation, which might tend to
influence the discharge of the duties of such member, provided that nothing
herein shall prohibit an Official or employee of the Town from accepting a
publicly offered reward for meritorious conduct.”
SECTION 3-10: REMOVAL OF ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS99.
   A.   Standard for Removal. Unless otherwise set forth in this Charter, any
Elected Official or Appointed Official (with the exception of members of Boards
and Commissions, who may be removed in accordance with §
7-1.E of this Charter), may be removed from office, for cause, by the
Legislative Council by a vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the entire membership
of the Council; subject to any applicable provisions of the General Statutes
100.
      (1)   The applicable provisions of the General Statutes shall be taken
into consideration with regard to the removal proceedings of the Town Clerk101,
Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Building Official and any other
Officials designated for protection by the General Statutes 102.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the grounds for cause set forth herein, the Mayor
shall have the power to remove any Appointed Official who serves a term
coterminous with the Mayor (as specifically set forth in this Charter and any
Ordinance creating the applicable Department); unless otherwise provided for in
this Charter or by law103.
   B.   Recitation of Charges 104. No such Elected or Appointed Official of the
Town ("charged party") may be removed except upon charges, which shall be
proffered following a majority vote of the Legislative Council. Removal may not
occur in the absence of a hearing thereon before a plenary session of the
Council.
   C.   Notice 105. Written notice by the Council of the charges and time and
place of hearing shall be given to the charged party at least fifteen (15) Days
prior to such hearing, unless otherwise required by Law (see, §
1-4.R). Said notice shall either be
      (1)   mailed to the charged party by registered or certified mail, in
each case, return receipt requested and postage prepaid or national recognized
overnight courier, with receipt and all fees prepaid; or,   
      (2)   addressed to an officer authorized to serve legal process with a
direction to make personal service upon the charged party of the same, within
the time prescribed.
   D.   Grounds of Cause. Such charges shall be for:
      (1)   A finding by the Board of Ethics of neglect or dereliction of
official duty or a violation of (a) the conflict of interest policy and ethics
provisions of this Charter and/or Ordinances; or, (b) any other provisions of
law pertaining to unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities
(including violations of federal, state or local law)106;
      (2)   Conviction of a felony, while in office107;
      (3)   Conviction of a lesser crime involving fraudulent or dishonest
conduct, while in office108;
      (4)   Determination of physical or mental incapacity to serve, based upon
the best evidence as presented by competent authority109;
      (5)   Determination of incompetence based upon the best evidence as
presented by competent authority110;
      (6)   Documented poor performance of an Appointed Official kept in the
normal course of business111;
      (7)   Habitual absence from office, as may be defined by the Mayor for
Appointed Officials; by Ordinance; or, if not by Ordinance by the adopted and
approved rules of procedure for the Legislative Council112;
      (8)   A delinquency materially affecting the person's general character
or fitness for office113;
      (9)   A violation of §
3-4 of this Charter; or,
      (10)   Such actions as may be set forth in the Ordinance by the
Council114.
   E.   Right to Counsel 115. Such Elected or Appointed Official shall have the
right to be represented by counsel at the hearing, to present evidence and
testimony personally and through witnesses, and to cross-examine witnesses.
   F.   Public Hearing 116. Such hearing shall be open to the public and
transcribed, except as otherwise permitted by Law.
   G.   Appeal. Any such Elected or Appointed Official may, within thirty (30)
Days from the date when the decision to remove is taken following such hearing,
take any appeals as may be permitted by law 117.
                                        
99   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 by adding “Appointed Officials.”
100   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, third
sentence). The provision reaffirms the “for cause” standard and establishes a
definitive vote of the Legislative Council. The current standard in § 3-14:
“The power to remove shall be by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/
3) of the Council present and voting in the case of elected officials or
officials appointed by the Council.”
101   Charter Revision of 2011. At the time the revised Charter C.G.S. § 7-22
entitled “Removal of town clerks” applied.
102   Charter Revision of 2011.
103   Charter Revision of 2011.
104   Charter Revision of 2011.
105   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, second
sentence).
106   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, first
sentence) by adding “dereliction of official duty.”
107   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, first
sentence).
108   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, first
sentence).
109   Charter Revision of 2011.
110   Charter Revision of 2011.
111   Charter Revision of 2011. Removal of Boards and Commission is addressed
in Charter §
7-1.E.
112   2022 modification of Charter Revision of 2011.
113   Charter Revision of 2011.
114   2011 modification of the standard set forth in 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first
paragraph, first sentence): include, but not limited to...”
115   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, fourth
sentence).
116   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (first paragraph, second and
fifth sentences).
117   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-14 (second paragraph). Deleting the
following provision since it was not clear what the legal authority was: “...of
such action to the Superior Court.”
CHAPTER IV: LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL118
118   1983 Charter Chapter III.
                                        
SECTION 4-1: LEGISLATIVE POWER119.
   The legislative power and authority of the Town shall be vested in the
Legislative Council120. No enumeration of powers set forth in this Charter
shall be deemed to limit the legislative authority of the Council as provided
for in the General Statutes 121, 122.
SECTION 4-2: OFFICERS OF THE COUNCIL.
   A.   The members of the Council shall meet on the first Monday after the
commencement of their terms of office as provided in §§
3-3.A(2) and C(2) of this Charter and shall choose one of its members to be
President of the Council and another to be President Pro Tempore of the
Council, each for the term of office123.
   B.   Such President shall preside over all meetings of the Council and
perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed by the
Council, but such President shall not vote more than once on any question124.
   C.   During the President's absence or disability, the President's duties
shall be performed by the President Pro Tempore125.
                                        
119   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §§ 3-1 and 3-5 by moving all references
to composition of the Council to proposed § 3-3. Moreover, the following
provision of § 3-1 (fourth sentence) was repealed since it is contrary to state
law: “Unless otherwise specified by State or Federal Law, no members of the
Council shall hold any elective or salaried office or position with the State
of Connecticut or the Town of Hamden, except those of notary public and justice
of the peace.”
120   See, 1983 Charter § 3-5 (first sentence). Required by C.G.S. § 7-193(a)
(1)(C).
121   Charter Revision of 2011.
122   See, C.G.S. § 7-193(b), as follows: “Every municipality shall have all
municipal officers, departments, boards, commissions and agencies which are
required by the general statutes or by the charter. Each municipality may have
any municipal officers, departments, boards, Commissions and agencies which are
specifically allowed by the general statutes or which are necessary to carry
out any municipal powers, duties or responsibilities under the general
statutes. All such officers, departments, boards, commissions and agencies
shall be elected, appointed and organized in the manner provided by the general
statutes, except as otherwise provided by the charter or by ordinances or
resolutions adopted pursuant to such charter, alter the method of election,
appointment or organization of any or all of such officers, departments,
boards, commissions or agencies, including combining or separating the duties
of each, unless specifically prohibited from making such alteration by the
Constitution or the general statutes.” See also, (1) C.G.S. § 7-421 entitled
“Political activities of classified municipal employees. Candidacy of municipal
employees for elective office. Leaves of absence. Service on governmental
bodies of the town in which the employee resides”; (2) C.G.S. § 7-421a entitled
“Inconsistent statutory or charter provisions;” and (3) C.G.S. § 7-421b,
entitled “Limitation on restrictions of political rights of municipal
employees;” and, (4) C.G.S. § 9-210 entitled “Incompatible town offices.”
123   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-2 (first sentence), adding the
phrase: “...for the term of office.”
124   1983 Charter § 3-2 (second sentence).
125   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-2 (third sentence) by replacing
“...a member chosen by the Council” with “President Pro Tempore.”
SECTION 4-3: PROCEDURES OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL - PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN
COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS126.
   A.   Meetings and Rules of Procedure. The Council shall:
      (1)   Rules of Procedure: Quorum. Adopt rules of procedure including the
creation of such committees as it deems necessary, within forty-five (45) days
following the election of members, which rules may be amended from time to time
127.
         (a)   The rules of the prior Council term shall apply until such rules
are adopted.
         (b)   A majority of the total membership of the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business128.
      (2)   Regular Meetings and Committee Meetings. Fix the time and place of
its regular and committee meetings and shall post such meetings as required by
the General Statutes 129. The Council shall schedule at least one regular
meeting and one Committee meeting a month 130.
      (3)   Special Meetings and Emergency Meetings 131. At the first meeting
of the Council following the Town election, the Council shall provide a method
for the calling of Special Meetings in accordance with the General Statutes.
Emergency Meetings shall be convened as set forth in §
5-4.D of this Charter 132.
   B.   Public Hearings 133. At least one public hearing shall be held by the
Council or any committee thereof before any Ordinance or Statutory Resolution
shall be passed. Meeting Notice of such public hearing shall be given, in
accordance with the requirements of the General Statutes.
   C.   Open Meetings and Public Comment Sessions 134. All meetings of the
Legislative Council shall be open to the public in accordance with the General
Statutes 135. Moreover, there shall be a public comment session prior to the
commencement of all regular meetings of the Legislative Council. The time and
duration of the public comment sessions shall be determined in accordance with
the provisions of Standing Rules of Order of the Hamden Legislative Council,
adopted in accordance with § 4-3.A(1) of this Charter. With respect to the
meetings of the standing and special committees and special meetings of the
Legislative Council, the public may address any item on the agenda. With
respect to the regular meetings of the Legislative Council, the public may
address any item on the agenda and any other matters concerning the Town that
are within the purview of the Legislative Council.
                                        
126   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §§ 3-3 and 3-7 entitled “Procedure” and
“Public Hearing on Ordinances.”
127   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-3 (second sentence).
128   1983 Charter § 3-3 (fourth sentence).
129   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-3 (first sentence).
130   Charter Revision of 2011.
131   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-3 (first sentence).
132   Charter Revision of 2011.
133   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-7 (first sentence), including the
new definition of “Meeting Notice.”
134   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. § 1-225. (Formerly § 1-21) entitled
“Meetings of government agencies to be public. Recording of votes. Schedule and
agenda of Meetings to be filed and posted on web sites. Notice of special
Meetings. Executive sessions.”
135   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-3 (third sentence), in lieu of the
following: “All Meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, except as
otherwise permitted by the General Statutes.”
SECTION 4-4: CLERK OF THE COUNCIL.
   A.   There shall be a Clerk of the Council, recommended by the President and
approved by the Council, whose compensation shall be fixed by the Council, and
who shall keep for public inspection copies of every proposed Ordinance and a
record of all proceedings including all roll call votes136.
   B.   All records so kept shall be authenticated by the signature of such
Clerk of the Council or the President of the Council or both137.
   C.   The Clerk of the Council shall be responsible for the publication of
such notices of hearing and publication of Ordinances, as may be necessary, and
perform such other duties as the Council may determine138.
                                        
136   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-4 (first sentence) by replacing
“appointed by the Council” with “...recommended by the President and approved
by the Council.”
137   1983 Charter § 3-4 (second sentence).
138   1983 Charter § 3-4 (third sentence).
SECTION 4-5: GENERAL POWERS139.
   In addition to the grant of legislative authority as set forth in the
General Statutes, the Legislative Council, by majority vote (unless otherwise
set forth in this Charter), shall have the power to:
   A.   enact, amend or repeal Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions, Resolutions,
Orders or Motions consistent with this Charter or the General Statutes140;
   B.   create or abolish Boards, Commissions, Departments, Offices and
positions, unless required by the Charter or reorganized as permitted by §
8-1.C(1) of this Charter, for the preservation of good order, peace, health and
safety of the Town and its inhabitants, including the power to enact a code of
ethics regulating the conduct of all Officials and employees of said Town141;
   C.   increase or decrease the budget or any item thereof142;
   D.   contract for legislative services, upon action by Order or Motion143;
   E.   contract, upon action by Order or Motion, for the use of facilities of
the United States or any federal agency, the State and any political
subdivision thereof, or may, by agreement, join with any other such political
subdivision to provide services and facilities144;
   F.   to appropriate, notwithstanding the provisions of this Charter to the
contrary, necessary funds for the purpose of meeting a Public Emergency as set
forth in §
5-4.C of this Charter145; and,
   G.   set the charges, if any, to be made for services by the Town or for the
execution of powers vested in the Town as provided in this Charter146.
In addition to all other powers, for purposes set forth in the General Statutes
relating to municipal sewerage systems and to the extent it wishes to exercise
such powers, the Council is deemed the body having power to make annual
appropriations for the Town147. Furthermore, the Council shall have the power
and duties which, on the effective date of this Charter, were conferred by Law
upon Boards, Commissions and Officials 148 of the Town existing immediately
prior to such date except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter
149.
                                        
139   Minor modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5, including moving the general
grant of legislative authority to proposed § 3-1 and modifying the language of
the provisions pertaining to the municipal sewerage system to recognize the
authority but to make it discretionary since WPCA is currently regional. Also,
establishes, a majority standard.
140   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (second sentence, first clause).
141   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (second sentence, second clause)
with the addition of the following clause: “...unless required by the Charter
or Charter or reorganized as permitted by §8-1.B (1) of this Charter...”.
142   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (fourth sentence).
143   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (fifth sentence) by replacing
"Ordinance" with "Order" or "Motion".
144   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (sixth sentence) by replacing
"Ordinance or Resolution with "Order or Motion".
145   Charter Revision of 2011.
146   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (seventh sentence), by deleting
the reference to "...Chapter I...".
147   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-5 (eighth sentence).
148   Replaced "officers" with "and Officials".
149   1983 Charter § 3-5 (third sentence).
SECTION 4-6: COUNSEL TO COUNCIL150.
   The Legislative Council may appoint and may remove by majority vote a
Counsel, who shall be an attorney, admitted to practice law in this State and
shall have been practicing for at least five (5) years. Such Counsel shall have
such duties as the Council shall determine. Such Counsel shall receive
compensation as fixed by the Legislative Council.
                                        
150   1983 Charter § 3-6.
SECTION 4-7: ORDINANCES, STATUTORY RESOLUTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS OR MOTIONS:
THE ROLE OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND THE MAYOR151.
   A.   Transmittal of Legislative Actions to the Mayor. Except in the case of
Resolutions, including those relating to the procedures of the Council, every
proposed Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion shall be transmitted
by the Clerk of the Council to the Mayor for action within five (5) Days after
passage by the Council 152. The provisions of §§
4-7 and
4-8 of this Charter shall not apply to the adoption of the Budget Ordinance
153. The procedures for the adoption of the Budget Ordinance is subject to the
provisions of §§
10-3 through
10-6 of this Charter 154.
   B.   Mayoral Action 155. The Mayor shall return to the Clerk of the Council
such Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion within fifteen (15) Days
after passage by the Council.
      (1)   Approval by the Mayor or Failure of the Mayor to Take Action 156.
In the event the Mayor approves or fails to take action within such fifteen
(15) Days, such Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion shall become
effective and operational as set forth in this section. In the event the Mayor
shall fail to take action upon such matters, the Town Clerk shall endorse such
fact upon the official copy of the matter.
      (2)   Veto by the Mayor 157. Every Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order
or Motion vetoed by the Mayor shall be returned within the same fifteen (15)
Days to the Clerk of the Council with a statement of the reasons for the veto.
   C.   Legislative Action Following Mayoral Veto 158. Following receipt of the
Mayor's veto, any vetoed Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion again
approved by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council
present and voting at a meeting, shall become effective in accordance with this
section.
   D.   Effective Date.
      (1)   Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions. Every Ordinance or Statutory
Resolution, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become effective on the
twenty-first (21st) Day after Public Notice, of Final Action 159, with the
exception that an Ordinance stated to be a public emergency measure which shall
be effective immediately, as set forth in §
5-4.E(4) of this Charter 160.
      (2)   Resolutions, Orders or Motions 161. Every Resolution, Order or
Motion, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become effective upon Final
Action.
                                        
151   1983 Charter § 3-8.
152   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (first sentence), by replacing
the following language: "Except in the case of resolutions relating to the
procedures of the Council, every proposed ordinance or resolution shall be
presented to the Mayor for approval, veto or acceptance within five (5) days
after adoption by the Council ". The replacement language adds the terms "order
or other legislative act"; replaces the term "adoption" with "passage" (akin to
the language in the rules of the General Assembly); inserts "business" days;
and, utilizes the term "for action" in lieu of "approval, veto or acceptance".
It also inserts the Clerk of the Council as the transmitting agent.
153   Charter Revision of 2011.
154   Charter Revision of 2011.
155   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (second sentence), by replacing
the following language: "Within fifteen (15) business days after adoption by
the Council, the Mayor shall approve veto or accept the proposed ordinance or
resolution". The replacement language adds "order or other legislative act";
inserts" business" days; and, addresses the specific Mayoral actions in a later
provision.
156   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (third sentence), by replacing
the following language: "Every ordinance and resolution approved by the Mayor
and those accepted by the Mayor's not acting to approve or veto such ordinance
or resolution within fifteen (15) days shall become effective in accordance
with this section". The replacement language adds "order or other legislative
act"; utilizes the term "fails to take action" in lieu of "not acting to
approve or veto" (veto is addressed in the following provision); adds
"business" days; and, adds the following sentence: "In the event the Mayor
shall fail to take action upon such matters the Town Clerk shall endorse such
fact upon the official copy of the matter".
157   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (fourth sentence), by replacing
the following language: "Every ordinance and resolution vetoed by the Mayor
shall be returned within the same fifteen (15) days to the Clerk of the Council
with a statement of the reasons for the veto". The replacement language adds
"order or other legislative act"; and "business" days.
158   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (fifth sentence), by replacing
the following language: "Following receipt of the Mayor's veto, any vetoed
ordinance or resolution again approved by an affirmative vote of at least two-
thirds (2/3) of the Council present and voting at a Meeting shall become
effective in accordance with this section". The replacement language adds
"order or other legislative act".
159   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 3-9 (second sentence); includes new
defined terms "Public Notice" and "Final Action".
160   Minor modification of 1983 Charter § 3-8 (sixth sentence) by changing
"publication" to "Public Notice".
161   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 4-8: PUBLIC NOTICE OF FINAL ACTION162.
   A.   Public Notice of Final Action. Public Notice regarding Ordinances and
Statutory Resolutions shall be provided within ten (10) Days after Final Action
or as otherwise required by Law (See, §
1-4.R) 163. Public Notice of Resolutions, Orders and Motions shall be provided
within twenty-four (24) hours of Final Action 164.
   B.   Public Notice of public emergency Ordinances or measures shall be
addressed in § 5-5.E of this Charter165.
   C.   Every Ordinance and Statutory Resolution, after passage, shall be given
a serial number and be officially recorded and preserved by the Town Clerk as a
public record as may be set forth in the General Statutes166.
                                        
162   2011 modification of title ("Publication of Ordinances") of 1983 Charter
§ 3-9.
163   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 3-9 (first sentence); includes the
definition of "Public Notice" in lieu of the "publication" requirement.
164   Charter Revision of 2011.
165   Derived from 1983 Charter § 3-9 (fourth sentence).
166   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-9 (fifth sentence) by adding
"Statutory Resolution".
SECTION 4-9: PETITION FOR OVERRULE.
   A.   All Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions of the Council, except fixing
the tax rate and the enactment of emergency Ordinances, shall be subject to
overrule167.
      (1)   If within twenty (20) Days after Final Action, a petition signed by
not less than fifteen (15%) percent of the Electors of the Town, as determined
from the last official voting list, is filed with the Town Clerk requesting a
referendum, the Council shall, at its next regular meeting, fix a time not more
than thirty (30) Days after such meeting for such election, which shall be
called and held in the manner provided by the General Statutes168.
      (2)   Any Ordinance or Statutory Resolution so referred to the voters
shall stand approved unless a majority of those voting thereon at such election
shall have voted "no" and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the Electors
entitled to vote on the question shall have voted169.
      (3)   The Council may by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/
3rds) of those present and voting add non binding referenda to be on the ballot
of such election170.
   B.   This section shall not apply to the borrowing of funds. The borrowing
of funds shall be governed solely by the provisions of §§
10-10 and
10-11 171 of this Charter. Moreover, this section shall not apply to the
Budget. The Budget overrule shall be governed solely by the provisions of §
10-7 of this Charter 172.
                                        
167   1983 Charter § 3-10 (first paragraph, first sentence).
168   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-10 (first paragraph, second
sentence) by reducing the requisite percentage of signatures to 15%. The
provision pertaining to "final action" is in lieu of the following: "...the
approval of an Ordinance or resolution by the Mayor, or passage by the Mayor's
failure to act, or passage by the Council after the Mayor's disapproval, as
provided in §38."
169   1983 Charter § 3-10 (first paragraph, third sentence).
170   1983 Charter § 3-10 (first paragraph, fourth sentence).
171   1983 Charter § 3-10 (second paragraph).
172   1983 Charter § 3-10 (third paragraph).
SECTION 4-10: SELECTION OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS173.
   The Council shall designate annually a certified public accountant or firm
of certified public accountants, as an independent auditor, to audit the books
and accounts of the Town as provided in the General Statutes and in accordance
with best practice standards as may be set forth and promulgated by the General
Accounting Office ("GAO"), Governmental Accounting Standards Board ("GASB"),
Finance Accounting Standard Board ("FASB"), the Government Finance Officers
Association ("GFOA")174, their successor or like-minded professional standard
setting organizations addressing the financial standards for municipalities.
The Council shall competitively select independent auditors and require the
rotation of such auditors by requiring their replacement by another firm at the
conclusion of the audit contract, which shall not exceed a maximum period of
six (6) consecutive years.
                                        
173   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 3-12. Establishes the principal of
rotation of independent auditors and the concept of best practices.
174   See, Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) reports entitled
"Audit Procurement" (1996 and 2002).
SECTION 4-11: APPROVAL OF MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS175.
   All appointments made by the Mayor that require approval by the Legislative
Council shall be deemed automatically approved if the Council fails to approve
or disapprove such appointments within forty-five (45) Days of written notice
to its Clerk of such an appointment; unless otherwise required by Law (See, §
1-4.R).
                                        
175   1983 Charter § 3-13.
SECTION 4-12: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION176.
   The Town shall take into cognizance the opportunities to engage in regional
initiatives in order to provide the most efficient delivery of services to the
Town. In this context, the town should utilize all laws pertaining to
regionalism, inter-local agreements and cooperative arrangements.
                                        
176   Charter Revision of 2011.
CHAPTER V: THE MAYOR177
177   1983 Charter Chapter V.
                                        
SECTION 5-1: ELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   At each general Town election, a Mayor shall be chosen by the Electors of
the Town. Such Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Town and shall
receive such compensation as shall be set by the Council. The Mayor shall
devote full time to the duties of the office178.
                                        
178   1983 Charter § 5-1.
SECTION 5-2: DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall:
   A.   be responsible for the administration of all Departments179 and
Officials 180, in charge of persons or Boards and Commissions 181 appointed by
the Mayor, and shall oversee and direct the same 182;
   B.   be an ex-officio, non-voting member of all Town Boards and Commissions
appointed by the Mayor, except the Board of Ethics or where such membership is
inconsistent with the General Statutes or this Charter183;
   C.   see that the provisions of all Laws, this Charter, the Ordinances and
Statutory Resolutions governing the Town are faithfully executed; shall cause
to be prepared and printed, within ninety (90) Days after the close of the
fiscal year, an annual Town report; shall recommend to the Council such
measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient; shall keep the Council fully
advised as to the financial condition of the Town; shall prepare and submit to
the Council an annual budget and shall exercise such other powers and duties as
may be required by Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion of the
Legislative Council consistent with the General Statutes and this Charter184;
and,
   D.   submit to the Council:
      (1)   commencing on the first (1st) day of July and every quarter
thereafter, a quarterly report on all contracts (including, agreements,
memoranda of understanding, memoranda of agreement, letters of understanding,
side letters and other agreements) entered into on behalf of the Town,
including but not limited to, those executed within the budget limits or other
authority established by the Legislative Council; however, excluding all such
contracts (as defined in this subsection) as may be exempted from disclosure by
Law185.
      (2)   a request for approval by a Majority Vote of the Legislative
Council, of any contracts:
         (a)   in excess of One Hundred Thousand ($100,000.00) Dollars which
are exempted from the competitive procurement and solicitation requirements of
this Charter and any Ordinances or regulations adopted hereunder. The
Legislative Council is authorized to modify the threshold based upon the
consumer price index or other like measure indexed for inflation or deflation.
This provision shall not apply to emergency transactions, which are addressed
in §
5-4.C(3) of this Charter186.
         (b)   which contain a term which will either fall in multiple fiscal
years; or, shall continue for a period longer than twelve (12) months187.
                                        
179   "Department" includes the deleted term "agencies".
180   "Officials" replaces "officers".
181   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-2, by adding the word
"Commissions".
182   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-2 (first sentence) by replacing
"supervise" with "oversee".
183   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-2 (second sentence).
184   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-2 (third sentence).
185   2022 modification of 2011 Charter Revision.
186   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-2 (fourth sentence) by modifying
the threshold amount and adding the following: "...The Legislative Council is
authorized to modify the threshold based upon the consumer price index or other
like measure indexed for inflation". In addition, the provision makes it clear
that the authority is over contracts exempted from the competitive procurement
and solicitation requirements of the Charter, in lieu of the language "...that
were negotiated contract for services with a value over...". It also deletes
the following language "...at least sixty (60) Days prior to the effective date
of the proposed contract".
187   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 (third sentence), to include all
contracts and reduce the time-frame to 12 months. Moreover, the vote should be
by majority in lieu of "...two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council present and
voting".
SECTION 5-3: APPOINTMENTS, TERMS OF OFFICE AND GENERAL POWERS.
   A.   The Mayor shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, appoint
and may remove all Department Heads and other Mayoral appointees188 of the Town
as set forth in this Charter 189. This provision shall not apply to Elected
Officials who are Department Heads 190.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the terms of all such
Department Heads or Mayoral appointees, established by Ordinance or by budget,
shall terminate at the same time as the term of the Mayor (unless otherwise
subject to the terms of an Employment Contract as set forth in §
8-2.C of this Charter); except such appointees may continue to serve until
their successors are appointed and qualified191.
    C.   The Mayor may, subject to the approval of the Council, perform the
duties of any office under the Mayor's jurisdiction, except those of the
Director of Finance in the performance of the duties and powers prescribed by
Law to Town Treasurers, as provided in §
8-4.A of this Charter192.
   D.   As set forth in §
8-1.B and C of this Charter, the Mayor shall have the power, subject to the
approval of the Council, to provide for the creation of any Department,
delegating to said Department any of the powers reserved to the Mayor under
this chapter and to appoint a Department Head for such Department thereby
created. The Mayor shall have the power to create for a new position, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council193.
   E.   Appointments to Boards and Commissions shall be set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter194.
                                        
188   "Mayoral appointees" replaces "...such officers and employees.".
189   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-3 (first sentence) by deleting the
following "...as an Ordinance of the Council consistent with this Charter may
provide" and replacing with "...set forth in this Charter".
190   Charter Revision of 2011.
191   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-3 (second sentence).
192   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-3 (third sentence) by repealing the
following clause: "...provided in case the Director of Finance is absent or
unable to act, the Mayor may countersign checks".
193   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 5-3 (fourth sentence) by adding the
opening clause and the second sentence.
194   NEW (2022). In lieu of 2011 § 5-4.
SECTION 5-4: EMERGENCY POWERS195.
   A.   Declaration of a Public Emergency. A public emergency pertaining to the
Town may be declared by the (1) President of the United States: (2) Governor of
the State of Connecticut 196; (3) Mayor; or, (4) upon the affirmative vote of
two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Legislative Council present and voting; although
there shall be, at least, nine (9) members voting in the affirmative. If
practicable, the declaration of Public Emergency by the Mayor or the Council
shall set the duration in the event it is expected to last for more than forty-
five (45) Days 197. In the event of a declaration of public emergency declared
by the President or Governor, there is no requirement for a local declaration,
unless unique circumstances or external funding or reimbursement requirements
otherwise require 198.
      (1)   Public Emergency. A public emergency is any condition that exists
or threatens to arise involving or threatening to damage or injure the lives,
health or property 199 of the inhabitants of the Town or curtail Town services
necessary to meet the requirements of the emergency 200. Said public emergency
may be a public health or civil preparedness emergency or both, as set forth
under the General Statutes 201.
      (2)   Notice 202. In the event a declaration is issued by the Mayor or
Legislative Council, the Mayor or President of the Legislative Council, as the
case may be, is required to issue notice within three (3) hours of such
declaration in accordance with § §
1-4.R and/or W of this Charter by electronic means to the Mayor or the members
of the Legislative Council, as the case may be; or in the event electronic
means are not available by delivering the written declaration to the receiving
party or parties. The Mayor is required to notify all emergency personnel of
the public emergency as may be required by Law.
      (3)   Termination of Public Emergency 203. The termination of the
emergency shall be determined and declared by the Mayor or by the affirmative
vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Legislative Council present and voting;
however, unless asserted in the declaration or otherwise extended, the Public
Emergency shall terminate at 11:59:59 P.M. of the forty-fifth (45th) Day
following the declaration.
   B.   Authority of the Mayor 204. The Mayor shall exercise within the limits
of the Town all the emergency powers given to the chief executive officer of a
municipality under the General Statutes with regard to the allocation of
personnel. Upon declaration of a public emergency, the Mayor may mobilize,
organize and direct the forces of the Town and call upon and cooperate with the
federal government or the State or its political subdivisions.
   C.   Appropriations and Expenditures for Emergencies.
      (1)   Public Emergency Contingency Appropriation 205. The Mayor and
Legislative Council are required to include in the Town Budget Ordinance an
appropriation for a public emergency contingency for the purpose of
effectuating the authority of the Mayor under §
5-4.C(2) of this Charter.
      (2)   Declared Public Emergency Expenditures.
         (a)   Authority of the Mayor and Modification of Authority. The Mayor
may obligate the Town in an amount of money not to exceed One Hundred Thousand
($100,000.00) Dollars ("Authorized Amount") 206, as may be appropriated
pursuant to §
5-4.C(1) of this Charter, any increase to the Authorized Amount, as set forth
below, or any emergency appropriation as may be approved by the Council from
the public emergency contingency appropriation 207.
            (i)   Increase in the Authorized Amount. In the event the
Legislative Council determines that the amount of funds set forth, above, is
not sufficient to meet expected emergency expenditures, the Council is
authorized to increase Mayor's level authority to an amount set forth by
Ordinance 208.
         (b)   Funds Unavailable from Authorized Appropriation 209. In the
event such money is not available from the public emergency contingency
appropriation, the Mayor may obligate such authorized amount from other
unexpended funds identified by the Director of Finance, to cope with such
public emergency until the Legislative Council convenes.
         (c)   Mayoral Report on Emergency Expenditures 210. The Mayor is
required to report any action taken under § 5-5C (2) (a) and (b) at the next
Meeting of the Legislative Council 211.
      (3)   Emergency Appropriations 212. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
10-9.D and E of this Charter, in the event that funds in addition to the public
emergency contingency appropriation are required to meet or mitigate a declared
public emergency, the Mayor shall determine the necessary amount and seek
Legislative Council approval, at an Emergency Meeting, to authorize transfers.
         (a)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Charter, the
Legislative Council may, if necessary, appropriate funds in addition to the
public emergency contingency.
         (b)   The affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds) of the
members of the Legislative Council is required to authorize any such emergency
appropriation213.
         (c)   The Order of the Legislative Council approving any emergency
appropriation shall specify the nature of the emergency and source of revenue.
Unless the Mayor certifies that the emergency threatens the immediate public
health or safety, the Legislative Council shall hold a public hearing on any
proposed special or emergency appropriation.
   D.   Emergency Meetings of the Legislative Council 214. In the event a
Public Emergency is declared, the Mayor or President of the Legislative Council
may call an emergency meeting of the Council upon three (3) hours notice and
may summon Council members to attend such meeting in such manner as the Council
may prescribe by the rules of the Legislative Council, unless otherwise
required by Law (See, §
1-4.R). Notwithstanding any provision of law or this Charter to the contrary,
at such meeting, the Council may transact any item or items of business
relevant to such emergency.
   E.   Public Emergency Ordinances, Orders and Measures 215. Upon the
declaration of a Public Emergency, the Legislative Council may enact Public
Emergency Ordinances, Orders (as set forth above) and other measures in order
to meet such emergency. Rules and procedures for the adoption of Public
Emergency Ordinances, Orders and measures shall be governed by the rules of the
Legislative Council which shall establish the terms of Final Action.
      (1)   Public Hearing and Notice Requirements 216. No public hearing or
Meeting Notice shall be required for any Ordinance or Order stated to be a
Public Emergency Ordinance, Order or measure, unless otherwise required by Law
(See, §
1-4.R).
      (2)   Procedural time-frame 217. The time-frame set forth in §§
4-7 through
4-8 of this Charter shall not apply to the adoption of a Public Emergency
Ordinance, Order or measure; however, the procedural measures set forth in that
provision shall be addressed in the rules of the Legislative Council.
      (3)   Requirements 218. An emergency Ordinance, Order or other measure
shall contain a specific statement of the emergency and shall require a
Majority Vote of the Legislative Council.
      (4)   Effective Date 219.  An emergency Ordinance, Order or other measure
shall become effective immediately upon final action as set forth in the Rules
of the Legislative Council, unless otherwise required by Law. However, Public
Notice of such Public Emergency Ordinance, Order or other measure shall take
place promptly following final action, unless otherwise required by Law (See, §
1-4.R) 220.
      (5)   Automatic Repeal of Public Emergency Ordinance or Measure 221. With
the exception of emergency appropriations (enacted by Order of the Legislative
Council), every such Public Emergency Ordinance or measure, including any
amendments thereto, shall automatically stand repealed at the termination of
the forty-fifth (45th) Day following Finance Action of said Ordinance.
                                        
195   Recodification of Charter § 5-5.
196   See, C.G.S. §28-9 entitled "Civil preparedness emergency; Governor's
powers. Modification or suspension of statutes, regulations or other
requirements;" and C.G.S. §19a-131a entitled "Declaration of public health
emergency by Governor."
197   Charter Revision of 2011 (first and second sentences of § 5-5.A).
198   NEW (2022) (second sentence of Charter §5-5.A).
199   See, C.G.S. §19a-1312a and §28-9, respectively.
200   First sentence of Charter §5-5.A (1) was adopted during the Charter
Revision of 2011.
201   NEW (2022) (second sentence of Charter § 5-5.A (1). At the time of
adoption public health and civil preparedness emergencies are set forth in
C.G.S. §19a-1312a and §28-9, respectively.
202   NEW (2022)
203   2022 recodification of Charter §5-5.A (2) of the Charter Revision of
2011.
204   Charter Revision of 2011.
205   NEW (2022). See, C.G.S. §7-148(c) (2) (D).
206   2022 modification and recodification of the first clause of the first
sentence of Charter §5-5.C (3) of the Charter Revision of 2011.
207   NEW (2022).
208   2022 modification of the parenthetical of the first sentence of Charter
§5-5.C (3) of the Charter Revision of 2011.
209   2022 modification and recodification of the second clause of the first
sentence of Charter §5-5.C (3) of the Charter Revision of 2011.
210   2022 recodification of the third sentence of §5-5.C (1) of Charter
Revision of 2011.
211   2022 repeal of the last sentence of Charter §5-5.C (3) of Charter
Revision of 2011. "The authority set forth in this provision shall not apply in
the event the Legislative Council has not been provided with notice under §5-
5.D of this Charter.
212   2022 recodification of Charter §5-5.C (2) of the Charter Revision of
2011.
213   See, C.G.S. §7-148(c) (2) (D), as follows: "Make appropriations for the
purpose of Meeting a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property
of citizens, provided such appropriations shall require a favorable vote of at
least two-thirds of the entire membership of the legislative body or, when the
legislative body is the town Meeting, at least two-thirds of those present and
voting".
214   2022 modification of Charter §5-5.D of the Charter Revision of 2011.
215   2022 modification of Charter §5-5.E of the Charter Revision of 2011.
216   2022 modification of Charter §5-5.E (1), which includes 2011 Charter
Revision modification of 1983 Charter §3-7 (second sentence).
217   2022 modification of Charter §5-5.E (2) of the Charter Revision of 2011.
218   Charter Revision of 2011.
219   In lieu of 1983 Charter §3-8 (sixth sentence) and 3-9 (third sentence).
220   Consistent with 1983 Charter §3-9 (third sentence).
221   2022 modification of Charter §5-5.E (5). Consistent with 1983 Charter §3-
9 (fourth sentence); 45th day in lieu of 61st day.
CHAPTER VI: OTHER ELECTED OFFICIALS
SECTION 6-1: TOWN CLERK.
   A.   There shall be a Town Clerk as required by the General Statutes and as
set forth in this Charter222.
   B.   Powers and Duties 223. The Town Clerk shall have all the powers and
duties 224 prescribed by the General Statutes, this Charter and such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Council.
      (1)   Registrar of Vital Statistics 225. The Town Clerk shall serve as
Registrar of Vital Statistics, unless otherwise set forth by the General
Statutes 226.
      (2)   Assistants and Employees 227. The Town Clerk shall appoint and may
remove, subject to the provisions of the Merit System, all assistants 228 and
employees of this office.
      (3)   Compensation 229. The Town Clerk's compensation and benefits shall
be set by the Council.
      (4)   Fees 230. All fees collected by the Town Clerk shall be paid to the
Town, except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes.
      (5)   Certification 231. For the purpose of meeting best practices and
the highest professional standards, the Town Clerk shall, upon eligibility,
participate in the certification program for town clerks, as set forth in the
General Statutes.
                                        
222   Charter Revision of 2011.
223   1983 Charter § 2-6 (first sentence).
224   Some of the responsibilities of the Town Clerk are set forth in C.G.S.
Title 7, Chapter 92. This is not the exhaustive list. (1) § 7-16. Bond
(Repealed); (2) § 7-16a. Notice to Secretary of the State of appointment of
town clerk, vacancy in appointed office of town clerk; (3) § 7-17. Oath of town
clerks; (4) § 7-18. Neglect of duty (Repealed); (5) § 7-19. Assistant town
clerks. Notice to Secretary of the State of appointment, vacancy; (6) § 7-20.
Acting town clerk; (7) § 7-21. Town clerk pro tempore; (8) § 7-22. Removal of
town clerks; (9) § 7-22a. Certification program for town clerks; (10) § 7-23.
Records and copies; (11) § 7-24. Recording of instruments; safekeeping of
records; recording of illegible instruments; (12) § 7-25. Index; (13) § 7-25a.
Electronic indexing system; (14) § 7-26. Errors to be corrected; (15) § 7-26a.
Indemnification of clerk with respect to claims arising out of land record
errors; (16) § 7-27. Municipal records to be kept in fire-resistive vaults or
safes; (17) § 7-27a. Destruction of original land records or instruments; (18)
§ 7-27b. Removal of Social Security number from document prior to recording on
land records; (19) § 7-28. Indexing of mechanic's lien; (20) § 7-29. Release or
assignment of mortgage or lien; (21) § 7-30. Attachment of real estate; (22) §
7-31. Maps of surveys and plots, filing requirements, copies; (23) § 7-32.
Index of surveys and maps; (24) § 7-32a to 7-32j. Reserved for future use; (25)
§ 7-32k. Property upon which hunting or shooting sports regularly take place.
Placement of property location on list maintained by town clerk. Notice.
Liability not imposed by section; (26) § 7-33. Lists of transfers of taxable
property; (27) § 7-33a. Issuance of certificates of authority of justices of
peace, notaries and Superior Court Commissioners; (28) § 7-34. Fees; (29) § 7-
34a. Fees; (30) § 7-34b. Accounting of fees required. Salary in lieu of fees;
(31) § 7-35. Preservation by town clerks of statutes, special acts and Register
and Manual; (32) § 7-35a. Off-site storage of original documents. Requirements;
(33) § 7-35b to 7-35z.
225   Charter Revision of 2011.
226   C.G.S. §7-37 entitled "Town clerk, ex-officio registrar. Notice to
Secretary of the State of appointment of registrar, vacancy in appointed office
of registrar".
227   1983 Charter § 2-6 (second sentence).
228   The appointment and vacancies in the office of such assistants shall be
subject to notification as required by the General Statutes. (C.G.S. § 7-19).
229   1983 Charter § 2-6 (third sentence, first clause).
230   1983 Charter § 2-6 (third sentence, second clause).
231   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-22a entitled "Certification
program for town clerks" is not mandatory: "(b) any person may participate in
the course of training....and upon successfully completing any examination...
shall be recommended to the secretary of the state as a candidate for
certification as a certified Connecticut town clerk".
SECTION 6-2: REGISTRARS OF VOTERS232.
   There shall be Registrars of Voters as required by the General Statutes and
as set forth in this Charter233.
                                        
232   Charter Revision of 2011.
233   See, C.G.S. §9-190 entitled "Registrars of voters". See also, C.G.S. §9-
189a entitled "Four-year terms for town clerks, registrars and treasurers".
CHAPTER VII: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 7-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS234.
   A.   Creation of Boards and Commissions 235. In addition to those Boards and
Commissions established by this Charter, the Legislative Council shall by
Ordinance establish the Boards and Commissions of the Town. Unless this Charter
or Special Acts provides otherwise, the Legislative Council shall set forth, by
Ordinance:
      (1)   The Role of Boards and Commissions. The primary purpose of a Board
or Commission is to serve the residents of the Town in carrying out the policy,
advisory and/or quasi-judicial or regulatory functions under its charge. Boards
and Commissions serve as a conduit for citizen participation and input by
gathering, analyzing and acting upon such information in order to meet the
specific objectives as set forth under this Charter, Ordinances or other source
of legal authority.
      (2)   The Public Interest. Members of Boards and Commissions are required
to understand the role and scope of responsibility and be informed of the
objectives, scope of responsibility and operating procedures of the Board of
Commission to which they are appointed. Members should represent the public
interest and not personal interests or special interest groups and seek to
render decisions on the basis of what is best for the residents of the Town.
Furthermore, members should take care that deliberations include thorough
research and review of all alternatives on an issue prior to making a
recommendation.
         (a)   Regulatory Functions 236. In the case of members of regulatory
Boards and Commissions, decisions should be evidence-based taking into account
the interests of the public and fairness to the parties based upon application
of the Law and any other pertinent documents.
         (b)   Departmental Policy and Administrative Functions 237. In the
case of members of Boards and Commissions aligned with a Department, members
serve as a communication link between the community, staff, and Town presenting
programs and recommendations and provide a channel for citizen expression.
Members should establish a strong working relationship with Department Heads
and other executives; however, at all times, members represent the public
interest as opposed to the specific department interests under their
jurisdiction. This is particularly true when a Board or Commission has an
oversight function.
      (3)   Open Meetings 238. The objective of Hamden's open government policy
is to achieve optimal public accessibility at all Meetings and to lead the way
as the State policy and law evolve. All Meetings of Boards and Commissions
shall be public and conducted in strict compliance with the requirements of the
General Statutes; unless otherwise permitted or required by Law 239. In
furtherance of this objective, all Boards and Commissions shall utilize all
technology provided by the Town so that in person, remote 240 or hybrid
interactions 241 may be provided at every meeting. The Town shall migrate
toward ensuring that technology is available to all Boards and Commissions so
that all possible means of public participation are provided for at every
meeting.
      Transition Migration Plan: The Mayor and Legislative Council shall agree
to a transition plan to comply with the provisions of § 7-1.A(2) of this
Charter. The plan shall include initial implementation staging for system and
operational requirements, funding for which shall be set forth in the Adopted
Town Budget for FY 2023-2024 (General fund/Operating and Capital).
   B.   Administrative Requirements of Boards and Commissions 242. All Boards
and Commissions established by this Charter or by Ordinance are required to
comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Number of Members and Terms 243. The number of Board and Commission
members (and alternates) and terms of office, which may be staggered. Except as
otherwise provided by the General Statutes and this Charter, the number shall
always be odd and the term of office shall not exceed a term of six (6) years,
which may be staggered.
         (a)   Modification of Charter Provisions Requiring Legislative Council
District Representation 244. Where the Charter creates a Board or Commission to
be appointed from each of the legislative districts of the Town, the Council
shall, by Ordinance, expand or contract the number of members in order to
accommodate any changes in the number of legislative districts.
         (b)   Representation by Legislative Council District 245. In
furtherance of the objective to ensure fair and diverse representation the
Legislative Council may, by Ordinance, modify the composition of any Board and
Commission established under this Charter or by Ordinance in order to implement
representation by Legislative Council District.
      (2)   Required Ordinance Provisions 246. Any such Ordinance shall make
provision for:
         (a)   The appointment of a chair, such officers as may be necessary
for its proper function and a delineation of the responsibilities of the
presiding officer and other officers;
         (b)   The keeping of records and posting of agendas as required by the
General Statutes;
         (c)   Compliance with minority party representation in accordance with
§7-1.B(8) of this Charter;
         (d)   Public access, comment and interaction (including, but not
limited to, public speaking, comment and any applicable rules and protocols),
in accordance with the requirements of §7-1.B(7) of this Charter;
         (e)   Frequency of regular Meetings of all Boards and Commissions, in
compliance with §7-1.B(4) of this Charter, and mandatory attendance
requirements, for the purpose of establishing a standard as required by §7-1E
(2) of this Charter. The agendas of Boards and Commissions shall be approved by
the Chair of such entity; and,
         (f)   Department Head, where aligned with a Board or Commission,
responsibility to notify members and any complaining parties of civilian
complaints pertaining to matters within the jurisdiction of said Board or
Commission, in accordance with rules established by said Board or Commission.
      (3)   Quorum. A majority of the total membership of each such Board and
Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business;
unless, otherwise required by the General Statutes.
      (4)   Meeting Frequency and Notice 247. Each Board or Commission shall
meet as frequently as necessary to perform its duties; however, not less than
monthly. Meetings may be cancelled with notice and disclosure to the public
stating the reason for such cancellation; notwithstanding the foregoing, no
Board or Commission shall cancel Meetings for two (2) consecutive months.
Failure to obtain a quorum shall not be deemed a violation of this provision of
the Charter 248. The Chair, any two (2) members or the Mayor may call a Meeting
of any appointive Board or Commission, provided each member is given notice of
not less than twenty-four (24) hours thereof, unless otherwise required by Law
(See, §
1-4(R)).
      (5)   Clerk 249. The Town Clerk, working with the Mayor, shall make
certain that each Board or Commission has a clerk or other designee assigned to
serve the function of said entity.
      (6)   Public Records 250. Each clerk shall keep a complete record of the
resolutions and other proceedings of the Board or Commission and shall have
custody of its correspondence, files and other records. All minutes and
recordings of Meetings shall be filed with the Town Clerk. All such records
shall be open for public inspection at reasonable hours and shall be available
for public review and inspection on the Town website in compliance with the
requirements of Law. Departments Heads shall obtain the approval of a Board or
Commission aligned with their department, prior to transmitting a request to
the Mayor for the disposition, transfer or destruction of public documents in
accordance with Law.
      (7)   Public Access, Comment and Interaction 251.
         (a)   Remote and Direct Public Access to Boards and Commissions. Each
Board and Commission shall have capacity to receive remote, direct electronic
or digital communications from the public. Said means of communication shall
include those currently in existence or those to be created in the future and
shall uniformly apply to all Boards and Commissions at any given time. Access
to the such communications capacity shall be limited to the clerk and/or Chair
of the Board or Commission both of whom shall be responsible for disseminating
such information to the remaining members. The Town Clerk will work with the
Town officials responsible for electronic or digital communications in order to
facilitate assignment of such communications technologies to Boards and
Commissions.
         (b)   Public Comment: Prior to and During Meetings. Meetings of Boards
and Commissions shall be open to the public in accordance with the General
Statutes. There shall be a public comment session prior to the commencement of
all business on the regular and special Meeting agenda of a Board or
Commission. Each Board or Commission shall establish rules pertaining to the
time and duration of such public comment and the protocols for additional
public comment during any Meeting in the event said Board or Commission has
received or heard new, material information during the course of a Meeting
following the initial public comment session. Such additional public comment,
if any, shall be considered prior to Final Action on the related agenda item,
at the discretion of the Chair of said Board or Commission.
            (i)   Agenda Items and Matters within Purview of the Board or
Commission. The public may address any item on the agenda of a regular or
special Meeting and any matter within the purview of a Board or Commission at a
regular Meeting, electronically or in person. unless otherwise set forth or
constrained by Law of the provisions of this Charter.
            (ii)   Adding Items to a Regular Meeting Agendas: Public Comment.
Members of Boards and Commission may add items to the agenda of any regular
Meeting as follows: prior to notice and posting of the agenda, unless otherwise
required by Law (See, §
1-4.R), by petition of one-third (1/3rd) of the members to the Chair; and, a
simple majority of the members present and voting if motion is made on the day
of the regular Meeting, insofar as such modifications are in accordance with
Law. Following the addition of an item to the agenda the Board or Commission is
required to permit public comment on such added items.
            (iii)   Submission Requirements. The rules of each Board and
Commission shall establish a submission requirement for documents to be
considered at the subsequent Meetings of such body. For the purposes of §7-1.B
(7)(b)(ii), above, documents shall be provided to the public online as soon as
available to the members of the Board or Commission.
            (iv)   Executive Session and Other Legal or Regulatory Proceedings.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, public comment may be limited or prohibited on
agenda items covered by the Law pertaining to non-public Meetings 252 or
executive sessions 253, by applicable provisions of collective bargaining
agreement, if any; and any Laws or agreements protective of the privacy rights,
confidentiality or legal rights associated with any party before the Board or
Commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Boards and Commissions should strive
to permit public comment where possible in order to reach a balance between the
public interest, contractual and legal obligations and avoiding prejudicial
behavior in the decisions to be rendered; as may be determined by opinion of
the Town Attorney.
      (8)   Political Composition: Minority Party Representation 254. Unless
otherwise required by the General Statutes or as otherwise set forth in this
Charter, the political affiliation of the members of all appointed Boards or
Commissions or panel of alternates shall reflect the requirements of the
General Statutes with respect to minority party representation 255. This
provision shall apply to all Boards or Commissions established or required by
this Charter or established by Ordinance.
      (9)   Compensation Prohibited 256. Except as otherwise set forth in this
Charter or by Ordinance, no member of any appointed Board or Commission shall
receive compensation for services as such member.
   C.   Appointment 257. Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes
or this Charter, all members or alternate members of Boards or Commissions
shall be appointed by the Mayor as set forth in this Charter, subject to
approval by the Legislative Council. All Board or Commission members shall
serve until the completion of their respective terms or until their successors
have been appointed and qualified.
      (1)   Limitations on the Mayoral Appointment Authority to Boards and
Commissions 258. The Mayor's power of appointment pertaining to all members of
Boards and Commissions, including vacancies, is set forth in this section of
the Charter and is absolute unless otherwise set forth in the General Statutes
or other specified provision of this Charter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in
the event the Mayor fails to announce and submit to the Legislative Council a
candidate for reappointment or replacement, in the event of a Vacancy, on said
Board or Commission:
         (a)   within ninety (90) Days following the end of the term of the
member or the date of the Vacancy (in accordance with notice from the Town
Clerk), whichever is applicable, during the first six (6) months of the Mayor's
first term of office; or,
         (b)   within sixty (60) Days following the end of the term of the
member or the date of the Vacancy (in accordance with notice from the Town
Clerk), whichever is applicable, during the remainder of the Mayor's term of
office;
         (c)   within thirty (30) Days following the rejection of a Mayoral
appointment by the Legislative Council, then the Legislative Council shall, on
its own motion, make said reappointment.
      (2)   Legislative Council Appointment Authority 259. Upon the failure of
the Mayor to recommend an appointment as set forth in §7-1.C (1), above, the
Legislative Council shall have the authority to reappoint or appoint a member
to a Vacancy, whichever is applicable, by a Majority Vote of the Legislative
Council. The Legislative Council shall take such action within sixty (60) Days
after the date the Mayor fails to take action.
      (3)   Lapse of Legislative Council Authority 260. In the event the
Legislative Council fails to fill the Vacancy during the sixty (60) Day period,
then the remaining members of the Board or Commission for which a term has
lapsed or a vacancy exists shall, by vote of a majority of the members present
and voting, fill the position; subject to the right of rejection by a Majority
Vote of the Legislative Council within thirty (30) Days of said vote. Said
appointments are subject to the requirements of the General Statutes pertaining
to minority party representation and other applicable provisions of this
Charter.
      (4)   Limitations of Service 261. On and after first (1st) day of
December 2023, no person shall be appointed to a term on any Board or
Commission if at the time of the commencement of such new term such person
shall have served twelve (12) consecutive years on such Board or Commission or,
if during the subsequent term, said appointment would result in service in
excess of said limitation of service. This limitation of service shall be
applied to members of Boards and Commissions serving at the effective date of
this provision. Moreover, the time served by a person filling a partial term
shall be counted toward the limitation of service. Any person whose term ends
due to this provision may be reappointed to such Board or Commission after a
lapse of one (1) year.
      (5)   Youth Representation 262. There shall be two (2) non-voting
positions on each Board and Commission for youths in the Town, ages fifteen
(15) through eighteen (18), regardless of their status in a public or private
high school. Said youth representatives shall be appointed by the Mayor in
accordance with the provisions of §7-1.C of this Charter. The Mayor and
Legislative Council shall establish a process for the recruitment of Youth
Representatives. The non-voting members shall be exempted from the provisions
of this Charter pertaining to qualifications; however, they shall be residents
of the Town and subject to all provisions of Law and applicable rules of
procedure and conduct pertaining to members of Boards and Commissions.
   D.   Vacancy 263. Unless otherwise set forth in the General Statutes or in
this Charter, in the event of a Vacancy on any Board or Commission, a successor
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council
(subject to the provisions of §7-1.C of this Charter), for the unexpired
portion of the term, as set forth in this Charter.
      (1)   Resignation: Effective Date 264. The effective date of a Vacancy
caused by resignation shall be the date the Town Clerk notifies the Mayor or
other Appointing Authority of the resignation and Vacancy, as such date is
dated, filed and recorded in the records of the Clerk. A resignation may be
effectuated if an oral statement is made on the record of the Board or
Commission and the approved minutes of said Meeting are transmitted to the Town
Clerk by the Chair.
      (2)   Notice to the Mayor of Vacancy Due to Resignation. The Town Clerk
shall send notice of any Vacancy to the Mayor (or other Appointing Authority)
and the President and Clerk of the Legislative Council within four (4) business
days or receipt or knowledge. Said Clerk shall record the time of said notice
as set forth herein.
   E.   Removal 265. Unless otherwise set forth in the General Statutes or this
Charter, the Mayor may initiate proceedings to remove a member of any appointed
Board, Commission, or relevant position or "panel of alternates" for any of the
following reasons: (1) misconduct in the performance of duties; (2) persistent
absence, as defined by Ordinance or the rules of the Board or Commission which
shall be so adopted 266; (3) conviction of a felony, while in office; (4)
conviction, while in office, of a misdemeanor which would undermine the public
confidence in the member's ability to perform the duties of office; and, (5)
violation of §7-1.F of this Charter, as determined by the Mayor or other
appointing authority. The Chair or a majority of the full membership of any
Board or Commission may recommend removal of a member for the reasons set forth
herein. Rules of Procedure for the removal of said member, and additional
grounds for removal shall be set by Ordinance.
   F.   Residency Requirement 267. Except as otherwise provided by Ordinance,
no person may serve on a Board or Commission unless such person is an Elector
of the Town; or, in the case of a district representative, a resident of the
district. If any such person who is a member of a Board or Commission shall
cease to be an Elector of the Town or a resident of a district where residence
is required for holding said office, such person shall thereupon cease to hold
appointive office in the Town or district. Failure to resign shall be grounds
for removal under §7-1.E of this Charter.
      (1)   District Representation 268. In the event a person is appointed as
a district representative to a Board or Commission, the member shall serve as
long as they remain a resident of the district they represent. If the member
moves from the district, such person shall cease to hold appointive office in
the district, as set forth in §7-1.F. In the event a member is removed from the
district following reapportionment under §
3-7 of this Charter, the member may continue to represent the district on said
Board or Commission for the remainder of the term of office.
   G.   Representation on Boards and Commissions 269. The Mayor and other
appointing authorities are required to consider appointments to ensure that, to
the fullest extent possible, the composition of Boards and Commissions reflect
the diversity of the residents and the geographic areas of the Town.
      (1)   Diversity. In furtherance of this provision, Boards and Commissions
should reflect the diversity, including the race, color, ethnicity, religious
creed, age, sex, national origin, ancestry, status as a veteran, socio-economic
status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial and marital
status, pregnancy, or physical and mental disability and cultural make-up of
the Town in order to achieve a representative balance of its residents.
      (2)   Geographical Areas of the Town. Moreover, Hamden is committed to
ensuring fair representation of residents from all voting districts on Boards
and Commissions, including balanced representation from throughout the Town. In
order to advance the intent of this provision, the Mayor or any other
appointing authority shall make best efforts to avoid the appointment of more
than one member from the same Legislative Council District; however, under no
circumstance shall appoint more than two. While this Charter may specifically
populate some Boards and Commissions on the basis of the Legislative Council
Districts, this provision applies, subject to the exceptions specifically set
forth herein, to Boards and Commissions. The Legislative Council may create or
modify the composition of any Board or Commission as set forth in §7-1.B(1)(b)
of this Charter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this limitation shall not apply
to any Board or Commission charged with a mission focused on a specific
geographic area of the Town.
      (3)   Backgrounds. Of equal weight with the foregoing requirements, the
Mayor and other appointing authorities are obligated to take into consideration
a diversity of backgrounds, life experience, expertise, as well as personal
integrity and a commitment to ensuring an ethical and transparent local
government. The Mayor and Legislative Council, when examining new candidates
for appointment to Boards and Commissions are required to give due
consideration to recommendations made by representatives of Outreach
Organizations as set forth in §7-1.K (2) of this Charter and other similar
organizations as well as the role of the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Commission as set forth in §
7-2.L of this Charter.
   H.   Dual Appointment Prohibited; Exceptions 270. Except where otherwise
provided by general or special law, no person may serve as an appointed member
of more than one Board or Commission at the same time, with the exception of a
Charter Revision Commission, other Boards or Commissions of finite duration or
appointment as a representative of the Town on regional entities 271. Members
of the Legislative Council may only serve on a Board or Commission if assigned
as a representative to such Board or Commission for the sole purpose of
representing the Council.
   I.   Restrictions Pertaining to Members of the Civil Service Commission,
Finance Commission 272, Board of Ethics and Police Commission and Fire
Commission 273. No person who has served in the previous two (2) years in
municipal office in the Town of Hamden (other than a member of the Boards or
Commissions set forth in this sub-section) or a political party officer, shall
be appointed to membership on the Civil Service Commission, Finance Commission,
Board of Ethics, Police Commission or Fire Commission. For purposes of this
section, the term "Municipal Office" means an individual who holds or has held
a municipal office (as defined in C.G.S. §9-372 but shall not include a justice
of the peace or notary public) in the Town and the term "political party
officer" means an officer of a national committee of a political party, state
central or town committee or any person employed by such committee for
compensation.
   J.   Required Cooperation 274. Each Official 275 and employee of any
Department 276 of the Town shall assist the Boards and Commissions and the
pertinent Departments in carrying out the provisions of this section.
Furthermore, in the event a Board or Commission is attached to a Department,
the Department Head shall cooperate with said Board or Commission in
formulating and carrying out the operational and management policies of the
Department.
   K.   Administration of Boards and Commissions:
      (1)   The Role of the Town Clerk: General Administration of Boards and
Commissions 277. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the general
administration of Boards and Commissions, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   swearing in all approved Board and Commission members;
         (b)   providing Board and Commission members with background materials
regarding the procedures and legal issues associated with service as a member,
including, but not limited to parliamentary procedure, home rule, freedom of
information and open government laws;
         (c)   the assignment of clerks, as set forth in §7-1.B(5), above;
         (d)   the keeping of records to comply with the General Statutes and
for public review, as set forth in §7-1.B(6), above;
         (e)   cooperating with other responsible Town officials on the
assignment of communications technologies, as set forth in §7-1.B(6)(a), above;
and,
         (f)   posting of all agendas and minutes of Boards and Commissions, as
set forth in §
1-4.Q and V of this Charter.
      (2)   The Responsibilities of the Town Clerk Pertaining to the Creation
and Maintenance of a Public Applicant Pool for Boards and Commissions 278. For
the purposes of creating and maintaining a public applicant pool for Boards and
Commissions the Town Clerk shall:
         (a)   be the filing repository of interested applicants to Boards and
Commissions and shall notify the Mayor's office of all such applicants;
         (b)   record all approved appointments and sworn oaths in the Town
Meeting Book as required by the Connecticut General Statutes.
         (c)   update the website of the Town on the status of Boards and
Commissions within seven (7) Days following any change in the composition of
any entity and republishing the list of Boards and Commissions as set forth in
§7-1.K(4)(b) and (c), below; and,
         (d)   notify the Mayor and Council President of all noticed Vacancies,
resignations (as set forth in §7-1.D(3), above) and upcoming term expirations
on Boards and Commissions and shall record the time of said notice for the
purposes of §7-1.C(1) of this Charter, within four (4) business days or receipt
or knowledge of such Vacancy or three (3) months prior to the end of the term
of office ("Effective Date"); and,
      (3)   The Role of the Mayor. The Mayor's office shall (a) maintain
records of incumbency of Boards and Commission by list; and (b) coordinate the
list with the Town Clerk on a quarterly basis.
      (4)   Publication of Boards and Commissions: Applicant Pool 279. For the
purposes of creating an applicant pool during the months of May and November of
each year, the Mayor shall cause to be
         (a)   published on the Town website;
         (b)   posted in a conspicuous location available to the public in the
office of the Town Clerk and in such location in Town Hall as designated by the
Mayor; and,
         (c)   if practicable, published in a newspaper of local availability
to the residents of the Town and, an updated list of all the Boards and
Commissions, specifically setting forth the terms set to expire during the
subsequent six (6) months following the publication.
         In addition, following receipt of the Town Clerk's notice of a vacancy
to the Mayor280, as set forth in §7-1.D(3), above, or upon the pending
expiration of a term on a Board or Commission, the Mayor shall provide Public
Notice that such position is subject to appointment, at least seventy-two (72)
hours of receipt of such notice from the Town Clerk or, in the case of upcoming
expiring terms, three (3) months in advance of such expiration of the term
(See, §
1-4.R) 281. The Mayor shall publish or post, as the case may be, such notice
(1) on the Town website and other electronic media, including social media and
other methods of reaching the public; (2) in a conspicuous location available
to the public in the office of the Town Clerk and in such location in Town Hall
as designated by the Mayor; and, (3) if practicable, in a newspaper of local
availability to the residents of the Town 282.
         (d)   Any Elector desirous of serving on any Board or Commission may
express such desire in writing addressed to the Town Clerk who shall,
forthwith, forward such correspondence and a list of all candidates for the
position283 to the Mayor or other such appointing authority who shall retain
such correspondence on file for two (2) years.
         (e)   The Mayor shall invite the Electors of the Town who are
interested in serving to apply by submitting their name, address and
qualifications, in writing, for membership on such Board or Commission to the
Town Clerk284.
         (f)   The Mayor may nominate an individual from this list and submit
the nomination to the Legislative Council, which shall approve or disapprove
the Mayor's selection; however, if the nominee is not taken from the list the
Mayor shall provide an explanation285.
         (g)   The appointing authority of any member of any Board or
Commission shall review such notices prior to making the appointment to such
Board286.
      (5)   Additional Public Outreach 287. In addition to the publication
requirements of this section, the Mayor and the Town Clerk will work to develop
an applicant pool of diverse and knowledgeable candidates for Board and
Commission appointments, taking into account resources such as, political,
religious, community-based, social, mutual benefit organizations, civic and
business organizations.
                                        
234   Charter Revision of 2011.
235   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-1.A.
236   At the time of adoption, the following Boards and Commission perform such
functions: Civil Service Commission; Board of Ethics; Zoning Board of Appeals;
Planning and Zoning Commission, Building Board of Appeals; Personnel Appeals
Board and Inland Wetlands Commission. The Police and Fire Commissions also have
regulatory functions in their complaint processes and personnel functions. If
adopted the Finance Commission would have discretionary and oversight functions
that would fall into this category.
237   At the time of adoption, the following Boards and Commission perform such
functions: Police Commission and Fire Commission, Diversity, Equity and
Inclusion Commission and Library Board.
238   NEW (2022).
239   At the time of adoption of this Charter amendment the applicable
provision was C.G.S. §1-200(2) and (6).
240   Comment of the 2022 Charter Revision Commission: Remote meetings are
entirely "virtual." There is no in-person component. At the time of the
adoption of this Charter state law requires an accommodation for "remote"
meetings; seem, P.A. 22-3.
241   Comment of the 2022 Charter Revision Commission: A "hybrid meeting" is
one which utilizes electronic equipment in conjunction with an in-person
meeting. These meetings are government by P.A. 22-3.
242   NEW (2022).
243   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. A(1).
244   NEW (2022).
245   NEW (2022).
246   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-1.A (2).
247   NEW (2022).
248   NEW (2022).
249   NEW (2022).
250   NEW (2022).
251   NEW (2022).
252   At the time of adoption of this Charter amendment the applicable
provision was C.G.S. §1-200(2).
253   At the time of adoption of this Charter amendment the applicable
provision was C.G.S. §1-200(6).
254   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. F.
255   See, C.G.S. § 9-167a entitled "Minority representation".
256   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. G.
257   Charter Revision of 2011.
258   NEW (2022).
259   NEW (2022).
260   NEW (2022).
261   NEW (2022).
262   NEW (2022).
263   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. C.
264   NEW (2022).
265   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. H.
266   NEW (2022) (the final clause).
267   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. D.
268   NEW (2022).
269   NEW (2022).
270   Charter Revision of 2011.
271   NEW (2022).
272   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.I, adding the Finance Commission.
273   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-1.I.
274   Charter Revision of 2011.
275   "Official" replaces "officer".
276   "Department" includes the deleted term "...or agency...".
277   NEW (2022).
278   NEW (2022).
279   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-1. K.
280   See, C.G.S. §7-193(b).
281   2022 recodification and modification of 2011 § 5-4 entitled "Appointments
to Boards or Commissions" which modified 1983 Charter § 5-5 by adding the
following: "In addition to the requirement set forth in §7-1. L of this
Charter, the Town Clerk shall publish such notice on the Town web-site, in a
conspicuous location available to the public in the office of such Town Clerk
and, if practicable, in a newspaper available to residents of the Town". See
also, modification of 1983 Charter § 5-5 (first sentence).
282   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 5-4.A which modified Charter
Revision of 2011.
283   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 5-4.C which modified 1983 Charter §
5-5 (third sentence).
284   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 5-4.B which modified 1983 Charter §
5-5 (second sentence).
285   2022 recodification of 2011 Charter § 5-4.D which modified 1983 Charter §
5-5 (fourth sentence).
286   2022 recodification of the final sentence of 2011 Charter § 7-1. K.
287   NEW (2022).
SECTION 7-2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE CHARTER288.
   A.   Finance Commission289.
      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Finance Commission which shall have
the authority to exercise the powers and duties exclusively set forth in this
Charter and Ordinances and such incidental powers as may be reasonably
necessary to enable it to investigate and determine those matters of fiscal
policy of the Town as are within its direct jurisdiction and responsibility.
Said responsibilities shall include:
         (a)   Budget Preparation and Oversight. Reviewing the Proposed Town
Budget and making its recommendations to the Legislative Council as set forth
in Chapter X of this Charter pertaining to financial efficacy and soundness as
well as compliance with Laws, procedures, contractual and fiduciary obligations
as well as best practices and standards in public finance as set forth in Law,
this Charter and as set forth in § 7-2.A(1)(f) of this Charter ("Best
Practices"). Specifically, the Commission shall (i) make recommendations as
required by §
10-4.C; and, (ii) offer its advice during the Final Budget Hearing (see, §
10-4.A(2) of this Charter) and following Adoption of the Budget (see, §
10-5.B of the Charter) and prior to Mayoral Action (see, §
10-6.B of this Charter). The Commission is further required to maintain
continued oversight over budget implementation and management during the course
of the fiscal year in cooperation with the Legislative Council, in furtherance
of the Council's role as the budget-making authority of the Town.
         (b)   Reporting Function. Conducting monthly Meetings and quarterly
budget review Meetings and preparing a comprehensive annual financial report
for the fiscal year and reports to the Legislative Council, upon request.
         (c)   Collective Bargaining Agreements. To the extent permissible by
Law and in accordance with any agreements governing the collective bargaining
process, the Mayor and Board of Education shall keep the Commission informed of
the operational and fiscal impact of collective bargaining negotiations. With
respect thereto, the Finance Commission may render an advisory opinion to the
Mayor and the Board of Education, as the case may be, of the total cost and
potential long-term tax burden as set forth in the tentative agreement. Prior
to final statutory action, if required, on the collective bargaining agreement,
the Commission shall, in turn, render an advisory opinion to the Mayor,
Legislative Council and Board of Education of the total cost and potential
long-term tax burden of said agreements. The Mayor and Board of Education shall
transmit the tentative agreement as required by Law and the Legislative Council
may then transmit such agreement to the Finance Commission.
         (d)   Pensions. The Mayor and the Finance Commission are required to
propose a funding policy to ensure that defined benefit pensions and Other
Post-Employment Benefits ("OPEB") are properly measured, reported and funded in
accordance with contractual obligations, Best Practices and Law.
         (e)   Long-term Financial and Capital Planning290. The Finance
Commission shall regularly (although not less than every two years) engage in
long-term financial and capital planning that takes into account the next five
years in the future and shall further consider the financial effects of the
Town's plan of conservation and development ("POCD") as required by the General
Statutes. A report on said planning effort over said five-year period shall be
transmitted to the Mayor and Legislative Council, which shall take the Plan
into account during budget deliberations. The Legislative Council may establish
a regular schedule for such planning by Ordinance.
         (f)   Standards and Policies. The Finance Commission shall, from time
to time, issue recommended policies and standards governing the Best Practices
for the financial operations of the Town.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership. The Commission shall consist of five
(5) members, appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint two (2) members and the President
of the Legislative Council shall appoint three (3) members for a term of six
(6) years commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of appointment
(subject to the transition provision, below). All appointments shall be subject
to approval by a Majority Vote of the Legislative Council. The terms shall be
staggered as established at the date of the original appointment.
            (i)   Transition Provision Pertaining to the Initial Appointment of
Members to the Finance Commission. The Mayor and President of the Legislative
Council shall each appoint one (1) member to a term of six (6) years commencing
on the 1st Day of January 2023. The Mayor and President of the Legislative
Council shall each appoint one (1) member to a term of five (5) years
commencing on the 1st Day of January 2023 and thereafter to a term of six (6)
years commencing on the 1st day of January 2028. The President of the
Legislative Council shall appoint one (1) member to a term of four (4) years
commencing on the 1st Day of January 2023 and thereafter to a term of six (6)
years commencing on the 1st day of January 2027. Following the initial
appointments, the term of office shall be uniformly applied.
         (b)   Minority Party Representation. Said Commission shall be subject
to the requirements of the §
7-1.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Restrictions. Said Commission members shall be subject to the
provision of §
7-1.I of this Charter.
         (d)   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice
Chair and such other officers as it deems necessary.
         (e)   Ex Officio Members. The following non-voting ex-officio members
shall be appointed to the Commission as follows: (i) a Public Official or
municipal employee representing the Mayor, designated by the Mayor; (ii) a
representative of the Board of Education, designated by a majority vote of said
Board; and, (iii) the Chair of the Legislative Council committee of
jurisdiction over the budget or a member of said committee designated by the
Chair. The provisions of §7-2A(2)(c) of this Charter shall not apply to said
ex-officio members.
         (f)   Qualifications. Members of the Commission, with the exception of
up to one (1) community stakeholder, shall have professional or business
experience in the fields of accounting, management or financial analysis as
evidenced by being a certified public accountant, certified management
accountant or having earned a degree in business, finance or public
administration or the equivalent thereof from an accredited college or
university; or, at least five (5) years of experience as an owner or manager or
financial officer of a business or public or nonprofit administrator or such
other qualifications as may be further defined by Ordinance. In addition to
these requirements, including the community stakeholder, the Mayor and
President of the Legislative Council are required to comply with the
requirements of §
7-1.G of this Charter.
         (g)   Adherence to Best Practices and Standards. In order to manifest
and exemplify the highest standards of conduct and best municipal finance and
budgeting practices, members are required to engage in training sessions
offered by the Government Finance Officers Association, the National League of
Cities, United States Conference of Mayors, Connecticut Conference of
Municipalities, their successor organizations or other similar organizations.
In the event such training programs are not available, the Town shall support
and fund mandatory training for the members and programs shall be recommended
by the Director of Finance. Said training shall occur not later than six (6)
months following confirmation to the Commission by the Legislative Council,
prior to the commencement of a new term and at the commencement of the third
(3rd) year of the term. Failure to participate in training sessions constitutes
grounds for removal from the Finance Commission.
   B.   Civil Service Commission291.
      (1)   Establishment292. There shall be a Civil Service Commission which
shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in the
General Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances pertaining to the administration
and operation of the Merit System and the civil service and human resources
policies of the Town.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership293. The Commission shall consist of
three (3) members and two (2) alternates, all Electors of the Town appointed as
set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire294.
         (a)   Executive Secretary295. The chief examiner shall serve as the
Executive Secretary of the Commission. The Executive Secretary shall be an ex
officio, non-voting member of the Commission and shall be responsible for such
matters as required by the General Statutes and the Commission296. The
Department Head of the Town agency responsible for personnel and human
resources may be appointed to serve as the chief examiner.
         (b)   Term297. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of six (6)
years, commencing on the 1st Day of September of the year of appointment. The
terms shall be staggered, as required by the General Statutes and as
established at the date of the original appointments.
         (c)   Term of Alternate Member298. The Mayor shall appoint the
alternate for a term of two (2) years, on the 1st day of January of the year of
appointment.
         (d)   Assignment of Alternate Member299. If a regular member of the
Board is absent or is disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate
an alternate to so act.
         (e)   Oath of Office300. Said Commission members shall take the oath
prescribed by the General Statutes.
         (f)   Minority Party Representation301. Said Commission members shall
be subject to the requirements of the General Statutes pertaining to civil
service boards.
         (g)   Restrictions302. Said Commission members shall be subject to the
restrictions set forth in the General Statutes and this Charter.
         (h)   Removal303. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Charter, the
Mayor may remove a member of said Commission in the manner set forth in the
General Statutes; and, upon removal shall fill the unexpired term of the member
in accordance with the provisions of §
7-1.C of this Charter.
      (3)   Merit System Ordinance304. Said rules of the Civil Service
Commission shall be set forth in the form of an Ordinance to be approved by the
Legislative Council, upon the advice of the Mayor (following consultation with
the Department Head responsible for personnel and human resources and the Civil
Service Commission), as set forth in this Charter. No Ordinance shall be
adopted which circumvents or otherwise violates the requirements of this
Charter pertaining to a Merit System and civil service rules and regulations
for the hiring and promotion of public employees.
   C.   Board of Ethics305.
      (1)   Establishment306. There shall be a Board of Ethics 307 which shall
have the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in the General
Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances pertaining to conflict of interest and
ethics, administration of a code of ethics, including the issuance of advisory
opinions and policies 308, and to investigate 309, render probable cause
findings 310 and conduct hearings 311 pertaining to allegations of unethical
conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities (including violations of
federal, state or local law) levied against any Official or employee of the
Town, unless otherwise provided by Law 312. In addition to the aforementioned
powers and duties, the Board shall have such other duties and powers as may be
provided by any code of ethics Ordinance or other Ordinances 313.
         (a)   Subpoena Authority314. In a manner consistent with the
provisions of the General Statutes, the Board may issue subpoenas or subpoenas
duces tecum, enforceable upon application to the Superior Court, to compel the
attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents,
records and papers.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership. The Board shall consist of five (5)
members and two (2) alternates, all Electors of the Town, appointed as set
forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter315. The Board shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire316.
         (a)   Term of Members317. The Mayor shall appoint a member(s) for a
term of five (5) years, commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments (Historical Note: See, §
11-9 of this Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter
adopted on November 8, 1983).
            (i)   Term of Alternate Members318. The Mayor shall appoint
alternates for a term of two (2) years, on the 1st Day of January of the year
of appointment (Historical Note: See, §
11-10 of this Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the
Charter adopted on November 8, 1983).
         (b)   Assignment of Alternate Members319. If a regular member of the
Board is absent or is disqualified, the chairman of the Board shall designate
an alternate to so act 320.
         (c)   Qualifications321. In addition to the general requirements of
statute, Law and this Charter, the Mayor is required to comply with the
requirements of §
7-1.G of this Charter. The Legislative Council may establish other
qualifications by Ordinance. In order to manifest and exemplify the highest
standards of conduct, members are required to engage in a training session
offered by the Connecticut Office of State Ethics or a successor agency (or, in
the event such training program is not available, the Town shall provide
mandatory training for the members), immediately following confirmation to the
Board by the Legislative Council and at the commencement of any subsequent term
thereon. Failure to participate in training sessions constitutes grounds for
removal from the Board of Ethics.
         (d)   Restrictions322. The Board members shall not be Officials or
employees of the Town. They shall hold no other appointed office in the Town
except Justice of the Peace or Notary Public.
         (e)   Interference. The activities, votes and rulings of the Board
shall not be subject to oversight or reversal by any Town Official or body 323.
The opinions of the Town Attorney required by this Charter shall not be deemed
to constitute interference for purposes of this sub-section 324.
         (f)   Local Law. Any reference in this Charter to local law shall mean
the Charter, the Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions and any other regulations or
policies approved by the Legislative Council under an Ordinance establishing a
method for adopting such regulations or policies.
      (3)   Oversight of the Ethics and Conflict of Interest Policies of the
Town325. The Board of Ethics shall oversee and regulate the ethics and conflict
of interest policies of the Town.
      (4)   Code of Ethics Ordinance326. Said rules and regulations of the
Board of Ethics shall be set forth in the form of an Ordinance to be approved
by the Legislative Council, upon the advice of the Mayor and the Board of
Ethics, as set forth in this Charter.
         (a)   No Ordinance shall be adopted which circumvents or otherwise
violates the requirements of this Charter pertaining to the requirements of the
General Statutes pertaining to the requirements of:
            (i)   probable cause findings327;
            (ii)   confidentiality of complaints328;
            (iii)   investigations329;
            (iv)   the conduct of hearings330;
            (v)   informing the complainant and respondent of findings331;
            (vi)   continuing confidentiality in the event of a finding of no
probable cause332; and,
            (vii)   public disclosure of a finding of probable cause333.
         (b)   Moreover, the Ordinance shall include a provision pertaining to
the expeditious review of complaints and the issuance of determinations or
other actions by the Board of Ethics334.
         (c)   Upon request of the Legislative Council or the Board of Ethics,
prior to legislative action, the Town Attorney shall render an opinion
pertaining to the compliance of the provisions of a proposed ethics Ordinance
or any amendment thereto with the requirements of this Charter, the General
Statutes and Law335.
      (5)   Finding of a Violation336. A finding by the Board of Ethics of a
violation of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics provisions of this Charter,
any other provision of this Charter, or its related implementing Ordinances;
including, allegations of unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal
activities (including violations of federal, state or local law), shall be
referred to:
         (a)   The Legislative Council in the case of any Elected Official337;
         (b)   The appointing authority in the case of any Appointed Public
Official338; and,
         (c)   The person's supervisor in the case of any employee,
for appropriate disciplinary action to be taken within thirty (30) Days of
receipt of the Board's finding(s) and decision; unless otherwise provided for
in a collective bargaining agreement.
Such finding(s) and decision would subject the parties to the provisions of §§
3-9.B(3) and
3-10 of this Charter, which may include removal from office. The findings
pertaining to violations of this Charter shall cite the opinions of the Town
Attorney pertaining to the application of any of the provisions of this
Charter, if any. In the event there is no such opinion and an interpretation of
a provision of the Charter is required to facilitate such finding, the Board
shall consult with the Town Attorney or, in the event of recusal by the Town
Attorney, an independent counsel appointed for such purpose.
      (6)   Appeal339. Any Public Official 340 or employee may, within thirty
(30) Days from the date any disciplinary action is voted or taken pursuant to
the Board's decision that a violation of this Charter and/or any such code of
ethics or other related Ordinance has occurred, take such appeal as may be
permitted by the General Statutes, if any. In the event there is no such appeal
permitted by the General Statutes, the findings shall be final.
   D.   Police Commission341.
      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Police Commission.
         (a)   Police Department Operations342. The Police Commission shall
have the authority to exercise the powers, duties and authority exclusively set
forth in this Charter, the Ordinances and by Law. Said Commission has such
incidental powers as may be necessary to enable it to review, render decisions
and approve or disapprove policies and regulations necessary for the effective
operation of the Police Department, including operational review and oversight
authority, that requires the cooperation of all personnel (sworn and civilian)
in order to meet the public safety needs of the Town.
         (b)   Traffic Authority343. Moreover, the Commission shall serve as
the Traffic Authority in accordance with the requirements of Law. In the event
the provisions of the General Statutes are modified to permit a separate
Traffic Authority, said authority may be created by Ordinance.
      (2)   Purpose of the Police Commission. The role of the Police Commission
is not to administer the day-to-day operations of the Police Department; but
rather to serve as an entity that provides civilian oversight with the ultimate
goal of ensuring:
         (a)   The safety and security of the Town, its citizens and guests;
         (b)   The development and improvement of Department policies,
promulgated as set forth herein, and procedures to promote public safety,
reduce crime, and ensure that the Department operates in an effective and
ethical manner;
         (c)   Liability management to reduce the likelihood of costly
litigation by identifying problems and proposing corrective measures;
accountability by the Police Commission, Chief of Police and all Police
Department employees to the citizens of Hamden; and,
         (d)   Adequate resources and utilization of best practices to
eliminate misconduct, reduce high profile incidents and to provide Department
employees with a safe and accountable working environment.
      (3)   Functions of the Commission. The role of the Police Commission is
to provide civilian oversight and ensure a platform for residents, civilians
and members of the Department to attain greater understanding through dialogue
and interaction of public safety and law enforcement throughout Hamden. In
accordance with public interest requirements set forth in §
7-1.A of this Charter and the General Statutes requirements, including but not
limited to the Municipal Employee Relations and any applicable Ordinances344:
         (a)   Community Collaboration, Outreach and Interaction345. The
Commission will promulgate policies, promulgated as set forth herein, that are
reflective of community values and reduce practices that result in disparate
impacts on various segments of the community. The Commission will proactively
engage the public through public input, surveys and other methods and work with
the Chief to implement the same transparently in order to establish credibility
throughout the Town and within the neighborhoods through a continuous iterative
trust building process. The Commission will utilize baselines and metrics to
measure progress.
            (i)   Public Comment346. In furtherance of its oversight of the
general management function the Commission shall undertake efforts to maintain
an open and transparent process designed to inform the Commission of the needs
of the public, inform the public of the work of the Commission, and foster
community engagement, in accordance with the legal obligations of the
Commission. Public comment sessions on agenda items shall be scheduled at the
opening of each Meeting of the Commission in order to create greater public
accountability and legitimacy through access and visibility; subject to the
provisions of §
7-1.B(7)(b)(iii) of this Charter. Additionally, the Commission shall establish
an accessible and transparent mechanism for the public to regularly communicate
and provide input into the work of the Commission, unless restricted by Law or
contract.
            (ii)   Civilian Review and Outreach. The Commission shall interact
with any other Town Boards or Commissions formed to address civilian review and
strategic planning. The Commission may act as a Civilian Review Board with the
authority to issue subpoenas, if so designated by Ordinance347. Moreover, the
Commission is authorized to establish citizen advisory groups to function as
liaisons between the Commission, the Department and the community in order to
address relevant community issues.
         (b)   Consultations with the Mayor and Chief of Police348. The
Commission shall confer with and advise the Mayor and the Chief of Police with
respect to the general management and oversight of the Police Department.
         (c)   Oversight and General Management349. The Commission shall
provide oversight of the general management of the Police Department of the
Town and the equipment used by the members of the Department. The Commission
shall ensure that the Department utilizes best practices in public safety and
policing across all operational units of the Department as well as transparency
and public accessibility of information and data, in a time-frame and manner
consistent with the interests of the Town and in accordance with applicable
laws governing the disclosure of information.
         (d)   Information Sharing and Transparency350. The Commission and the
Chief of Police shall develop, propose and implement technologies to provide
the public with public safety information sharing and transparency of
information in a timely manner consistent with Law and any applicable provision
of a collective bargaining agreement. Information sharing shall be a foundation
for the development of policies and strategies in the Town and especially in
neighborhoods disproportionately affected by crime. Information sharing should
include readily accessible data pertinent to the composition of the Police
Department, such as race, gender, age and other relevant demographic data,
disposition of civilian and departmental complaints, crime and response
statistics by neighborhood as well as community policing and other efforts to
engage the community. The Commission shall regularly analyze crime and
incidence data, trends in best practice of policing, public safety and law
enforcement and solicit input from Hamden residents in order to inform policing
policy and practice and the effective management of police services in the
Town. In accordance with the provisions of §7-1.B(5) of this Charter, the Chief
shall obtain the approval of the Commission to transmitting a request to the
Mayor for the disposition, transfer or destruction of public documents in
accordance with Law.
         (e)   Public Communications and Electronic Access to the Police
Commission351. Members of the public shall have capacity to communicate
directly with the Police Commission in accordance with §
7-1.B(7)(a) of this Charter. Moreover, members of the public shall have
electronic access to the Police Commission in accordance with §
7-1.B(7)(b)(iii) of this Charter.
         (f)   Policies, Rules and Regulations352. Approval or disapproval of
the policies, rules and regulations proposed by the Chief of Police as set
forth in §
8-5.A (4) of this Charter 353. In addition, the Commission may recommend a
review of policies, rules and regulations pertaining to the general management
and oversight of the Department and the provision of public safety of the Town
by all Department personnel 354. Said policies, rules and regulations shall be
printed and made available to the public 355. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the policies, rules and regulations of the Commission shall be in (i)
furtherance of best practices in the policing, public safety and law
enforcement; and (ii) compliance with the requirements of Law and any
applicable regulatory authority.
         (g)   Budget Review. Review and comment on the annual budget request
of the Police Department prior to its submission to the Mayor 356. In
particular, the Commission shall work with the Chief of Police to review,
analyze the projected overtime in order to assess and report the amount
required to meet contractual provisions of collective bargaining agreements
(and other agreements relating thereto) pertaining to minimum mandatory
workforce requirements as opposed to expenditures related to direct public
services 357.
         (h)   Collective Bargaining. Submit to the Mayor, a review and comment
on the contents of collective bargaining agreement in order to effectuate the
alignment of such agreement with the public service requirements of the Town as
well as the best practices of a department in diversity, recruitment,
promotion, training, community interaction and operations as well as other
areas as may be set forth by Ordinance, provided; however, that such review and
comments are for consideration only and shall not be deemed a directive to the
Mayor or the Town's negotiating committee.
         (i)   Personnel. The sole power to appoint, promote and remove all
sworn personnel, including officers (with the exception of the Chief and other
department personnel subject to the appointment authority of the Mayor under
the §8-2 of this Charter), of the Police Department under such regulations as
it adopts for that purpose 358 as well as the provisions of any applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
            (i)   Recruitment359. Working with the Director of Human Resources
and the Civil Service Commission, the Commission and the Chief of Police shall
advise in the development of recruitment strategies including, but not limited,
to workforce diversity and Hamden residency and, if legally permissible
residency incentives, all in accordance with nationally accepted best
practices.
            (ii)   Appointment360. Said power to appoint personnel shall be
exercised, by majority vote of the Commission, present and voting, in
accordance with national best practice pertaining to background and
qualification standards, Law, and the certification rule 361 governing the
selection of candidates on any applicable eligibility list promulgated under
civil service rules and regulations 362 of the Civil Service Commission 363.
            (iii)   Training364. Advising the Mayor and Chief of Police the
Commission will work to align police training and recruitment practices with
demonstrated needs of communities and the best practices in the field. In
addition to police training requirements required by Law, training should focus
on, but not be limited to, interpersonal skills, active listening and effective
communication strategies, community interactions and problem-solving
principles, bias awareness, trauma informed strategies, responding to persons
experiencing a mental health crisis, overdose prevention, scenario-based
situation decision-making, de-escalation strategies, crisis intervention,
language and cultural responsiveness; and other nationally recognized best
practices.
            (iv)   Promotion365. Said power to promote personnel shall be
exercised, by majority vote of the Commission, present and voting, in
accordance with the certification rule 366 governing the selection of
candidates on any applicable Merit System eligibility list promulgated under
civil service rules and regulations 367 of the Civil Service Commission 368 and
consistent with Law and the provisions of the applicable collective bargaining
agreement, where applicable 369.
            (v)   Removal370. Said power to remove shall be in accordance with
the provisions of this Charter and Law 371, including provisions of any
applicable collective bargaining agreement 372.
            (vi)   Recommendation of the Chief of Police373. With regard to the
power to appoint, promote and remove the sworn personnel, including officers
(with the exception of the Chief and other Department personnel subject to the
appointment authority of the Mayor under the §
8-2 of this Charter), of the Police Department, the Chief of Police shall
provide a recommendation to the Commission. Other non-sworn personnel of the
Department shall be subject to the authority of the Chief in accordance with
the Merit System and Personnel and Human Resources polices of the Town as well
as any applicable collective bargaining agreements.
         (j)   Complaints: Discipline, Discharge and Removal 374. The appointed
officers and members of the Department shall hold office during good behavior
and until removed for just cause (or such standard of Law or collective
bargaining agreement).
            (i)   Appeal or Referral to the Police Commission. Final
determinations of removal or discipline shall be considered by the Commission
upon appeal by an affected party following a disciplinary action (under §
8-5.A(4)(c) of this Charter or in accordance with the applicable provisions of
a collective bargaining agreement) or referral by the Chief of Police in
accordance with Law or with any applicable provisions of collective bargaining
agreement. In such event, the Commission shall meet and hear, the appeal of:
any member of the Police Department by reason of the acts or conduct of any
officer 375.
            (ii)   Civilian Complaint376. Any civilian 377 may file a complaint
by reason of any alleged misconduct or malfeasance or other violations of Law
and the policies, rules and regulations of the Department 378 of any member of
the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of the collective
bargaining agreement. (Note: Civilians should have the same right to file an
appeal as is currently permitted to members of the Police Department by the
collective bargaining agreement. Nonetheless, at the time of the adoption of
this Charter, the provisions of collective bargaining agreements, which
supersede the provisions of this Charter do not include a civilian right of
appeal from a determination of the Chief of Police. As a result, this provision
can only be effectuated by amendment of the collective bargaining agreement; a
memorandum of agreement or understanding with the collective bargaining
representative of the police force; or, the amendment of the General Statutes;
and, following such modification(s), if any the promulgation of procedures by
the Police Commission for said appeals).
            (iii)   Proceedings379. Said referrals and appeal proceedings shall
be conducted in accordance with the Law and any applicable provision of a
collective bargaining agreement as well as any regulations of the Department
and the Commission consistent therewith. As a party to any proceeding or
hearing, any member of the Police Department may be represented by counsel.
            (iv)   Receipt and Notice of Complaints. Receipt and notice of the
content of all complaints shall be transmitted to the Police Commission by the
Chief in accordance with applicable regulations and consistent with
requirements of any applicable collective bargaining agreements 380. Upon
receipt of any civilian complaint, the Chief shall immediately notify the
Police Commission and complaining parties of the receipt of said complaint, in
accordance with rules established by the Commission; said rules shall also
address notice procedures pertaining to the disposition of such complaints.
Procedures for civilian complaints shall permit complainants to file such
complaints at a location designated by the Commission under circumstances set
forth by the Commission in writing. The Commission shall not analyze, study or
peruse any such complaint which may be subject to their review 381.
            (v)   Recommendations382. Said Commission shall make such
recommendations as it deems reasonable to adjust a complaint heard by it but
shall not commit the Town for the payment of money damages and may not affect
the rights of any person under the Merit System.
         (k)   Audits383. The Commission is authorized to conduct regular
audits of police internal complaints and disciplinary processes and where
necessary and permitted by Law, to conduct due diligence reviews, on its own
motion, following consultation with the Town Attorney or counsel assigned by
the Town Attorney. The Department shall provide the Commission with actions
taken in individual cases, stating the reasons for action or inaction. The
Commission, where permitted by Law may issue reports to the public, at least
annually, giving relevant data, including the types of complaints as well as
information regarding the race and gender of complainants and the officer-
respondent.
         (l)   Professional Services384. While the Commission is an
instrumentality of the executive departments of the Town and is obligated to
comply with Law and any agreements pertaining to the Town, the Commission may
retain any necessary professional services for advice on specific matters under
their jurisdiction, following consultation with the Town Attorney. In
furtherance of this authority, the annual Town Budget shall include a specific
line-item appropriation for the Police Commission for said professional
services in an amount equal to four-tenths of one percent of the approved
general fund budget for the Police Department in the ensuing fiscal year.
      (4)   Appointment and Membership385. The Commission shall consist of nine
(9) Electors of the Town, one each selected from the Legislative Council
Districts of the Town, appointed as set forth in §
7-1.B of this Charter 386. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire 387.
         (a)   Term388. Following the completion of the transition terms set
forth below the Mayor shall appoint members for a term of three (3) years, for
a term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of appointment 389.
         (b)   Transition Terms. The Mayor shall appoint:
            (i)   One member each from the 1st, 4th and 7th Legislative Council
Districts to a term of three (3) years commencing on the 1st Day of January
2024 and thereafter to a term of three (3) years commencing on the 1st day of
January 2027.
            (ii)   One member each from the 2nd, 5th and 8th Legislative
Council Districts to a term of two (2) years commencing on the 1st Day of
January 2024 and thereafter to a term of three (3) years commencing on the 1st
day of January 2026.
            (iii)   One member each from the 3rd, 6th, and 9th Legislative
Council Districts to a term of one (1) year commencing on the 1st Day of
January 2024 and thereafter to a term of three (3) years commencing on the 1st
day of January 2025.
         (c)   Qualifications390. Members of the Commission shall have a
variety of personal, business and professional experience, including any of the
following fields: law, public policy, social work, psychology, mental health,
law enforcement (although not in the HPD), community organizing, civil rights,
the planning, design and permitting of traffic and transportation projects
(including traffic analysis and impact), engineering, land development and
infrastructure projects; and advocacy on behalf of (1) immigrant or
undocumented people; people with disabilities and/or mental health disorders or
(3) LGBTQ+ people. In addition to these requirements the Mayor and President of
the Legislative Council are required to comply with the requirements of §
7-1.G of this Charter. No more than two (2) members shall be current or retired
law enforcement officers or officials or immediate family of such member or
official, as said term may be defined by the Board of Ethics, and no member or
retired member of the Hamden Police Department shall be appointed to said
Commission in order to avoid appearance or violation of the provisions of this
Charter or Ordinances pertaining to conflict of interest.
         (d)   Adherence to Best Practices and Standards: Grounds for Removal.
In order to manifest and exemplify the highest standards of conduct and best
public safety and police practices and traffic planning standards, members are
required to engage initial training programs offered by the Citizens' Police
Academy operated by the Department or any successor program of the Department.
Thereafter, members may continue training obligations under programs offered by
the following organizations:
            (i)   International Association of Chiefs of Police ("IACP");
            (ii)   Federal Law Enforcement Training Center ("FLETC");
            (iii)   Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, DOJ
("COPS");
            (iv)   National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law
Enforcement;
            (v)   National League of Cities, United States Conference of
Mayors, Connecticut Conference of Municipalities ("CCM") or the Connecticut
Interlocal Risk Management Agency ("CIRMA");
            (vi)   American Planning Association (Transportation Planning
Division) or regional affiliates;
            (vii)   National Alliance on Mental Illness ("NAMI"); or,
            (viii)   Council of State Governments Justice Center, their
successor organizations or other similar organizations, or the monthly police
training certified by the Police Officer Standards and Training Council.
Additional training shall utilize organizations recognized for their advocacy
of best practices in the public safety services as well as internal (agency
culture, policy administrative processes or training) and external
(transparency, community engagement and interactions with various populations)
policing strategies. In the event such training programs are not available, the
Town shall support and fund mandatory training for the members and other
programs recommended by the Chief of Police or by a majority vote of the
Commission present and voting. Said training shall not be later than six (6)
months following confirmation to the Commission by the Legislative Council and
prior to the commencement of a new term. Failure to participate in training
sessions constitutes grounds for removal from the Police Commission. The Chief
of Police shall be responsible for notifying members of their training
obligations.
   E.   Fire Commission391.
      (1)   Establishment392. There shall be a Fire Commission which shall have
the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in this Charter and
Ordinances pertaining to the oversight of the general management (including
operations) of the Fire Department of the Town and the equipment used by the
members of the Department. In this regard, the Commission shall approve or
disapprove policies, rules and regulations proposed by the Fire Chief as set
forth in §
8-5.B (2) of this Charter 393. Moreover, in accordance with the provisions of §
7-1.B(5) of this Charter, the Fire Chief shall obtain the approval of the
Commission to transmitting a request to the Mayor for the disposition, transfer
or destruction of public documents in accordance with Law.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership394. The Commission shall consist of five
(5) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term395. Following the municipal election of 2013 and biennially
thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint members for a term of two (2) years for a
term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of appointment 396.
      (3)   Duties and Responsibilities. For the purposes of complying with the
requirements of the General Statutes, this Charter and any applicable
Ordinances, the Commission shall:
         (a)   confer with and advise the Mayor and the Fire Chief with respect
to the general management of the Fire Department397;
         (b)   review and comment on the budget request for the Fire Department
prior to its submission to the Mayor398.
         (c)   have the sole power to appoint, promote and remove all personnel
including sworn personnel under such regulations as it adopts for that purpose.
            (i)   Said power to appoint and promote personnel shall be
exercised, by majority vote of the Commission, present and voting, in
accordance with the certification rule governing the selection of candidates on
any application eligibility list promulgated under civil service rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission and consistent with Law and the
provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement, where
applicable399;
            (ii)   Said power to remove shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter and Law400.
            (iii)   With regard to the power to appoint, promote and remove
personnel, the Fire Chief shall provide a recommendation to said Commission401.
         (d)   appoint Fire Marshal(s) and Deputy Fire Marshal(s) as set forth
in the General Statutes402.
      (4)   Complaints.
         (a)   The Commission shall meet and hear, upon written request, the
complaint of any member of the Fire Department by reason of the acts or conduct
of any officer403.
         (b)   The Commission shall meet and hear, upon written request, the
complaint of any citizen of the Town by reason of any alleged misconduct or
malfeasance of any member of the Fire Department, in accordance with any
applicable provisions of a collective bargaining agreement404. Upon receipt of
any civilian complaint, the Chief shall immediately notify the Commission and
complaining parties of the receipt of said complaint, in accordance with rules
established by the Commission; said rules shall also address notice procedures
pertaining to the disposition of such complaints.
         (c)   Any member of the Department may be represented by counsel at
any proceeding or hearing to which he is a party405.
         (d)   Said Commission shall make such recommendations as it deems
reasonable to adjust a complaint heard by it but shall not commit the Town for
the payment of money damages and may not affect the rights of any person under
the Merit System406.
   F.   Zoning Board of Appeals407.
      (1)   Establishment408.  There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals to
exercise the following powers and duties as more explicitly set forth in the
General Statutes:
         (a)   To hear and decide zoning appeals409;
         (b)   To hear and decide all land use matters as may be permitted by
law410; and,
         (c)   To determine and vary the application of the zoning bylaws,
Ordinances or regulations in cases of exceptional difficulty or unusual
hardship411.
The ability to hear cases shall be limited as set forth in the General
Statutes412. The validity and effect of variances shall be governed by the
General Statutes413. The provision of §
7-1.E of this Charter shall be confirmed in the form of an Ordinance414.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership415. The Board (comprised of five (5)
regular members and three (3) members of a "Panel of Alternates") shall consist
of eight (8) Electors of the Town 416 appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter 417. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire 418. The Board shall follow the requirements of the
General Statutes pertaining to the call of public meetings, the administration
of oaths, compelling of attendance of witnesses, preparation of meeting minutes
and the filing of rules, regulations and requirements (and the amendment or
repeal thereof) and decisions as public records 419.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of five (5)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments.
            (i)   Term of the Panel of Alternates. The Mayor shall appoint
members to the Panel of Alternates for a term of five (5) years, for a term
commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of appointment, which terms
shall be staggered as established at the date of the original appointments.
         (b)   Assignment of the Panel of Alternates420. Members of the Panel
of Alternates shall be designated to act in the place of a member as set forth
in the General Statutes 421.
         (c)   Restrictions422. The regular members and Panel of Alternates
shall not be members of the body acting as the Zoning Commission.
         (d)   Vacancy423. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
7-1.C of this Charter, any Vacancy in the regular members of the Board or Panel
of Alternates, shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the
Mayor.
   G.   Planning and Zoning Commission424.
      (1)   Establishment425. There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission
to exercise the powers and duties as set forth in the General Statutes 426.
This provision of the Charter (to wit. § 7-2.G) shall be affirmed and approved
in the form of an Ordinance or action by the Legislative Council in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes 427.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership428. The Commission shall consist of nine
(9) regular members and three (3) alternate members 429, all Electors of the
Town appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter 430. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term431. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of three (3)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-11 of this Charter pertaining
to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on November 8, 1983).
            (i)   Term of the Alternate Members432. The Mayor shall appoint
alternate members for a term of three (3) years, on the 1st Day of February of
the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-12 of this
Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).
         (b)   Assignment of Alternate Members433. When a regular member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is absent, the Chairman of the Commission shall
designate an alternate, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act
as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not
available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting 434.
      (3)   Division of Commission435. The Commission may be divided into a
zoning section and a planning section, each to consist of four (4) members and
the chairman. Each section shall be subject to the provisions of §
7-1.F of this Charter. The Chair shall preside over both sections.
   H.   Building Board of Appeals436.
      (1)   Establishment437. As required by the General Statutes, there shall
be a Building Board of Appeals to exercise the powers and duties as set forth
in the General Statutes and the Basic Building Code of the State438.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership439. The Commission shall consist of five
(5) regular members 440, all Electors of the Town, unless otherwise required by
the General Statutes 441, appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of five (5)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments 442.
   I.   Personnel Appeals Board443.
      (1)   Establishment444. There shall be a Personnel Appeals Board for the
purpose of hearing and determining any grievance, as shall be defined by
Ordinance, of any employee or group of employees who are members of the
classified service 445. The Board shall adopt rules of procedures which shall
insure any aggrieved employee a prompt and fair hearing and an opportunity to
be heard in person or by the employee's chosen representative 446. This
provision of the Charter (to wit. § 7-2.I) shall be affirmed and approved in
the form of an Ordinance or action by the Legislative Council in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes 447.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership448. The Board shall consist of five (5)
Electors of the Town holding no salaried municipal office 449, appointed as set
forth in § 7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such
other officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint regular members for a term of
three (3) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year
of appointment 450, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date
of the original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-13 of this Charter
pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on November
8, 1983) 451.
         (b)   Minority Party Representation452. Notwithstanding the provisions
of §
7-1.F of this Charter, the minority party requirements set forth in the
applicable General Statutes shall apply in the event such statutory standard is
more restrictive than the Charter 453.
         (c)   Quorum454. The quorum requirements shall conform to the
requirements of the General Statutes 455.
      (3)   The Board shall have such other duties and powers as may be
prescribed by the Council456.
      (4)   Statutory Appeal457. The decisions of the Board may be appealed to
the Superior Court as set forth in the General Statutes 458.
   J.   Library Board459.
      (1)   Establishment460. There shall be a Library Board 461 which shall
have the authority to establish policies for the operation and use of all
public libraries in the Town and shall exercise full supervision over all
public library operations in accordance with the General Statutes, this Charter
and Ordinances.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership462. The Board shall consist of nine (9)
Electors of the Town, one each selected from the Legislative Council Districts
of the Town, appointed as set forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term463.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of five (5)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments 464.
         Transition Provision Pertaining to the Appointment of Members to the
Library Board. The Mayor shall each appoint:
            (i)   One member each from the 1st and 5th Legislative Council
Districts to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st Day of February
2023 and thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of
February 2028;
            (ii)   One member from the 3rd Legislative Council District to a
term of one (1) year commencing on the 1st Day of February 2023 and thereafter
to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2024 and
thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February
2029;
            (iii)   One member from the 6th Legislative Council District to a
term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2024 and
thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February
2029;
            (iv)   One member from the 8th Legislative Council District to a
term of two (2) years commencing on the 1st Day of February 2023 and thereafter
to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2025;
            (v)   One member from the 4th Legislative Council District to a
term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2025 and
thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February
2030;
            (vi)   One member from the 9th Legislative Council District to a
term of three (3) years commencing on the 1st Day of February 2023 and
thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February
2026;
            (vii)   One member from the 2nd Legislative Council District to a
term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2026 and
thereafter to a term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February
2031;
            (viii)   One member from the 7th Legislative Council District to a
term of five (5) years commencing on the 1st day of February 2027.
      (3)   Administrative Functions465. Such Board shall recommend appointment
and removal of the Library Director to the Mayor in accordance with §§
8-2.A and B. of this Charter. Subject to the provisions of the Merit System,
the Director shall appoint such other personnel as are necessary to administer
the library system of the Town 466.
      (4)   Adherence to Best Practices and Standards. In order to manifest and
exemplify the highest standards of conduct and best practices, not later than
six (6) months following confirmation by the Legislative Council, newly
appointed board members shall engage in training programs shall include
organizations recommended by the Library Director for their advocacy and
knowledge of best practices in public library services and training specific to
the responsibilities of being a library trustee, orientation to library
operations, and acclimatization with board processes and vision. In the event
such training programs are not available, the Town shall support and fund
mandatory training for the members and other programs recommended by the
Library Director or by a majority vote of the Commission present and voting.
Said training shall not be later than six (6) months following confirmation to
the Board by the Legislative Council and prior to the commencement of a new
term. Failure to participate in training sessions constitutes grounds for
removal from the Library Board. The Library Director shall be responsible for
notifying members of their training obligations.
   K.   Inland Wetlands Commission467.
      (1)   Establishment468. There shall be an Inland Wetlands Commission
which shall promulgate such regulations, in conformity to those adopted by the
State, as are necessary to protect the wetlands and watercourses within the
Town.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership. The Commission shall consist of nine
(9) members and three (3) alternates, all Electors of the Town appointed as set
forth in §
7-1.C of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of three (3)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of May of the year of appointment,
which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the original
appointments.
         (b)   Term of Alternate Member469. The Mayor shall appoint the
alternate for a term of two (2) years, on the 1st Day of January of the year of
appointment.
         (c)   Assignment of Alternate Member470. If a regular member of the
Board is absent or is disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate
an alternate to so act.
         (d)   Ex-officio Members. The Mayor and Town Planner shall serve as
ex-officio members of the Commission, without vote. The Legislative Council
may, by Ordinance, establish an ex officio membership for a member of the
Council.
      (3)   Duties and Appointment and Membership. The Commission shall carry
out the provisions of the General Statutes pertaining to the protection of
wetlands and watercourses within the Town limits 471.
   L.   Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Commission472.
      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
(DEI) Commission which shall have the task of shepherding equity for all
residents of the Town particularly those who (a) belong to marginalized and/or
underserved communities; (b) are in included in the protected classes as set
forth by Law at the time of adoption of this Charter, including, Black and
African American, Latino, Latina and Latinx, Indigenous and Native Americans,
Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders and other persons of color; members of
religious minorities; LGBTQ+ persons; persons with disabilities; and, (c)
persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality. The
Town may modify the preceding enumeration by Ordinance, regulation or policy to
cover any additional protected classes as may be covered by Laws pertaining to
civil rights and discrimination.
      (2)   Definitions. (a) The term "underserved communities" refers to
populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic
communities, that have been systematically denied a full opportunity to
participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life and/or other
discrimination as determined by the Commission and/or local, state or federal
Law.
      (3)   Role of Commission. The DEI Commission will coordinate efforts to
gain public input into and embed equity principles, policies, and approaches
across all Town policies, procedures and systems of the Town. The Commission
shall provide assistance to the Mayor, Legislative Council and other Boards and
Commissions with respect, but not limited, to the following issues: housing;
access to education; public health; law enforcement and civilian engagement;
redressing inequities and inequalities in the capital budget; supporting
participation in Town Boards and Commissions and governance; and, eliminating
structural and institutional issues contributing to and concerning inequity and
inequality. As such, the Commission shall:
         (a)   systematically review and provide recommendations relating to
Town policies, procedures and budgetary and fiscal items as they impact equity
in the Town;
         (b)   coordinate with and support all Town commissions, agencies and
the Legislative Council in the development and execution of diversity, equity,
and inclusion initiatives within the framework of local, state and federal Law;
         (c)   provide regular reports to the Mayor and Legislative Council on
significant developments and findings in the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Commission and related activities, including, but not limited to an annual
report, commencing on July 1, 2025 and on each anniversary date thereafter,
regarding the compliance of Boards and Commissions to §
7-1.G(1) and (2) of this Charter;
         (d)   support other Boards and Commissions in identifying,
coordinating and addressing issues related to equity;
         (e)   research, recommend structure and oversee the Diversity, Equity
and Inclusion Fund as established by ordinance; and
         (f)   advise and provide recommendations to the Mayor and the
Legislative Council pertaining to compliance with the provisions of §
7-1.G(1) of this Charter at the time of a nomination and appointment of said
member, effective; three (3) months following the first Meeting of the
Commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing effective date of this sub-section
appointments to Boards and Commissions shall proceed in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter; and
         (g)   other duties as defined by Ordinance.
      (4)   Appointment and Membership. The Commission shall consist of members
from each of the nine (9) Legislative Council Districts, appointed as set forth
in
7-1.C of this Charter. The Board shall choose a chair and such other officers
as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for a term of four (4)
years commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of appointment (subject
to the transition provision, below). The terms shall be staggered as
established at the date of the original appointment.
            (i)   Transition Language Pertaining to the Initial Appointment of
Members to the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Commission. Three members shall
be appointed to a term of four (4) years commencing on the 1st Day of January
2023. Three members shall be appointed to a term of three (3) years commencing
on the 1st Day of January 2023 and thereafter to a term of six (6) years
commencing on the 1st day of January 2026. Three members shall be appointed to
a term of two (2) years commencing on the 1st Day of January 2023 and
thereafter to a term of six (6) years commencing on the 1st day of January
2025. Following the initial appointment, the term of office shall be uniform.
         (b)   Ex-officio Member: Liaison.
            (i)   The Mayor shall serve as an ex-officio member of the DEI
Commission.
            (ii)   The Mayor shall assign an employee of the Town to be the
liaison to the DEI Commission. The liaison will serve as a resource to
establish communication between the Mayor, the Legislative Council, the Town
Clerk, other Town Boards and Commissions, and other bodies to advance the work
of the Commission to address equity within the Town.
      (5)   Equity Fund Ordinance. The Commission and the Legislative Council
shall develop an Ordinance establishing criteria for the level of funding and
methods of allocation of such funds to address issues of equity, justice and
inclusion for the people of the Town in accordance with the scope, priorities
and recommendations of the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Commission.
      (6)   Transition Provision Regarding Equal Rights and Opportunities 473.
Not later than sixty (60) Days following the effective date of this Charter,
the Mayor shall appoint a Task Force on Equal Rights and Opportunities ("Task
Force") for the purpose of determining the necessity of establishing a
Commission on Equal Rights and Opportunities for the Town, said appointments
subject to approval by the Legislative Council. Said Task Force shall deliver
its findings to the Mayor and Legislative Council within one (1) year from the
first Meeting of the task force; unless the Task Force seeks additional time to
complete its work and to submit the written reasons for such extension request.
The Task Force shall work with the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Commission
and the Human Rights Commission regarding this endeavor. The Task Force may
recommend consolidation of the pre-existing Boards and Commissions if deemed
appropriate. The Legislative Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
findings of the Task Force within thirty (30) Days following receipt of said
report.
                                        
287   NEW (2022).
288   Charter Revision of 2011.
289   NEW (2022).
290   NEW (2022).
291   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.A, which modified 1983 Charter § 17-
4.
292   2022 recodification of 1983 Charter § 17-4 (first and second sentences).
293   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2. A (2) which modified 1983
Charter § 17-4 (first sentence).
294   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-408, in pertinent part, as
follows: "Within thirty days after such official determination, the chief
executive officer of such political subdivision shall appoint three persons as
civil service Commissioners to hold office, one for two years, one for four
years and one for six years, and until their respective successors are
appointed and have qualified, which Commissioners shall constitute the civil
service board; and, biennially thereafter, such chief executive officer shall
appoint one Commissioner to serve for six years and until his successor is
appointed and has qualified".
295   2022 modification of 1983 Charter § 17-4 (third sentence), which reads as
follows: "The Executive Secretary of the Commission shall serve as the
Personnel Director of the Town".
296   See, C.G.S. §7-410 entitled "Civil service board; president; chief
examiner".
297   Charter Revision of 2011. See, fn re - C.G.S. §7-408, above.
298   NEW (2022).
299   NEW (2022).
300   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-408, in pertinent part, as
follows: "...Each Commissioner, before entering upon the duties of his office,
shall take the oath prescribed for executive officers...".
301   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-408, in pertinent part, as
follows: "... All appointments to said board, both original and to fill
vacancies, shall be so made that not more than two members shall, at the time
of appointment, be members of the same political party...".
302   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-408, in pertinent part, as
follows: "...and no such Commissioner shall, during his term of office, hold
any other lucrative office or employment under the United States or the state
or any political subdivision thereof having employees classified under the
provisions of this part".
303   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-408, in pertinent part, as
follows: "...The chief executive officer may remove any Commissioner appointed
by him, for lack of moral character, incompetency, neglect of duty, malfeasance
or partisan activity while in office, but he shall, at the same time, file with
the clerk of the superior court for the appropriate judicial district a report,
in writing, of such removal, with his reasons therefor. In case of any vacancy,
the unexpired portion of the term shall be filled by appointment by such chief
executive officer...".
304   Charter Revision of 2011.
305   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.B, which modified 1983 Charter § 19-
5.
306   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.A. See, C.G.S. §7-148h(a), in
pertinent part, as follows: "Any town, city, district, as defined in § 7-324,
or borough may, by charter provision or ordinance, establish a board,
commission, council, committee or other agency to investigate allegations of
unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities levied against
any official, officer or employee of such town, city, district or borough...".
307   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.A (first sentence, first
clause). See, C.G.S. §7-148h entitled "Ethics Commission; establishment and
powers. Interest in conflict with discharge of duties".
308   1983 Charter § 19-5. B.1.
309   1983 Charter § 19-5. B.2.
310   1983 Charter § 19-5. B.2.a.
311   1983 Charter § 19-5. B.2.b.
312   Charter Revision of 2011 (final clause).
313   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5. B.3 by adding "other
ordinances".
314   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-148h(a), in pertinent part, as
follows: "...Any board, commission, council, committee or other agency
established pursuant to this section may issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces
tecum, enforceable upon application to the Superior Court, to compel the
attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents,
records and papers...".
315   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.A (first paragraph, first
sentence).
316   Charter Revision of 2011.
317   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.A (first paragraph, fifth and
seventh sentences). The revision deletes language regarding "compensation"
since it is addressed generally in § 7-1.G.
318   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.A (first paragraph, ninth
sentence).
319   1983 Charter § 19-5.A (first paragraph, fourth sentence).
320   2011 modification of the following language in 1983 Charter § 19-5.A
(first paragraph, first sentence): "...no more than three (3) of whom shall be
members of the same political party".
321   NEW (2022).
322   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5. A (first paragraph, second and
third sentences) by removing the term "elected".
323   1983 Charter § 19-5. A (second paragraph, second sentence).
324   Charter Revision of 2011.
325   Charter Revision of 2011.
326   Charter Revision of 2011.
327   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.B.2.a. See, C.G.S. §7-148h(a),
in pertinent part, as follows: "...The provisions of subsections (a) to (e),
inclusive, of § 1-82a shall apply to allegations before any such agency of such
conduct, influence or activities, to an investigation of such allegations
conducted prior to a probable cause finding, and to a finding of probable cause
or no probable cause...".
328   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.B.2.a (second sentence). See,
C.G.S. §1-82a. "Confidentiality of complaints, evaluations of possible
violations and investigations. Publication of findings (a) Unless a judge trial
referee makes a finding of probable cause, a complaint alleging a violation of
this part or section 1-101nn shall be confidential except upon the request of
the respondent. An evaluation of a possible violation of this part or section
1-101nn by the Office of State Ethics prior to the filing of a complaint shall
be confidential except upon the request of the subject of the evaluation. If
the evaluation is confidential, any information supplied to or received from
the Office of State Ethics shall not be disclosed to any third party by a
subject of the evaluation, a person contacted for the purpose of obtaining
information or by the ethics enforcement officer or staff of the Office of
State Ethics. No provision of this subsection shall prevent the Office of State
Ethics from reporting the possible commission of a crime to the Chief State's
Attorney or other prosecutorial authority."
329   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.B.2.a. See, C.G.S. §1-82a.
"Confidentiality of complaints, evaluations of possible violations and
investigations. Publication of findings...(b) An investigation conducted prior
to a probable cause finding shall be confidential except upon the request of
the respondent. If the investigation is confidential, the allegations in the
complaint and any information supplied to or received from the Office of State
Ethics shall not be disclosed during the investigation to any third party by a
complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or board or staff member of
the Office of State Ethics."
330   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5. B.2.b.
331   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §1-82a. "Confidentiality of
complaints, evaluations of possible violations and investigations. Publication
of findings. (c) Not later than three business days after the termination of
the investigation, the Office of State Ethics shall inform the complainant and
the respondent of its finding and provide them a summary of its reasons for
making that finding. The Office of State Ethics shall publish its finding upon
the respondent's request and may also publish a summary of its reasons for
making such finding".
332   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §1-82a. "Confidentiality of
complaints, evaluations of possible violations and investigations. Publication
of findings. (d) If a judge trial referee makes a finding of no probable cause,
the complaint and the record of the Office of State Ethics' investigation shall
remain confidential, except upon the request of the respondent and except that
some or all of the record may be used in subsequent proceedings. No
complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or board or staff member of
the Office of State Ethics shall disclose to any third party any information
learned from the investigation, including knowledge of the existence of a
complaint, which the disclosing party would not otherwise have known. If such a
disclosure is made, the judge trial referee may, after consultation with the
respondent if the respondent is not the source of the disclosure, publish the
judge trial referee's finding and a summary of the judge trial referee's
reasons therefore".
333   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §1-82a. "Confidentiality of
complaints, evaluations of possible violations and investigations. Publication
of findings. (e) The judge trial referee shall make public a finding of
probable cause not later than five business days after any such finding. At
such time the entire record of the investigation shall become public, except
that the Office of State Ethics may postpone examination or release of such
public records for a period not to exceed fourteen days for the purpose of
reaching a stipulation agreement pursuant to subsection (c) of section 4177.
Any such stipulation agreement or settlement shall be approved by a majority of
those members present and voting."
334   Charter Revision of 2011.
335   Charter Revision of 2011.
336   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.C.
337   "Official" replaces" "officer".
338   "Appointed Public Official" replaces "appointed officer".
339   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 19-5.D by removing the appeal to the
Superior Court. It is not clear what statutory basis exists for such appeal.
340   "Public Official" replaces "elected or appointed officer".
341   1983 Charter § 10-3. Comment of the 2022 Charter Revision Commission. The
Charter cites C.G.S. §7-276. Powers of Commissioners as a point of reference,
not the source of legal authority for the creation of the Hamden Police
Commission. This provision is based on the authority to establish municipal
charters, including the creation of boards and commissions, as the scope of
authority under the home rule act; in particular, C.G.S. §7-193(b).
342   Modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(1), which was approved in the 2011
Charter Revision. See also 1983 Charter § 10-3.
343   NEW (2022). See, See, C.G.S. §14-297, definition of "Traffic Authority".
344   NEW (2022).
345   NEW (2022).
346   NEW (2022).
347   NEW (2022). Comment of the 2022 Charter Revision Commission. It is
generally understood that Chapter 104 of Title 7 of the General Statutes, which
includes C.G.S. §7-274 through §7-280, addresses the creation of police
commissions, by ordinance, in municipalities which do not have Home Rule
Charters. This general notion is complicated by the placement of other
provisions of apparent general application which are included in Chapter 104. A
study of Title 7 has been authorized by the General Assembly to clarify issues
of the relationship between laws that address charter and non-charter
municipalities. Any conclusions that these provisions would be applicable to
charter municipalities would require further due diligence including possible
guidance from the courts.
348   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(a) which
modified Modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3 (first paragraph, third sentence).
349   Recodification and modification of the following clause of 2011 Charter §
7-2.C (1): ... "the oversight of the general management (including operations)
of the Police Department of the Town and the equipment used by the members of
the Department."
350   NEW (2022).
351   NEW (2022).
352   Recodification and modification of the following clause of 2011 Charter §
7-2.C (1): "In this regard, the Commission shall approve or disapprove
policies, rules and regulations proposed by the Chief of Police as set forth in
§8-5.A (4) of this Charter."
353   Charter Revision of 2011. Again citing C.G.S. § 7-276. "Such
boards...shall make all needful regulations for the government thereof not
contrary to law and may prescribe suitable penalties for the violation of any
such regulation, including suspension or removal from office of any officer or
member of such police department".
354   NEW (2022).
355   NEW (2022).
356   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(b) which
modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (first paragraph, fourth sentence) by adding the
term "and comment on...".
357   NEW (2022) (Final clause).
358   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c) which
modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (second paragraph, first sentence) by adding the
term "sole" and the clause "remove officers and members of the police
department under such regulations as it adopts for that purpose" as set forth
in C.G.S. § 7-276. "Such board...shall have the sole power of appointment,
promotion and removal of the officers and members of such police department,
under such regulations as it adopts for the purpose".
359   NEW (2022).
360   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c)(i)
(deletion of "promote").
361   Note: The applicable rule at the time of adoption of this amendment in
2022 was the "Rule of Three;" in other words, the "top three (3) candidates."
362   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3 (second paragraph, first
sentence), by using the following in lieu of the term "Civil Service":
"...Merit System eligibility list promulgated under civil service rules and
regulations".
363   NEW (2022).
364   NEW (2022).
365   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c)(i)
(deletion of "appoint").
366   Note: The applicable rule at the time of adoption of this amendment in
2022 was the "Rule of Three;" in other words, the "top three (3) candidates."
367   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3 (second paragraph, first
sentence), by using the following in lieu of the term "Civil Service":
"...Merit System eligibility list promulgated under civil service rules and
regulations".
368   NEW (2022).
369   NEW (2022) ("...and law, including provisions of any applicable
collective bargaining agreement"). At the time of adoption promotions are
further governed by Article 36 of the "Tentative Agreement between the Town of
Hamden and UPSEU / COPS, LOCAL 062 (The Hamden Police Department), effective
July 1,2014 - June 30, 2022 ("2014 - 2022 CBA").
370   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c)(ii).
371   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c)(iii) which
recodified 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(3)(c)(i).
372   NEW (2022) (final clause).
373   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 7-2.C (3)(c)(iii) (second paragraph,
second sentence).
374   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C (4), which was
approved in 2011. See, C.G.S. § 7-276 "...and such appointees shall hold office
during good behavior and until removed for cause upon written charges and after
hearing". At the time of adoption promotions are further governed by Article 36
of the 2014 - 2022 CBA.
375   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(4)(a), which
modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (third paragraph, first sentence).
376   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(4)(b), which
modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (third paragraph, second sentence).
377   NEW (2022) ("civilian" replaces "citizen of the Town").
378   NEW (2022) ("other violations of Law and the policies, rules and
regulations of the Department").
379   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(4) (first
sentence of last paragraph), which modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (third
paragraph, third sentence).
380   NEW (2022).
381   NEW (2022).
382   Recodification and modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.C(4) (second
sentence of last paragraph), which modified 1983 Charter § 10-3 (third
paragraph, third sentence).
383   NEW (2022).
384   NEW (2022).
385   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3 (first sentence).
386   Modification of the first sentence § 7-2.C (2).
387   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3.
388   In lieu of the following language in 1983 Charter § 10-3 (first
paragraph, second sentence): "The Mayor shall during the month of December in
odd-numbered years, appoint such Commissioners who shall serve for a term of
two (2) years from January 1st following their appointment, and until their
successors have been appointed and qualified."
389   Modification of the following language in 1983 Charter § 10-3 (first
paragraph, first sentence): "...no more than three (3) of the members of such
Commission shall belong to the same political party".
390   NEW (2022).
391   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.D, which modified 1983 Charter § 10-
9.
392   Charter Revision of 2011.
393   Charter Revision of 2011.
394   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-9 (first paragraph, first
sentence).
395   In lieu of the following language in 1983 Charter § 10-9 (first
paragraph, second sentence): "The Mayor shall during the month of December in
odd-numbered years, shall appoint such Commissioners who shall serve for a term
of two (2) years from January 1st following their appointment, and until their
successors have been appointed and qualified.
396   2011 modification of the following language in 1983 Charter § 10-9 (first
paragraph, first sentence): "...provided that no more than three (3) of the
members of such Commission shall belong to the same political party".
397   1983 Charter § 10-9 (first paragraph, third sentence).
398   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-9 (first paragraph, fourth
sentence) by adding "and comment on...".
399   2022 modification founded upon the 2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-9 (first paragraph, fifth sentence), by using the following in lieu of the
term "Civil Service": "...Merit System eligibility list promulgated under civil
service rules and regulations."
400   Charter Revision of 2011.
401   1983 Charter § 10-9 (first paragraph, sixth sentence).
402   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §29-297 entitled "Appointment of
local fire marshals, deputies and provisional fire marshals".
403   1983 Charter § 10-9 (second paragraph, first sentence).
404   1983 Charter § 10-9 (second paragraph, second sentence).
405   1983 Charter § 10-9 (second paragraph, third sentence).
406   1983 Charter § 10-9 (second paragraph, fourth sentence). The term "Merit
System" replaces the following clause: "...under the merit provisions of this
Charter".
407   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.E.
408   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-3 (first and second sentences).
Required by the General Statutes in all towns having zoning commissions; see,
the following footnotes.
409   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-6. Powers and duties of board of
appeals. "(a) The zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers and
duties: (1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an
error in any order, requirement or decision made by the official charged with
the enforcement of this chapter or any bylaw, ordinance or regulation adopted
under the provisions of this chapter...".
410   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-6. Powers and duties of board of
appeals. "(a) The zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers and
duties: ...(2) to hear and decide all matters including special exceptions and
special exemptions under § 8-2g upon which it is required to pass by the
specific terms of the zoning bylaw, ordinance or regulation; and
411   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-6. Powers and duties of board of
appeals. "(a) The zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers and
duties: (3) to determine and vary the application of the zoning bylaws,
ordinances or regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and
with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience,
welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where,
owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting
generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such
bylaws, ordinances or regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety
and welfare secured, provided that the zoning regulations may specify the
extent to which uses shall not be permitted by variance in districts in which
such uses are not otherwise allowed..."
412   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-6. Powers and duties of board of
appeals. "(a) ...No such board shall be required to hear any application for
the same variance or substantially the same variance for a period of six months
after a decision by the board or by a court on an earlier such application...".
413   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-6. Powers and duties of board of
appeals. "(b) Any variance granted by a zoning board of appeals shall run with
the land and shall not be personal in nature to the person who applied for and
received the variance. A variance shall not be extinguished solely because of
the transfer of title to the property or the invalidity of any condition
attached to the variance that would affect the transfer of the property from
the person who initially applied for and received the variance."
414   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5.
415   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-3 (first sentence).
416   See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals. Alternate members. (a) "...The
regular members and alternate members of such zoning board of appeals shall be
electors...".
417   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals.
Alternate members. "(a) In each municipality having a zoning commission there
shall be a zoning board of appeals consisting of five regular members and three
alternate members, unless otherwise provided by special act. Such alternate
members, also referred to as "the panel of alternates", shall, when seated as
herein provided, have all the powers and duties set forth in the general
statutes relating to zoning boards of appeals and their members..."
418   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-3; see also, C.G.S. §8-5(a)
regarding selection of chair.
419   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals.
Alternate members. "(a)...Such board by vote of its regular members only shall
elect a chairman from among its members, unless otherwise provided by special
act, and all Meetings of such board shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such other times as the board determines and shall be open to the
public. Such chairman or in his absence the acting chairman may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member and each alternate member when
seated upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact; and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Each rule or regulation and each amendment or repeal thereof and each
order, requirement or decision of the board shall immediately be filed in the
office of the board and shall be a public record".
420   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5a. "Designation of alternate
members to act. If a regular member of a zoning board of appeals is absent, he
may designate an alternate from the panel of alternates to act in his place. If
he fails to make such designation or if he is disqualified, the chairman of the
board shall designate an alternate from such panel, choosing alternates in
rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible.
If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact
shall be recorded in the minutes of the Meeting". (1959, P.A. 146, S. 2; 1971,
P.A. 763, S. 5.). History: 1971 act made no changes. Fact that minutes failed
to show how or by whom alternates who participated in hearing were designated
did not invalidate board's action. 150 C. 539. Cited. 219 C. 352. Cited. 33 CA
281.
421   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-3 by deleting the following: "...a
bare majority of the regular members of which and a bare majority of the
alternate members of which may be from the same political party."
422   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals.
Alternate members. "(a) ...The regular members and alternate members of such
zoning board of appeals... shall not be members of the zoning commission, any
provision of any special act to the contrary notwithstanding..."
423   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals.
Alternate members. "a) ...Any vacancy in such board, including any vacancy in
the panel of alternates, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or special act,
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term, by the board of
selectmen of towns or the chief executive officer of cities and boroughs...".
424   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.F.
425   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-1.
426   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-1 (fourth sentence): "(3) Such
commission shall operate in accordance with the terms of the special act in
existence prior to the effective date of this Charter and shall have all powers
and duties, not inconsistent with this Charter, as prescribed in Chapters 124
and 126 of the General Statutes as amended". According to the town Attorney and
Counsel to the commission there are no special acts. The commission operates
strictly under Title 8 of the General Statutes.
427   The Code of Ordinances validates the charter provisions in §§33.56 and
33.57. These provisions will need to be amended following adoption of the
charter. See also, § 8-4a. Zoning or planning commission may be designated as
planning and zoning commission, as follows: "Any town, city or borough, unless
otherwise provided by special act, may by ordinance or by vote of its
legislative body designate its zoning Commission or its planning commission as
the planning and zoning commission for such municipality, and such commission
shall thereupon have all the powers and duties of both a planning commission
and a zoning commission and shall supersede any previous planning commission or
zoning commission, as the case may be. Such vote shall establish the number of
members to comprise such planning and zoning commission, which number of
members shall be five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten, not counting nonvoting
members. In the establishment of a five-member planning and zoning commission,
the provisions of § 8-19 shall apply. In the establishment of a planning and
zoning commission with six or more members, the provisions of § 8-19 shall
apply except that the terms of office shall be so arranged that not more than
three of such terms on a six-member commission, four of such terms on a seven
or an eight member commission, or five of such terms on a nine or ten-member
commission shall expire in any one year. Any public hearing conducted by a
planning and zoning commission with six or more members shall be held by the
Commission or a committee thereof appointed for that purpose constituting a
majority of the members of the commission. Any combined planning and zoning
commission established under the general statutes prior to October 1, 1959, may
continue to exist. Upon the establishment of a combined planning and zoning
commission, all regulations adopted by the planning commission or the zoning
commission which were in effect prior to the establishment of such combined
commission shall continue in full force and effect until modified, repealed or
superseded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 126. A
vacancy on such combined planning and zoning commission shall be filled in a
manner prescribed by the legislative body of such municipality."
428   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-1 (first sentence) by deleting the
following language: "...subject to the provisions of § 5-5 of this Charter and
may be removed for cause...". The proposed charter addresses the issue of
removal for cause in §7-1. H.
429   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-2 by deleting the following
language: "...In addition to the members appointed in 13-1 of this Chapter, the
Mayor shall appoint subject to the provisions of § 5-5 of this Charter and may
remove for cause, three (3) alternate members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission no more than two (2) of whom shall be from the same political party
and who shall act as alternates at hearings before the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Initially, the Mayor shall appoint one (1) alternate member for a
term of one (1) year, one (1) alternate member for a term of two (2) years and
one (1) alternate member for a term of three (3) years all to take office
February 1, l966. Annually thereafter during the month of January, the Mayor
shall appoint one (1) alternate member for a term of three (3) years". The
proposed charter addresses the issue of removal for cause in §7-1. H.
430   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §8-5. Zoning board of appeals.
Alternate members. "(a) In each municipality having a zoning commission there
shall be a zoning board of appeals consisting of five regular members and three
alternate members, unless otherwise provided by special act. Such alternate
members, also referred to as "the panel of alternates", shall, when seated as
herein provided, have all the powers and duties set forth in the general
statutes relating to zoning boards of appeals and their members...".
431   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-1 (first and second sentences).
432   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-2 (first and second sentences).
433   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-2 (third and fourth sentences).
434   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §§ 13-1 and 13-2 (first sentence) by
deleting the following: "...no more than five (5) of whom (regular members)
shall be from the same political party" and "...no more than two (2) of whom
(alternate members) shall be from the same political party" and "...no more
than two (2) of whom shall be from the same political party and act as
alternates at hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission".
435   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 13-1 (third sentence), by deleting
the following: "...no more than three (3) of whom, including the chairman,
shall belong to the same political party" and stating that the Chair shall
preside over both sections".
436   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.G.
437   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 10-6.
438   See, C.G.S. § 29-266a. (Formerly § 19-402) entitled "Municipal board of
appeals. Filing of appeals in absence of board of appeals)". See also, §29-266.
(Formerly § 19-402) entitled "Municipal board of appeals. Filing of appeals in
absence of board".
439   Charter Revision of 2011.
440   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §29-266(a), as follows: "...Such
board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall meet the qualifications
set forth in the State Building Code".
441   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §29-266(a), as follows: "...A
member of a board of appeals of one municipality may also be a member of the
board of appeals of another municipality."
442   Charter Revision of 2011.
443   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.H, which modified 1983 Charter § 17-
5.
444   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 17-5 (first sentence); see also,
C.G.S. § 7-422 entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to Superior Court".
445   In lieu of current language from 1983 Charter § 17-5 (fourth sentence),
as follows: "They shall have the duty of hearing and determining appeals from
any member of the Classified Service who is dismissed, demoted, suspended,
fined or otherwise aggrieved as a result of the interpretation and application
of the rules and regulations promulgated under this Chapter". See also,
ORDINANCE § 17-5: PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD. The Mayor shall appoint subject to
the provisions of § 5-5 of this Charter and may remove for cause five (5)
resident electors of the Town to serve as a Personnel Appeals Board. Initially
the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member for a term of five (5) years, one (1)
member for a term of four (4) years, one (1) member for a term of three (3)
years, one (1) member for a term of two (2) years and one (1) member for a term
of one (1) year, all to take office February 1, 1966. Annually thereafter,
during the month of January, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of
five (5) years. They shall have the duty of hearing and determining appeals
from any member of the Classified Service who is dismissed, demoted, suspended,
fined or otherwise aggrieved as a result of the interpretation and application
of the rules and regulations promulgated under this Chapter. They shall have
such other duties and powers as may be prescribed by the Council."
446   See, C.G.S. § 7-422 entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to Superior
Court", as follows: "Said board shall hear and determine any grievance, as
defined in such ordinance, of any employee or group of employees of such town,
city or borough. It shall adopt rules of procedures which shall insure any
aggrieved employee a prompt and fair hearing and an opportunity to be heard in
person or by a representative of his choosing."
447   See, C.G.S. §7-422 entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to Superior
Court".
448   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 17-5 (first sentence) by deleting the
following language: "...The Mayor shall appoint subject to the provisions of
§5-5 of this Charter and may remove for cause five (5) Electors of the Town to
serve as a Personnel Appeals Board". The proposed charter addresses the issue
of removal for cause in §7-1.H.
449   Charter Revision of 2011. See, C.G.S. §7-422, entitled "Personnel appeals
board. Appeal to Superior Court", as follows: "...Any town, city or borough
may, by ordinance, create a personnel appeals board which shall consist of five
members who shall be electors of such municipality holding no salaried
municipal office."
450   The following language from 1983 Charter § 17-5 was deleted: "Initially
the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member for a term of five (5) years, one (1)
member for a term of four (4) years, one (1) member for a term of three (3)
years, one (1) member for a term of two (2) years and one (1) member for a term
of one (1) year, all to take office February 1, l966. Annually thereafter,
during the month of January, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of
five (5) years"...See also, C.G.S. § 7-422, entitled "Personnel appeals board.
Appeal to Superior Court" which permits the ordinance to fix the "...term of
office and method of election or appointment... The terms of office shall be
arranged so that not more than one of such terms shall expire in any one year.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term in the manner
fixed in the ordinance."
451   1983 Charter § 17-5 (second and third sentences).
452   Charter Revision of 2011.
453   At the time of the consideration of the revised Charter, C.G.S. §7-422,
entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to Superior Court" states that "Not
more than three members shall be members of the same political party."
454   Charter Revision of 2011.
455   See, C.G.S. §7-422, entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to Superior
Court" which states that "...Three members shall constitute a quorum..."
456   1983 Charter § 17-5 (fifth sentence).
457   Charter Revision of 2011.
458   See, C.G.S. § 7-422, entitled "Personnel appeals board. Appeal to
Superior Court", as follows: "...The decision of said board may be appealed to
the Superior Court within ninety calendar days from the date such board renders
its decision..."
459   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.I. See., C.G.S. §11-30.
460   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 14-1 (first and fourth sentences).
461   See, C.G.S. §§11-32 and 11-36.
462   2022 modification of 2011 Charter § 7-2.J and 1983 Charter § 14-1 (first
sentence), by replacing the following: "(1) There shall be a Library Board of
five (5) Electors... Initially the Mayor shall appoint one (l) member for a
term of one (1) year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2)
years, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, one (1)
member shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years and one (1) member shall
be appointed for a term of five (5) years, all to take office February 1, l966.
Annually, thereafter, during the month of January, the Mayor shall appoint
subject to the provisions of §5-5 of this Charter one (l) member for a term of
five (5) years."
463   2022 modification of 1983 Charter § 14-1 (second and third sentences).
464   2022 modification of 1983 Charter § 14-1, by deleting the following:
"...no more than three (3) of whom shall be members of the same political
party."
465   2022 modification and recodification of the first sentence of Charter §
7-2.I which modified 1983 Charter § 14-1 (fifth sentences).
466   2022 modification of the second sentence of Charter § 7-2.I which
modified 1983 Charter § 14-1 (sixth sentences).
467   2022 recodification of Charter § 7-2.J. Charter Revision of 2011. In
accordance with C.G.S. §22a-42 entitled "Municipal regulation of wetlands and
watercourses. Action by Commissioner."
468   2022 modification of current Ordinance §33.104.
469   NEW (2022).
470   NEW (2022).
471   At the time of the adoption of this Charter the pertinent provisions of
the General Statutes are C.G.S. §§22a-36 through 22a-45.
472   NEW (2022).
473   NEW (2022).
SECTION 7-3: APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS REQUIRED BY THE CHARTER474.
   The Legislative Council shall adopt Ordinances setting forth the
organizational structure and powers of Boards and Commissions pertaining to the
following matters:
   A.   Economic development;
   B.   Public housing;
   C.   Human rights, opportunities and relations;
   D.   Veterans affairs;
   E.   Parks, recreation and youth services475;
   F.   Retirement, pensions and/or disabilities;
   G.   Environmental policy, energy use, climate change, natural resources,
open space, solid waste, recycling, litter and blight;
   H.   Regulation and management of traffic and parking476; and,
   I.   Arts and Culture477.
                                        
474   Charter Revision of 2011.
475   Charter Revision of 2011.
476   See §§33.10 through 33.15 of the Code of Ordinances.
477   NEW (2022).
SECTION 7-4: APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED BY ORDINANCE OR AS
OTHERWISE MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY THE GENERAL STATUTES.
   The Legislative Council may establish, by Ordinance or as otherwise may be
prescribed by the General Statutes, such additional Boards and Commissions as
are necessary to effectuate the powers and purposes of the Town as enumerated
in the General Statutes, Special Acts and this Charter.
SECTION 7-5: BOARDS APPOINTED BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL478.
   A.   Board of Assessment Appeals479.
      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals which
shall have such powers as set forth in the General Statutes.
      (2)   Appointment and Membership480. The Board shall consist of three (3)
members and two (2) alternates, all Electors of the Town, appointed by the
Legislative Council. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.
         (a)   Term. The Council shall appoint members for a term of three (3)
years and alternates for a term of three (3) years, for a term commencing on
the 1st Day of February of the year of appointment, which terms shall be
staggered as established at the date of original appointments (Historical Note:
See, §
11-16 of this Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the
Charter adopted on November 8, 1983) 481, 482.
         (b)   Minority Party Representation. Said Commission members shall be
subject to the requirements of §
7-1.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Miscellaneous. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Charter to
the contrary, the Legislative Council shall set the compensation for members of
the Board of Assessment Appeals and no person holding an elective, appointive
or salaried office or position in the Town shall be eligible to serve 483. Said
Board shall have all powers and duties conferred or imposed by the General
Statutes on boards of tax review or assessment appeals484.
                                        
478   1983 Charter Chapter IV.
479   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 4-1 by repealing title: "Board of Tax
Review".
480   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 4-1.
481   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 4-1 (first and third sentences) by
repealing the following language: "...Council shall at a Meeting to be held not
later than January 31,1966 appoint a board of assessment appeals consisting of
three (3) members...".
482   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 14-1, by deleting the following:
"...no more than two (2) of whom shall be from any one political party...".
483   1983 Charter § 4-1(fourth sentence).
484   2011 modification of 1983 Charter section 4-1(fifth sentence) by adding
"assessment appeals".
SECTION 7-6: CONTINUANCE OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS485.
   Boards and Commissions established under the authority of prior Charters
which may be modified, altered or abolished by this Charter will continue under
the provisions of this Charter; unless otherwise specified.
                                        
485   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 7-7: MERGER OR CONSOLIDATION OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS486.
   The functions of any Board or Commission required under this Chapter may be
merged or consolidated with another by Ordinance.
                                        
486    Charter Revision of 2011.
CHAPTER VIII: THE TOWN GOVERNMENT: DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS487 
487   Charter Revision of 2011. [1] 1983 Charter 1 8-1 Repealed. Chapter VIII
entitled "Department of Welfare". [2] 1983 Charter 16-1 Repealed. Chapter XVI
entitled "Water Pollution Control Authority".
                                        
SECTION 8-1: THE AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH THE DEPARTMENTS OF TOWN GOVERNMENT488.
   A.   Powers and Purposes489. In addition to the Departments specifically set
forth in §§
8-3 through
8-7 of this Charter, the Town, acting within the powers and duties enumerated
in the General Statutes, any applicable Special Acts and this Charter may
establish, by Ordinance, such Departments necessary to carry out and organize
the functions of government. The express intent of this Charter is to afford
the Mayor and the Legislative Council the ability to organize the government in
order to achieve a balance of efficiency and service to the people of the Town
consistent with the provisions herein.
   B.   Creation of Departments490. Accordingly, the Legislative Council may,
by Ordinance proposed by the Mayor, establish the Departments 491 of the Town.
Each of these Departments shall be constituted to perform such functions and
have such powers and duties as are imposed by the General Statutes, this
Charter and Ordinances. Moreover, the head of each Department established by
Ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter generally
applicable to Department Heads and shall serve coterminously with the term of
the appointing Mayor (however, may continue to serve until a successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified); unless otherwise provided by the General
Statutes or this Charter. All Departments shall be entitled to office space
provided by the Town and shall remain open during such hours as the Mayor may
direct.
   C.   Reorganization Plans.
      (1)    The delineation of departmental categories in this Charter is
advisory and may be altered pursuant to a reorganization plan proposed by the
Mayor and approved by the Legislative Council. Accordingly, any departmental
categories may be reorganized and Department Heads may be reassigned (unless
otherwise prohibited by law). The reorganization plan is subject to the
limitation that all governmental functions set forth in this Charter shall
continue to be provided to the residents of the Town; unless such function was
eliminated as the result of a repealed Federal or State mandate and not
otherwise in the best interest of the Town to continue. Moreover, any
reorganization plan shall include specific reference to the departmental
function(s) set forth in this Charter that will be carried out in said
reorganization and shall be accompanied by an opinion of the Town Attorney
verifying that the reorganized function complies with the Charter
requirements492.
      (2)   Any internal departmental reorganization plan proposed by a
Department Head, pertaining to non-budgetary matters, shall be forwarded to the
Mayor for review, approval and final action, prior to announcement and
implementation of the plan by the Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
with regard to the Police and Fire Departments such internal departmental
reorganizational plan shall be forwarded by the Department Head (following
review and approval by the Mayor) to the Police Commission and the Fire
Commission, as applicable, for review, approval and final action, prior to
announcement and implementation of the plan493.
                                        
488   Charter Revision of 2011.
489   Charter Revision of 2011.
490   Charter Revision of 2011.
491   "Department" includes "...and agencies".
492   Charter Revision of 2011.
493   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 8-2: APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS AND OTHER MAYORAL DEPARTMENTAL
APPOINTEES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS494.
   A.   Appointment495. Except as otherwise provided by law or the provisions
of this Charter, all Department Heads and other Mayoral appointees shall be
appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor, following approval by
the Legislative Council. The terms of the Department Heads established by
Charter are set forth in each applicable section. The terms of Department Heads
and other Mayoral appointees established by Ordinance or otherwise shall be
coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor unless otherwise set forth by
agreement of the Mayor and the Legislative Council by Ordinance (for
Departments not set forth in this Charter), by employment contract (as set
forth in §
8-2.C of this Charter) or both.
   B.   Removal. The Department Head or appointee may be removed from office by
the Legislative Council, in accordance with the provisions of §
3-10 of this Charter or by authority of the Mayor, in accordance with §
3-10.A(2) and the provisions of Chapter VIII of this Charter.
      (1)   Vacancy. In the event of a Vacancy in the office of any Department
Head or other Mayoral appointee, a successor may be appointed as set forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter.
      (2)   Full-time Service. The general rule is that all Department Heads
and Mayoral appointees shall devote full time to the duties of office; subject
to modification by Ordinance or adoption of the budget, following a written
determination by either the Mayor or the Legislative Council that full-time
service is not required.
   C.   Employment Contracts. Except for employees of the Mayor's office and
the Legal Department (unless otherwise required by law) and notwithstanding the
provisions of §
8-2 of this Charter, the Mayor may, with the approval of the Council, enter
into an employment contract with a Department Head or Mayoral appointee not
covered by the provisions of the Merit System 496. Such contracts shall be
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The term of the contract shall not exceed three (3) years, provided
that any such contract shall include an initial ninety (90) day probationary
period497. Moreover, the contract term shall not extend more than twelve (12)
months following the commencement of the term of office following that of the
appointing Mayor.
      (2)   The contract may extend for said period, only if recommended by the
Mayor and approved by a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of the Council present and
voting498.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
3-10 of this Charter, the Mayor may remove the contract employee at any time.
However, the contract shall contain a provision that would provide the employee
with a sole remedy in the event such employee is removed without cause; which
provision shall not apply in the event the employee is removed for cause or
within the first ninety (90) days of such contract499.
      (4)   In the event the Mayor announces an intention not to run for re-
election or following September 1 of the year in which there is a Mayoral
election, whichever is earlier, the Mayor shall not recommend nor shall the
Council act upon an employment contract under this provision.
The Mayor may instruct the Personnel Director to prepare job descriptions,
conduct searches, interviews and examinations for any position to be filled
under this section500.
   D.   Effect of Charter on Department Heads501. Unless otherwise terminated
pursuant to law, the status of Department Heads holding office subject to
appointment on the effective date of this Charter shall continue until the end
of their term. Thereafter, the provisions of this Charter shall apply.
   E.   Authority of Department Heads502. Once appointed as described in this
Charter, the Department Head shall appoint, hire, discipline and remove all
deputies, assistants and other employees of the Department as provided for in
the budget and subject to (1) the authority of the Mayor or designee; (2) any
specific provisions of this Charter or law pertaining to the authority of the
Department Head and the relationship with a governing Board or Commission; (3)
the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission; and, (4) any
applicable collective bargaining agreements. This provision shall not apply to
Mayoral appointees assigned to a particular department.
   F.   Qualifications of Department Heads503. The job qualifications of all
Department Heads, in addition to those enumerated in this Charter, by the
General Statutes or Special Act shall be established by Ordinance following the
recommendation of the human resources or personnel director or as may otherwise
be designated by Ordinance. Said job qualifications shall be prepared in
accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and best practices
in the applicable field and shall be reviewed and updated, if necessary, every
four (4) years and whenever a Vacancy occurs in the position.
   G.   Compensation504. The salaries and compensation of all Officials,
Department Heads and employees of the Town shall be set by Ordinance or through
the budget, except where otherwise fixed by the General Assembly or as
otherwise covered by the Merit System and civil service rules, collective
bargaining agreement(s) or contract.
   H.   Residency505. The Legislative Council may, in its discretion, establish
by Ordinance a residency requirement or compensation benefit for residency in
the Town for all Department Heads, to the extent permitted by law and subject
to the provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements.
   I.   Liability506. Any Public Official, any employee of any Department or
member of any Board or Commission of the Town who shall, in order to provide
for the payment of any bill, account or claim against the Town, knowingly
instruct, or vote to instruct, or in any manner cause, the Director of Finance
to draw upon any specific item of the appropriations as made by the Legislative
Council other than the item against which such bill, account or claim is
properly and legally chargeable, shall be personally liable to the Town for the
amount of such bill, account or claim.
   J.   Surety Bonds of Certain Town Officials507. The following employees of
the Town, shall severally give bonds, with surety, to said Town in such manner
and form as the General Statutes or Ordinances shall prescribe, for the
faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices: the Director of
Finance, Purchasing Agent, Tax Collector, and any and all Public Officials and
employees of said Town in any Department thereof, charged with the custody and
control of property, monies, or goods of said Town, or the collection or
disbursement of the same, as determined by the Director of Finance or otherwise
required by the General Statutes, this Charter or Ordinance. The premiums for
said bonds shall be paid by the Town.
   All bonds, except that of the Director of Finance, shall be set by and
lodged with the Director of Finance of said Town. The Director of Finance's
bond shall be set by and lodged with the Mayor. In case of the refusal or
neglect of any Official or employee to give the bond so required, such office
shall be deemed Vacant by reason of such refusal or neglect, and, on a
declaration being made to the Legislative Council by the Director of Finance to
that effect, such Vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by this
Charter.
   K.   Position Titles508. The position titles of the Department Heads set
forth in this Charter reflect the title at the time of the adoption of this
Charter. Titles may be changed; however, the functions and fiduciary
obligations specifically set forth in this Charter shall not be altered.
   L.   Reporting Obligations. Commencing on the fifteenth (15th) day of
January 2023 and the fifteenth (15th) day of every month thereafter, Department
Heads reports pertaining to overtime expenditures for the prior completed month
and the reasons and legal authority for said overtime shall be filed with the
Legislative Council and Finance Commission by the Director of Finance.
                                        
494   Charter Revision of 2011.
495   Charter Revision of 2011.
496   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 17-3 (first sentence) "...the provisions
of the Merit System" replaces "...not covered by the merit provisions of this
Charter".
497   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 17-3 (end of first sentence), as
follows: "shall" replaces "may".
498   1983 Charter § 17-3 (third sentence). Also repealed the following
language: "...beyond the end of the current term of the Council and Mayor".
499   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 17-3 (second sentence); with the
exception of the following: "however, in the event of removal without cause,
the Town shall remain bound to fulfill all financial commitments contained in
such employment contract, unless such removal without cause shall take place
within the first ninety (90) days of such contract".
500   1983 Charter § 17-3 (fourth sentence).
501   Charter Revision of 2011.
502   Charter Revision of 2011.
503   Charter Revision of 2011.
504   Charter Revision of 2011.
505   Charter Revision of 2011.
506   Charter Revision of 2011.
507   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 i; in lieu of the following
language: "...to purchase at the expense of the Town, surety bonds for all
Officials and employees of the Town required by Law or by Ordinance to furnish
bonds to the Town, and insurance of such types against liability, loss or
damage on the part of the Town or its property with approval of the Mayor, and
be responsible for collection of insurance benefits and other matters relating
to the administration of the Town's insurance".
508   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 8-3: THE LEGAL DEPARTMENT509 - TOWN ATTORNEY510.
   A.   Established511. The Town Attorney shall be the head of the Legal
Department of the Town. In this respect, the Town Attorney shall have the power
to employ bond counsel and such other assistant Town Attorneys, and any special
assistants required, all of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice law in
this State, and who shall be responsible to the Town Attorney.
   B.   Appointment of the Town Attorney512. The Mayor shall appoint the Town
Attorney as set forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter. The Town Attorney shall serve a term coterminous with
that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §
3-10.A (2) and §
8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.
      (1)   The Mayor shall, subject to the approval of the Council, propose
the rates of compensation to be received by the Town Attorney and
assistants513.
   C.   Qualifications514. The Town Attorney shall be an attorney admitted to
practice law in this State and who shall have been practicing for at least five
(5) years.
   D.   Powers and Duties. The Town Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the
Mayor, and all other Departments, Public Officials515, Boards, Commissions or
agencies of the Town, in all matters affecting the interests of the Town516. In
this respect, the Town Attorney shall:
      (1)   appear for and protect the rights of the Town in all actions, suits
or proceedings brought by or against it or any of its Departments, Public
Officials517, Boards, Commissions or agencies518.
      (2)   have the power, with the approval of the Mayor and subject to such
rules and limitations as the Council may from time to time adopt, to appeal
from orders, decisions or judgments in such cases and to compromise and settle
any claims by or against the Town subject to approval of the Mayor519.
      (3)   prepare or approve the form of all contracts or other instruments
to which the Town is a party or in which it has an interest, and shall prepare
all codifications of Ordinances as may be required by the General Statutes or
the Council520.
      (4)   review, at least every five (5) years, the Ordinances and Statutory
Resolutions of the Town to ensure compliance with the General Statutes and this
Charter and to make recommendations to the Legislative Council accordingly521.
   E.   Opinions of the Town Attorney. Upon written request of the Mayor or a
member of the Council, the Town Attorney shall furnish them with written
opinions on any questions of Law with respect to any Town matter, including,
but not limited to interpretations pertaining to the applicability and
enforcement of the provisions of this Charter. The opinions of the Town
Attorney shall be indexed and kept in the office of the Town Attorney. Said
book shall be a matter of public record and the property of the Town and shall
be delivered by the Town Attorney to a successor upon resignation, removal, or
the expiration of the term of office. Said opinions shall be determinative with
respect to interpretations of law and the Charter and the actions of the
Officials, Boards and Commission of the Town 522.
                                        
509   1983 Charter Chapter VI.
510   1983 Charter 6-1.
511   2011 modification of 1983 Charter 6-1 (third sentence).
512   2011 modification of 1983 Charter 6-1 (first sentence); in lieu of the
following: "...shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Council, and may be removed by the Mayor".
513   1983 Charter 6-1 (fourth sentence).
514   1983 Charter 6-1 (second sentence).
515   "Public Officials" replaces "officers".
516   1983 Charter 6-1 (first half of the fifth sentence).
517   "Public Officials" replaces "officers".
518   1983 Charter 6-1 (sixth sentence).
519   1983 Charter 6-1 (seventh sentence).
520   1983 Charter 6-1 (eighth sentence).
521   Charter Revision of 2011.
522   2011 substantial modification of 1983 Charter 6-1 (second half of fifth
sentence) by permitting a written request by any member of the Legislative
Council and the following "...including, but not limited to interpretations
pertaining to the applicability and enforcement of the provisions of this
Charter". Also the following clause: "The opinions of the Town Attorney shall
be indexed and kept in the office of the Town Attorney. Said book shall be a
matter of public record and the property of the Town and shall be delivered by
the Town Attorney to a successor upon resignation, removal, or the expiration
of the term of office. Said opinions shall be determinative with respect to
interpretations of law and the Charter and the actions of the Officials, Boards
and Commission of the Town."
SECTION 8-4: GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION523.
   There shall be established a system of government administration
specifically designed to reduce duplication of services and efficiently foster
the delivery of services to the Town. The benefits of such system shall be
conferred upon the general government and, where permitted or by mutual
agreement, upon the Department of Education.
   A.   The Department of Finance524. The Department shall be responsible for
the keeping of accounts and financial records, the assessment and collection of
taxes, special assessments and other revenues, the custody and disbursement of
Town funds and money, the control over expenditures and such other powers and
duties as may be required by the General Statutes, this Charter, Ordinance or
Order or Motion of the Council 525.
      (1)   The Director of Finance. The Department Head shall be the Director
of Finance who shall, under this Charter and Ordinances, be subject to the
direction of the Mayor in all matters concerning the financial affairs of the
Town 526. The director shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and
good conduct of the Department and have direct supervision of the members of
the Department 527. The Director of Finance shall have a fiduciary
responsibility to the Town and shall, at all times, be required to accurately
report information to the Mayor and the Legislative Council 528.
         (a)   Appointment529.  The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Finance
as set forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter. The Director of Finance shall serve a term coterminous
with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§
3-10.A (2) and
8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.
         (b)   Qualifications. Said Director of Finance shall be qualified by
education, training and experience in public administration and public finance,
including, but not limited to budget, purchasing and personnel practices as
well as additional qualifications as may be established by Ordinance 530. Said
qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter 531.
         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees532. Except as provided in
this chapter, the Director of Finance shall appoint and may remove, subject to
the provisions of the Merit System, all other employees of this Department.
Additionally, the Director of Finance shall have all the duties and powers
prescribed by Law to town treasurers and shall be responsible for town
deposits.
         (d)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities. The Director of Finance
shall:
            (i)   Keep accounts showing the financial transactions for all
Departments and agencies of the Town533.
            (ii)   Prescribe the forms of such accounts, with the approval of
the Mayor534.
            (iii)   Prepare financial reports for each quarter and for each
fiscal year and such other periods as may be required by the Mayor535.
            (iv)   Prepare monthly reports to the Legislative Council and
Finance Commission on transfers as made pursuant to §
10-9.D. of this Charter.
            (v)   Assemble monthly Department Head reports for the Legislative
Council and Finance Commission, as required by §
8-2.L, §
8-5.A(5)(c)(iv) and §
8-5.B(2)(c)(vi) of this Charter536.
   B.   The Tax Collector.
      (1)   Appointment537. The Mayor shall appoint the Tax Collector as set
forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter utilizing the recruitment provisions of the Merit System;
however, the Tax Collector may be removed from office as set forth in §§
3-10 and
8-2.B of this Charter or as may be required by law. The Tax Collector shall
hold office until Completion of Service or until a successor shall be appointed
and shall have qualified.
      (2)   Qualifications538. The Tax Collector539 shall be required to meet
the requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in the
General Statutes. Said qualifications shall be in accord with nationally
accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as
developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
      (3)   Powers and Duties. The Tax Collector shall collect all taxes and
assessments duly levied by the Town, as provided for in the General Statutes of
the State of Connecticut, this Charter and the Ordinances and such other duties
as the Council may prescribe 540. In addition, the Tax Collector shall:
         (a)   be responsible to the Director of Finance, or such other
official as may be designated by the Mayor, in the performance of duties541.
         (b)   report all tax collection information as prescribed by the
Director of Finance in accordance with the policies of the Department of
Finance542.
         (c)   pay to the accounts designated by the Director of Finance all
monies collected in accordance with the policies of the Department of
Finance543.
   C.   The Assessor544.
      (1)   Appointment545. The Mayor shall appoint the Assessor as set forth
in §
8-2.A of this Charter, utilizing the recruitment provisions of the Merit
System; however, the Assessor may be removed from office as set forth in §§
3-10 and
8-2.B of this Charter or as may be required by law. The Assessor shall hold
office until Completion of Service or until a successor shall be appointed and
shall have qualified.
      (2)   Qualifications546. The Assessor547 shall be required to meet the
requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in the
General Statutes. Said qualifications shall be in accord with nationally
accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as
developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
      (3)   Powers and Duties548. The Assessor shall have the powers and shall
perform all duties prescribed for assessors in the General Statutes, together
with such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, the
Ordinances and such other duties as the Council may prescribe549. In addition,
the Assessor shall be responsible to the Director of Finance, or such other
official as may be designated by the Mayor, in the performance of duties550.
   D.   The Purchasing Agent551.
      (1)   Appointment552. The Mayor shall appoint the Purchasing Agent as set
forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter, utilizing the recruitment provisions of the Merit
System; however, the Purchasing Agent may be removed from office as set forth
in §§
3-10 and
8-2.B of this Charter or as may be required by law. The Purchasing Agent shall
hold office until Completion of Service or until a successor shall be appointed
and shall have qualified.
      (2)   Qualifications553. The Purchasing Agent shall be required to meet
the requirements, qualifications and certifications required by the Town in
accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and best practices
in the applicable field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
      (3)   Powers and Duties554. The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for
managing the centralized purchasing system for the Town and shall contract for
and purchase all services, supplies, equipment, materials and other commodities
required by all Departments, offices, Boards, Commissions and other agencies of
the Town, including, where practicable, the Board of Education 555, in a manner
consistent with this Charter and the Ordinances. The Purchasing Agent shall be
responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the system. In
addition, the Purchasing Agent shall:
         (a)   In the performance of duties be responsible to the Director of
Finance, or such other official as may be designated by the Mayor556.
         (b)   With respect to said Board of Education, be required to take
advantage of incentives, cooperative agreements and consortiums generally
available to boards of education in order to expedite the acquisition of goods
and services for said Board to meet the curriculum and scheduling requirements
of the Board, upon reasonable notice by the Board. The rules governing
purchasing and procurement, including a definition of "reasonable notice",
shall be set forth by Ordinance. The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for
the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the system557.
         (c)   Facilitate, where in the best interest of the Town,
participation in any joint purchasing program administered by the State of
Connecticut, any Regional Council of Governments, the Connecticut Conference of
Municipalities, the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education or any other
public agency, including another municipality or municipalities, or other
nonprofit organization the members of which are public bodies558.
      (4)   Centralized Purchasing System559. There shall be a centralized
purchasing system for the Town (including, where practicable, the Board of
Education) covering the purchase of all services, supplies, materials,
equipment and other commodities required. In order to advance the provisions of
this Charter, the Legislative Council shall, upon recommendation of the
Purchasing Agent, establish by Ordinance the rules and regulations 560
governing the operation of said central purchasing system in a manner
consistent with the General Statutes, this Charter, Ordinance and standards
established by organizations such as the National Institute of Governmental
Purchasing and the National Association of State Purchasing Officials as well
as the Model Procurement Code and Ordinances prepared by the American Bar
Association. The rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to,
provisions governing:
         (a)   Additional roles and responsibilities of the Purchasing Agent;
         (b)   Competitive procurement561 and solicitation requirements562,
including local business preference563;
         (c)   Specifications564; requisition standards565; and, inspection and
testing methodologies566, following consultation with the Mayor, Director of
Finance and appropriate Town Officials; and,
         (d)   Storage567; recycled and recyclable products568; transfer or
sale of surplus property and appropriate reporting standards569; and, inventory
control570.
The Purchasing Agent shall review such Ordinance, every two years, and make
recommendations pertaining to the purchase of all services, supplies,
materials, equipment and other commodities required as well as the factors,
including, but not limited to, cost, competition and processes, that assure
compliance with the provisions of this Charter.
      (5)   Repealer571.  Any provisions referring to purchasing inconsistent
with the terms of this section referred to elsewhere in this Charter are hereby
expressly repealed.
   E.   Human Resources572.
      (1)   Equal Employment Opportunity573. It shall be the policy of the Town
to afford equal opportunity to all qualified applicants and to all Public
Officials574 and employees of the Town with respect to initial employment,
advancement and general working conditions, without regard to race, religious
creed, color, age, gender, marital status, sexual orientation or civil union
status, ancestry, national origin, physical disability or any other persons as
may be defined or otherwise protected by the General Statutes. Public Notice
shall be given for all openings in Town positions, including Mayoral
appointments, prior to the filling of such positions. For these purposes Public
Notice shall be posted, prior to the date that final applications may be due,
as determined by the Director of Human Resources or as otherwise required by
Law (See, §
1-4.R).
      (2)   The Merit System and Personnel and Human Resources Policy of the
Town575.  It shall be the policy of the Town to establish and maintain, by
Ordinance and regulation, consistent with the policies of this Charter, a Merit
System and civil service rules and regulations that will assure recruitment of
the best available persons to appointment to Vacant positions in the Classified
Services of the Town on the basis of merit and in conformity with recognized
principles of public personnel administration. Moreover, the Director of Human
Resources shall endeavor to train and evaluate employees and bargain fairly
with the collective bargaining representatives of employees.
      (3)   Director of Human Resources576. 
         (a)   Appointment577. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Human
Resources as set forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter. The Director of Human Resources shall serve a term
coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§
3-10.A (2) and
8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.
         (b)   Qualifications578. The Director of Human Resources shall be
required to meet the requirements, qualifications and certifications required
by the Town in accord with nationally accepted professional standards and best
practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Powers and Duties579. The Director of Human Resources shall be
the primary advisor to the Mayor and Legislative Council regarding the
personnel and human resources policies of the Town and the administrator of the
Personnel, Human Resources and Merit System, including the civil service rules
and regulations, as promulgated by the Civil Service Commission in accord with
the authority set forth in §
7-2.B of this Charter. In the event the Director is appointed the chief
examiner, as required by the General Statutes, said Director shall serve as
Executive Secretary of the Civil Service Commission 580. The Director shall be
responsible for using best practices in the field pertaining to the following:
            (i)   Administration of up-to-date civil service lists and the
competitive examinations necessary for the hiring and promotion of Town
personnel (including, the Board of Education, where practicable);
            (ii)   Planning and implementing a system to achieve productivity
improvements through training and technology;
            (iii)   Ensuring that job descriptions are current and reflect the
skills and tasks necessary to conduct the business of the Town;
            (iv)   Undertaking the cost effective selection and administration
of benefits for Town employees;
            (v)   Assisting the Civil Service Commission in its deliberations
and investigations;
            (vi)   Establishing and maintaining timely and up-to-date
eligibility lists for the various classes and positions of employees and
notifying the Department Heads (including the Superintendent of Schools) of the
expiration of said lists no less than six (6) months prior to said expiration
and certifying eligible employees to the appropriate Departments in accordance
with selection standards;
            (vii)   Maintaining all necessary performance records and ratings
and all other records necessary for the administration of the Commission and
the Department;
            (viii)   Making an annual report to the Civil Service Commission,
the Legislative Council and the Mayor; and
            (ix)   Such other duties as set forth by Ordinance or by the Civil
Service Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and
Ordinances.
                                        
523   Charter Revision of 2011.
524   1983 Charter Chapter XV, § 15-1.
525   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-1 (first sentence).
526   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 15-2 (first sentence).
527   Final clause is a 2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-2.
528   Charter Revision of 2011.
529   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-2 (first sentence); in lieu of the
following: "...shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Council and may be removed by the Mayor".
530   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-2 (second sentence).
531   Charter Revision of 2011.
532   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-2 (third sentence); by replacing
the following: "...serve as agent of the Town deposit fund".
533   1983 Charter § 15-1 (second sentence).
534   1983 Charter § 15-1 (third sentence).
535   1983 Charter § 15-1 (fourth sentence).
536   Charter Revision of 2011.
537   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-3 (first sentence); in lieu of the
following: "...shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Council and may be removed by the Mayor".
538   Charter Revision of 2011.
539   See, C.G.S. 12-130a entitled "Training, examination and certification of
municipal tax collectors".
540   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 15-3 (third and fourth sentences).
541   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-3 (fifth sentence).
542   Charter Revision of 2011.
543   Charter Revision of 2011.
544   1983 Charter § 15-3.
545   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-3 (second sentence).
546   Charter Revision of 2011.
547   See, C.G.S. 12-40a entitled "Committee for training, examination and
certification of assessment personnel. Fees. Certification by Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management".
548   Charter Revision of 2011.
549   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 15-3 (fourth sentence).
550   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-3 (third and fifth sentences).
551   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4.
552   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 (first sentence) by deleting the
following: "...The Director of Finance shall act as or appoint, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and the Council, and may remove."
553   Charter Revision of 2011.
554   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 15-4 (second sentence).
555   Charter Revision of 2011.
556   Consistent with 1983 Charter § 15-4 (first sentence).
557   Charter Revision of 2011.
558   Charter Revision of 2011.
559   Charter Revision of 2011.
560   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4j; in lieu of the following
language: "...to prepare subject to the approval of the Council such rules and
regulations regarding competitive solicitation as may be necessary." NOTE:
There is no § 15-4h.
561   See, C.G.S. 7-148v entitled "Requirements for competitive bidding". See
also, C.G.S. 7-148w entitled "Disqualification of contractors from bidding on
municipal contracts".
562   2011 modification of 1983 Charter section 15-4 j; in lieu of the
following language: "...to prepare subject to the approval of the Council such
rules and regulations regarding competitive solicitation as may be necessary".
563   Charter Revision of 2011.
564   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4a; in lieu of the following
language: "...to establish and enforce, with the approval of the Mayor and
after consultation with the heads of all departments, standard specifications
for all supplies, materials and equipment required by the several departments,
offices, and agencies of the Town".
565   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 b; in lieu of the following
language: "...to establish to prescribe the time of making requisitions for
such supplies, materials and equipment".
566   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 c; in lieu of the following
language: "...to establish a system for inspection of all deliveries of such
supplies, materials and equipment, and to cause tests to be made when necessary
in order to determine their quality, quantity and conformance with
specifications".
567   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 d; in lieu of the following
language: "...to supervise and control such central store rooms as the Council
may provide by ordinance to serve the several departments, offices and agencies
and to use the facilities of the Board of Education, upon approval of said
board".
568   Charter Revision of 2011.
569   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4 e and f; in lieu of the
following language: "...e) to transfer, with the approval of the Mayor, to or
between departments, offices, and agencies, or sell supplies, materials and
equipment considered to be surplus, obsolete or unused, after consultation with
the head of the department, office or agency concerned; f) to give to the Mayor
and Legislative Council, an accounting at the time of the sale, donation, or
other disposition of any unused equipment, stating to whom it was sold, the
original cost, the date of purchase, and the monies obtained as a result of
such disposition".
570   2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 15-4g; in lieu of the following
language: "...to maintain an inventory of all movable equipment belonging to
the Town".
571   Charter Revision of 2011.
572   1983 Charter Chapter XVII.
573   1983 Charter § 17-1 entitled "General Provisions".
574   "Public Officials" replaces "officers".
575   1983 Charter § 17-1 entitled "General Provisions".
576   Charter Revision of 2011.
577   Charter Revision of 2011.
578   Charter Revision of 2011.
579   Charter Revision of 2011.
580   1983 Charter § 17-4 (third sentence). Note: The only mention of the
Personnel Director in the 1983 Charter.
SECTION 8-5: PUBLIC SAFETY581, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES582.
   A.   The Police Department583.
      (1)   The Police Department shall be responsible for the preservation of
the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, regulation of
traffic, protection of the rights of persons and property and enforcement of
the Laws of the State and the Ordinances of the Town and all rules and
regulations made in accordance therewith584.
      (2)   All sworn members of the Department shall have powers and duties
with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of criminal
laws as are vested in police officers by the General Statutes585.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the power of special
constables appointed in accordance with the General Statutes586.
      (4)   The Chief of Police - Powers and Duties587. The head of the Police
Department shall be the Chief of Police who shall be responsible for the
general management and operations of the Police Department. In this regard, the
Chief shall propose, in writing, policies, rules and regulations concerning the
general management and operations of said Department and the conduct of all its
members, subject to approval by the Police Commission, as set forth in §
7-2.D of this Charter 588.
         (a)   Appointment589. The Mayor shall appoint the Chief of Police as
set forth in §
8-2.B of this Charter; however, the Chief may be removed from office in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes 590. The Chief of Police
shall hold office until Completion of Service or until a successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified 591.
         (b)   Qualifications592. The Chief of Police shall meet the
requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in the
General Statutes and required by the Town in accordance with nationally
accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as
developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities.
            (i)   The Chief shall be responsible for the training, efficiency,
discipline and good conduct of all members of the Department and the care and
custody of all property used by the Department, and shall consult with and
receive the advice of the Police Commission on the general management of the
Department, including, but not limited to, prior consultation on budgetary
matters and as otherwise required by §
7-2.D and §
8-1.C of this Charter593.
            (ii)   The Chief may discipline members of the Department for
violation of rules and regulations of the Department. Any such disciplinary
action may be appealed by the individual to the Police Commission. The appeal
of such disciplinary action shall stay the imposition of the discipline until
the appeal is decided by the Commission unless the Chief finds that immediate
suspension with pay is required to ensure the public safety, which finding is
subject to immediate review by the Commission594, 595.
            (iii)   The Chief shall assign all members of the regular divisions
to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties596.
         (iv)   The Chief shall provide monthly reports to the Police
Commission and, through the Director of Finance, the Legislative Council and
Finance Commission pertaining to overtime expenditures for the prior completed
month and all reasons and legal authority for said overtime. Said reports shall
commence on the fifteenth (15th) day of January 2023 and the fifteenth (15th)
day of every month thereafter.
   B.   The Fire Department.
      (1)   The Fire Department shall consist of the regular and volunteer
divisions which shall be responsible for the protection of life and property in
the Town from fire and other like disasters and emergencies, and for the
enforcement of all Laws, Ordinances, and regulations relating to fire
prevention and fire safety597.
      (2)   The Fire Chief - Powers and Duties598. The head of the Fire
Department shall be the Fire Chief who shall be responsible for the general
management and operations of the Fire Department. In this regard, the Chief
shall propose, in writing, policies, rules and regulations concerning the
general management and operations of said Department and the conduct of all its
members, subject to approval by the Fire Commission599.
         (a)   Appointment600.  The Mayor shall appoint the Fire Chief as set
forth in §
8-2.B of this Charter; however, the Chief may be removed from office in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes 601. The Fire Chief
shall hold office until Completion of Service or until a successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified 602.
         (b)   Qualifications603. The Fire Chief shall meet the requirements,
qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in the General Statutes
and required by the Town in accordance with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities.   
            (i)   The Fire Chief shall assign all members of the regular
divisions to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties604.
            (ii)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the training,
efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the regular and volunteer divisions
and for the care and custody of all property used by the Department605.
            (iii)   The Fire Chief shall consult with the Fire Commission on
the general management of the Department, including, but not limited to, prior
consultation on budgetary matters and as otherwise required by §
8-1.C of this Charter606;
            (iv)   The Fire Chief may discipline members of the Department for
violation of rules and regulations of the Department, where applicable in
accordance with the General Statutes607.
            (v)   Any such disciplinary action may be appealed by the
individual to the Fire Commission. The appeal of such disciplinary action shall
stay the imposition of the discipline until the appeal is decided by the
Commission unless the Chief finds that immediate suspension with pay is
required to ensure the public safety, which finding is subject to immediate
review by the Commission608.
            (vi)   The Fire Chief shall provide monthly reports to: (a) the
Fire Commission and, through the Director of Finance, to the Legislative
Council and Finance Commission pertaining to overtime expenditures for the
prior completed month and the reasons and legal authority for said overtime;
and, (b) the Legislative Council and Fire Commission pertaining to inspection
reports. Said financial reports shall commence on the fifteenth (15th) day of
January 2023 and the fifteenth (15th) day of every month thereafter.
      (3)   The Fire Marshal609. The Fire Marshal(s) and Deputy Fire Marshal(s)
shall be appointed as set forth in §
7-2.E(3)(d) of this Charter 610.
      (4)   Volunteer Companies611. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed
to affect the organization, status or property of the active volunteer fire
companies. Whenever regular and volunteer companies are acting together, they
shall be under the command of the ranking officer of the regular Fire
Department present at the scene.
   C.   Health and Human Services Departments.
      (1)   Generally612. Departments 613 responsible for human services shall
be established by Ordinance, in accordance with 8-2 of this Charter. Said
Departments shall (1) be charged with key human service functions such as
community and social services, recreation and other related services; and, (2)
always have in place up-to-date action plans to address the needs of families,
children, youth, adults and the elderly. These plans shall be implemented in
close coordination with the appropriate Federal and State offices and with
other pertinent private and public agencies.
      (2)   The Health District614. Under provisions of the General Statutes
governing Health Districts, the Town is authorized to enter into such a
District. Any provisions of this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, if
such a District is joined, it shall act in place of the Health Department and
the District Director shall act as Health Director for the Town.
         (a)   At the time of the adoption of this Charter in 2011 and 2022,
the Town was party to an agreement utilizing the services of the Quinnipiack
Valley Health District. Said continued utilization of the services of the
Health District is subject to the approval of the Town.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may choose to provide
health services to its residents in any manner as may be granted by the General
Statutes.
                                        
581   1983 Charter Chapter X.
582   Charter Revision of 2011.
583   1983 Charter §
10-1.
584   1983 Charter §
10-1 (first sentence).
585   1983 Charter §
10-1 (second sentence).
586   1983 Charter §
10-1 (third sentence).
587   2022 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-2.
588   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-2 (second sentence).
589   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-2 (first sentence); in lieu of the following: "...shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Council and shall be subject to removal
subject to the provisions of the General Statutes".
590   C.G.S. 7-278 entitled "Hearing prior to dismissal of municipal police
head. Just cause requirement. Appeal".
591   Charter Revision of 2011. Consistent with current practice.
592   Charter Revision of 2011.
593   2022 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-2 (third sentence).
594   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-2 (second and fourth through sixth sentences).
595   1983 Charter §
10-4 is repealed, as follows: "Dog Warden. The Mayor shall appoint and may
remove a Dog Warden and such assistants as may be necessary whose term of
office and duties shall be as provided by the General Statutes. The Animal
Control Officer shall be responsible to the Police Chief in the performance of
these duties".
596   Charter Revision of 2011.
597   1983 Charter §
10-7.
598   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-8 (first sentence) by adding the following clause: "who shall be responsible
for the operation of the Fire Department and shall propose rules and
regulations concerning the operation of said Department and the conduct of all
its members, subject to approval by the Fire Commission".
599   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (third sentence).
600   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
10-8; in lieu of the following: "...who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject
to the approval of the Council and shall be subject to removal subject to the
provisions of the General Statutes".
601   See, C.G.S. 7-302 entitled "Hearing prior to dismissal of fire department
head. Appeal".
602   Charter Revision of 2011. Consistent with current practice.
603   Charter Revision of 2011.
604   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (second sentence).
605   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (fourth sentence).
606   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (fifth sentence), by adding the following in lieu of the "affairs of the
Fire Department": "...general management of the Department, including, but not
limited to, prior consultation on budgetary matters and as otherwise required
by §
8-1.C (2) of this Charter".
607   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (sixth sentence).
608   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
10-8 (seventh and eighth sentences).
609   Charter Revision of 2011.
610   See, C.G.S. 29-297 entitled "Appointment of local fire marshals, deputies
and provisional fire marshals".
611   1983 Charter §
10-10.
612   2022 modification of 2011 §
8-5.D.
613   "Department" includes "and agencies".
614   2022 recodification of 2011 §
8-5.C derived from 2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
11-3. 1983 Charter §§ 11-1 and 11-2 repealed.
SECTION 8-6: GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE615.
   A.   Department of Public Works and Parks616.
      (1)   Powers617. The Department of Public Works and Parks shall, except
as otherwise supplemented by the Legislative Council, have supervision and
control of the planning, constructing and reconstructing, altering, paving,
repaving, maintaining, cleaning, lighting and inspecting of all Town
infrastructure, including, but not limited to, streets, bridges, parkways,
public drains, sidewalks and curbs, sanitation, trees, buildings and grounds
and fleet maintenance 618. Unless otherwise authorized and agreed to by the
Mayor and the Legislative Council, the Department shall be responsible for
controlling, maintaining, developing, operating and managing all public
grounds, buildings, equipment and facilities provided by the Town for park
purposes 619.
         (a)   Any provision of this section to the contrary not withstanding,
the Department of Public Works and Parks may maintain and care for school
buildings and grounds, but only if and to the extent and for the period
requested by the Board of Education and approved by the Council, provided the
costs are charged against the Board of Education's appropriations620, 621.
      (2)   Director of Public Works and Parks622. The head of the Department
shall be the Director of Public Works and Parks, who shall exercise the powers
and duties of the Department under the direction of the Mayor 623.
         (a)   Appointment624. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Public
Works and Parks as set forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter. The Director of Public Works and Parks shall serve a
term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions
of §§
3-10.A(2) and
8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.
         (b)   Qualifications625.  The Director of Public Works and Parks shall
be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications or
experience. Said qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted
professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as developed
pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees626. Subject to the Merit
System, except as hereinafter provided, the Director shall appoint and may
remove all other employees of the Department.
         (d)   Tree Warden627. The Director of Public Works and Parks shall
supervise the tree warden, with all the powers and duties provided by Law.
         (e)   Additional Park functions. The Director shall (i) perform such
park duties as the Mayor may direct; (ii) consult with any Board or Commission
established to address park and/ or recreational functions 628; (iii) prepare
regulations for the use of said park facilities for recreational programs; and,
(iv) recommend, to the Department Head responsible for recreational activities,
the fees to be charged for such use 629, 630.
   B.   Engineering Department631.
      (1)   Powers632. The Department shall be responsible for providing
professional engineering services to assist in maintaining and improving the
Town's infrastructure. Moreover, the Department shall provide or supervise
planning, surveying, design, and construction administration and inspection
services for the Town's capital improvement projects, including highway,
bridge, storm drainage, and other municipal infrastructure projects.
      (2)   The Town Engineer633. The head of the Department shall be the Town
Engineer who shall, under the Charter and Ordinances, be subject to the general
direction of the Mayor in all matters concerning the engineering needs of the
Town. The director shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good
conduct of the Department and have direct supervision of the members of the
Department.
         (a)   Appointment634. The Mayor shall appoint the Town Engineer as set
forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter. The Town Engineer shall serve a term coterminous with
that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§
3-10.A (2) and
8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.
         (b)   Qualifications. Said Town Engineer shall be a professional
engineer licensed or certificated by the State in accordance with the General
Statutes, experienced in the active practice of the profession 635.
Furthermore, said qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted
professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as developed
pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter 636.
         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees637. The Town Engineer shall
have charge of all engineering work of the Town and shall appoint (subject to
the provisions of the Merit System) and remove such other assistants as may be
required.
         (d)   Responsibilities638. The Town Engineer shall be responsible to
the Mayor and shall have the duty of advising the Department of Public Works
and Parks and any other Board, Commission or Department 639 concerning
engineering problems.
                                        
615   Charter Revision of 2011.
616   1983 Charter Chapter VII. Recreation function is hereby repealed.
617   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
7-1, by adding the following clause: "all Town infrastructure, including, but
not limited to..."
618   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
7-1 (first sentence).
619   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
9-1 by deleting "recreation" purposes (first sentence, first clause).
620   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
7-1 (second sentence).
621   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
9-1 (first sentence, second clause). The current provision is within the
Department of Parks and Recreation and, with respect to facilities and grounds,
reads "...except those under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education which
may be used by the Department of Parks and Recreation with the consent of the
Board of Education". This provision recognizes that the town owns the
facilities and property; although recognizes the practical reality that the
management of Education grounds and facilities is maintained by employees of
the Board of Education, within their budget. Hence, the need for a policy
following consultation with the Board of Education.
622   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-2.
623   Consistent with 1983 Charter §
7-2 (fourth sentence) by replacing "supervision" with "direction".
624   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-2 (first sentence); in lieu of the following: "...shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Council and may be removed by the Mayor".
625   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-2 (second sentence) with the addition of the following: "Said qualifications
shall be in accord with nationally accepted professional standards and best
practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to 8-2.F of this
Charter."
626   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-2 (third sentence).
627   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-2 (fifth paragraph).
628   Modification of 1983 Charter §
9-2 (sixth sentence).
629   Modification of 1983 Charter §
9-2 (fourth sentence).
630    9-2 (first, second and third paragraphs) is repealed.
631   Charter Revision of 2011.
632   Charter Revision of 2011.
633   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-3.
634   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-3, in lieu of the following: "The Mayor shall appoint and may remove, subject
to the merit provisions of this Charter, a professional engineer..."
635   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-3 (first sentence, first clause).
636   Charter Revision of 2011.
637   Modification of 1983 Charter §
7-3 (first sentence, second clause).
638   1983 Charter §
7-3 (second sentence).
639   "Department" includes "...or agency".
SECTION 8-7: TOWN PLANNING, ZONING ENFORCEMENT, ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT640.
   A.   Town Planning and Zoning Enforcement Responsibilities641. There shall
be Department(s) established for the coordination of the planning and zoning
functions, including, but not limited to the master plan or plan of development
(or the successor planning requirements), building code inspection and
enforcement, building zone regulations, subdivision regulation, the renewal
activities and the capital planning activities of the Town. Each of these
Departments shall be constituted to perform such functions and have such powers
and duties as are imposed by the General Statutes, Special Acts, this Charter
and the Ordinances. The directors of each Department established by Ordinance
shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter generally applicable to
Department Heads 642.
   B.   Building Department643.
      (1)   Powers644. The Department shall be responsible for administering
and enforcing the State of Connecticut Building Code and the provisions of the
General Statutes and regulations that govern residential, commercial and
industrial construction. Moreover, the Department shall assist the Fire and
Police departments in emergency situations pertaining to enforcement of the
provisions of the Building Code.
      (2)   Building Official645. The head of the Department shall be the
Building Official who shall perform such duties as may be required by Law.
         (a)   Appointment646. The Mayor shall appoint and may remove the
Building Official, subject to the provisions of the General Statutes and, if
consistent therewith and applicable thereto, the Merit System 647. In
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes, the Building Official
shall hold office for the prescribed term, subject to reappointment, or until a
successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified 648.
         (b)   Qualifications649. Said Building Official shall meet the
qualification650 and license requirements 651 as set forth in the General
Statutes 652 and meet such education, training and experience in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable
field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees653. Said Building Official
may appoint and may remove, subject to the provisions of the Merit System, such
assistants as may be necessary.
   C.   The Town Planning and Zoning Department654.
      (1)   Powers655. The Department shall, except as otherwise supplemented
by the Legislative Council, be responsible for ensuring appropriate development
and adaptation to changes of the built environment; protecting the Town's
natural resources; updating and enforcing zoning, inland wetland and water
course, subdivision, aquifer protection, flood plain, village district
regulations; processing applications for land use; providing oversight of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Inland Wetland and
Water Course Commission, and other Commissions or Boards that fall within the
purview of the Department; and enforcing the Anti-Blight and Property
Maintenance and related Ordinances of the Town.
      (2)   The Town Planner656. The Town Planner shall be the head of Town
Planning and Zoning Department 657 and shall have the duty of advising the
Mayor and the Town Planning and Zoning Commission concerning a comprehensive
plan of development 658. The Town Planner shall have the duty of advising the
Town Planning and Zoning Commission, and any other Commission or Department 659
concerning the effect of any actions it may take on said comprehensive plan
660. The Town Planner shall be responsible to the Mayor 661.
         (a)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Town Planner as set
forth in §
8-2.A of this Charter 662. The Town Planner shall serve a term coterminous with
that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§
3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed
and shall have qualified663.
         (b)   Qualifications664.  The Town Planner shall be a graduate
municipal planner or otherwise professionally qualified by training or
experience, including but not limited to any certifications by professional
organizations in the planning field 665, 666. Said qualifications shall be in
accord with nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in
the applicable field as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of this Charter.
         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees667. Subject to the
provisions of the Merit System, the Town Planner may appoint and may remove all
other employees of the Department.
      (3)   Zoning Enforcement Officer668. The Town Planner669 shall appoint
and may remove subject to the provisions of the Merit System a Zoning
Enforcement Officer who shall be responsible for the enforcement of zoning
regulations and have such other duties as the Council may prescribe.
   D.   Other Departments670. There shall be established by Ordinance,
Departments 671 of the Town in accordance with §
8-2 of this Charter charged with the administration of programs pertaining to
the environmental, economic development and planning needs of the Town.
                                        
640   Charter Revision of 2011.
641   Charter Revision of 2011.
642   Charter Revision of 2011.
643   Charter Revision of 2011.
644   Charter Revision of 2011.
645   1983 Charter §
10-5 (first sentence).
646   Modification of 1983 Charter §
10-5 (first sentence). This modification recognizes that the General Statutes
are applicable and should be taken into account during the hiring and removal
processes.
647   See, C.G.S. 29-260 (Formerly Sec. 19-396) entitled "Municipal building
official to administer code. Appointment. Dismissal."
648   See, C.G.S. 29-260. (Formerly Sec. 19-396) entitled "Municipal building
official to administer code. Appointment. Dismissal."
649   Charter Revision of 2011.
650   See. C.G.S. 29-261 (Formerly Sec. 19-397) entitled "Qualifications of
building official and assistant building officials. Powers and duties. Return
of building plans and specifications".
651   See, C.G.S. 29-262 (Formerly Sec. 19-397a) entitled "Licensure of
building officials. Continuing educational programs. Suspension or revocation
of license or certificate. Hearing. Appeal. Indemnification". See also, C.G.S.
29-251b re Building Code Training Council.
652   Building Board of Appeals. The purpose of the Building Board of Appeals
is to serve as an appellate board to owners whose mode or manner of
construction in creating or altering a building has been rejected by the
building official's approval. The owner must write their appeal to the board,
after which the board decides whether the person has a right to an appeal
hearing or not. After an appeal has been accepted by the board, the chairman
then shall appoint at least three board members to a panel to hear the case.
Following the result of the hearing the Board informs the building official and
the owner of their findings. If the owner is still not pleased with the ruling
of the board they have the option to appeal to the Codes and Standards
Committee within 14 days of the ruling. The overall goal of the board is to
ensure that the public has a forum to express concerns if they feel they are
being treated unfairly in the building process. The Commission works to make
sure both sides are heard to thus ensuring a decision that both sides can work
with in the future. This board consists of five members, with no more than
three of the same political party. This is a five-year appointment, which is
recommended by the Mayor and subject to the approval of the Legislative
Council. Meetings are scheduled as needed.
653   1983 Charter §
10-5 (second sentence).
654   Charter Revision of 2011.
655   Charter Revision of 2011.
656   1983 Charter § 13-4.
657   1983 Charter § 13-4 (third sentence).
658   1983 Charter § 13-4 (third sentence).
659   "Department" shall include "...or agency".
660   1983 Charter § 13-4 (fourth sentence).
661   1983 Charter § 13-4 (second sentence).
662   Modification of 1983 Charter § 13-4 (first sentence); in lieu of the
following: "...subject to the approval of the Council and may be removed by the
Mayor".
663   Charter Revision of 2011.
664   Modification of 1983 Charter § 13-4 (second sentence).
665   AICP Certification Requirements. See www.planning.org/certification/
eligible.htm.
666    Modification of 1983 Charter § 15-2.
667   1983 Charter § 13-4 (fifth sentence).
668   Modification of 1983 Charter § 13-5 by replacing appointment by the
"Mayor" with "Town Planner".
669   In lieu of "the Mayor".
670   Charter Revision of 2011.
671   "Department" includes "and agencies".
CHAPTER IX: DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION672
672   2022 modification of 1983 Charter Chapter XII (add: "Department of").
                                        
SECTION 9-1: BOARD OF EDUCATION673.
   A.   Board of Education Established. There shall be a Board of Education
consisting of the Mayor, ex-officio, and nine (9) Electors of the Town, elected
as set forth in §
3-3 of this Charter 674.
   B.   Said Board shall have all the powers conferred and imposed by the
General Statutes on boards of education in respect to the control and
management of schools and the Town s Department of Education675.
SECTION 9-2: BUDGET676.
   The Board of Education shall submit its budget to the Mayor at the same time
as other Departments of the Town. If the Board receives an appropriation
greater or less than its original request, it shall forthwith revise its
estimates of expenditure in accordance therewith and file a copy thereof with
the Mayor and with the Council. The Board shall report monthly to the Mayor and
to the Council a comparison of actual and estimated expenditures. The Director
of Finance shall keep a full and complete record of all financial transactions
of the Board of Education.
SECTION 9-3: COMPLIANCE AND COOPERATION677.
   The Board of Education and Department of Education shall cooperate with the
Mayor, Legislative Council, Finance Commission and other Departments, Boards
and Commission of the Town as set forth in this Charter and as otherwise
required by Law; including, but not limited to the following provisions of the
Charter: §
3-3.A(1) and (2); §
3-3.B(1); §
3-3.C(1); §
3-3.E; §
3-5.C; § 5-6.C(6); §§
7-2.A(1)(c) and (2)(e); §
8-4.D(3) and (4); §
8-4.E(3)(c)(1); §
8-6.A(1)(a) and Chapter X. including but not limited to §
10-3.G.
                                        
673   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
12-1. Provisions pertaining to the election of members of the Board of
Education moved to Charter III.
674   2011 modification of 1983 Charter §
12-1 (first and tenth sentences) entitled "Board of Education".
675   2022 modification of 1983 Charter §
12-1 (twelfth sentence) entitled "Board of Education".
676   1983 Charter §
12-2.
677   NEW (2022).
SECTION 9-4: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS678.
   Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by the General Statutes, commencing
on the 1st day of July and every quarter thereafter, the Board of Education
shall file with the Mayor and Legislative Council, a quarterly report on all
contracts (including, agreements, memoranda of understanding, memoranda or
agreement, letters of understanding, side letters and other agreements) entered
into on behalf of the Town, including but not limited to, those executed within
the budget limits or other authority established by the Legislative Council
and/or the Board of Education; however, excluding all such contracts (as
defined in this subsection) as may be exempted from disclosure by federal or
state Law or otherwise not capable of redaction in order to protect statutory
privacy rights of individuals.
                                        
678   NEW (2022).
CHAPTER X: BUDGET679
679   1983 Charter Chapter XVIII.
                                        
SECTION 10-1: THE BUDGET PROCESS680.
   A.   Cooperation of Town Officials and Employees681. The Mayor, the Board of
Education, the Finance Commission and Legislative Council are required to work
together, in good faith, throughout the year in order to develop and approve a
municipal budget which shall include all expected revenues and expenditures
and, for the purposes of short- and long-term financial planning, including
detailed estimates of revenues, capital expenses and operating expenses all as
required by this Charter and any Ordinances pertaining thereto. Each of these
Public Officials and employees of the Town are required to utilize best
practices in the field of municipal and public finance, in order to comply with
Law and with the generally accepted accounting principles (or such successor
policies thereto) and shall embrace principles of accountability, transparency
and outreach in order to expand public participation, engagement and trust in
the budgetary process of the Town.
   B.   Budget Liaison682. On and after the Effective Date there shall be a
Budget Liaison, which shall be appointed by the President of the Legislative
Council. Said Liaison shall assist the Legislative Council and Finance
Commission in the functions set forth in this provision, as may be amplified by
Ordinance.
      Transition Provision. At the time of the Effective Date and until the
President appoints said Liaison, the Director of Finance at the request of and
following consultation with the President of the Legislative Council, shall
assign an employee as said Liaison.
      (1)   Qualifications. The Budget Liaison shall be qualified by education,
training and experience in public administration and public finance as well as
additional qualifications as may be established by Ordinance and in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices.
      (2)   Role of the Budget Liaison. The Budget Liaison shall serve as the
liaison to the Department of Finance and, as such, shall assist the Legislative
Council and Finance Commission in carrying out the provisions of this Charter
pertaining to budget development, implementation and oversight. In particular,
said Liaison shall assist the Commission and Council, in its interactions with
the Mayor, as follows:
         (a)   developing and executing the Town Budget (capital and
operating), including the budgets of the Town's internal service, special
revenue funds and enterprise funds, if any;
         (b)   providing any information pertaining to federal and state
revenue estimates and any potential adjustments;
         (c)   conferring with the Chair of the Commission and President of the
Council or their designees with budget related questions or concerns throughout
the fiscal year;
         (d)   assisting the Commission in its reporting function and the
Council in its oversight function pertaining to budgetary compliance;
         (e)   assisting the Council on all matters pertaining to all budgetary
transfer requests submitted for legislative action; and,
         (f)   assisting the Commission and the Council, preferably in concert,
in developing combined methods and means of communicating with the residents of
the Town in order to expand public participation, engagement and trust in the
budgetary process including electronic posting of financial documents and
information as well as enhanced opportunities for public participation
throughout the year.
   Said Liaison shall be strictly accountable to the Commission and Legislative
Council. The Mayor, Board of Education and Director of Finance are required to
provide the Budget Liaison with all financial and budgetary information and
data that is not otherwise deemed confidential or exempt from disclosure under
Law.
                                        
680   NEW (2022).
681   NEW (2022).
682   NEW (2022).
SECTION 10-2: FORMULATION AND SUBMISSION OF TOWN BUDGETARY REQUESTS683.
   A.   Submission of Budgetary Request684. At a time established by the Mayor,
following consultation with the Director of Finance and prior to the submission
of the general fund or operating and capital budget of the Mayor to the Finance
Commission/Council, each Department 685 of the Town supported wholly or in part
of Town funds, including the Board of Education, shall submit to the Director
of Finance at such time in such form and containing such information as the
Director of Finance may require, a budgetary request showing services,
activities and work accomplished during the next fiscal year and to be
accomplished during the ensuing four (4) fiscal years.
   B.   Contents of Budgetary Request686. The budgetary request shall include a
detailed estimate of the expenditures to be made by the Department 687, and the
revenue, other than tax revenues, to be collected in the next and four (4)
succeeding fiscal years, or as may be otherwise required by Law and such other
information as may be required by the Council, the Mayor, the Finance
Commission or the Director of Finance.
   Forms provided by the Director of Finance for the itemized estimates of
income and expenditures shall require no less than the following data688:
      (1)   an itemization of all proposed expenditures for services or
administration to be provided, including manpower and monetary requirements689;
      (2)   comparative figures for: (a) actual or estimated income, other than
income from tax revenues, and expenditures for the current fiscal year; and,
(b) actual income, other than income from tax revenues, and expenditures for
the preceding fiscal year, and proposed expenditures for current operations
during the ensuing fiscal year690;
      (3)   estimates of the cost of capital projects pending or which should
be undertaken within the next and four (4) succeeding fiscal years, including a
detailed budget by project for expected Capital Expenditures in the next fiscal
year, shall be submitted by each Department691 annually in the form and manner
prescribed by the Director of Finance, under the authority of the Mayor692;
and,
      (4)   all special revenue, equity assistance and enterprise funds, if
any.
   These estimates for general fund or operating budget and capital projects
shall be public records and open for inspection at reasonable times.
                                        
683   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-1 derived from 1983 Charter § 18-1.
684   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-1.A derived from 1983
Charter § 18-1 (first paragraph, first sentence).
685     Department" includes "..., office or agency".
686    2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-1.B derived from 1983
Charter § 18-1 (second paragraph, first sentence).
687   "Department" includes "..., office or agency".
688   1983 Charter § 18-1 (third paragraph).
689   1983 Charter § 18-1.1).
690   1983 Charter § 18-1 2) a. and b.
691   "Department" includes "... office or agency".
692   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-2.C (second sentence).
1983 Charter § 18-2 (third paragraph, second sentence).
SECTION 10-3: MAYOR SUBMITS PROPOSED TOWN BUDGET TO THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND
FINANCE COMMISSION693.
   A.   Mayor Transmits Proposed Town Budget to the Legislative Council and
Finance Commission694. Annually, not later than the eighteenth (18th) Day of
March ("Budget Transmittal"), the Mayor, having reviewed or revised the
budgetary requests outlined in 10-1 of this Charter and following consultation
with the Director of Finance, shall present to the Legislative Council and
Finance Commission a budget that shall consist of the capital projects budget
and the proposed general fund or operating budget for the next fiscal year
(including the Board of Education) and detailed budget estimates (i.e.,
estimates of revenues, Capital Expenditures, and general fund or operating
expenses) for each of the four fiscal years thereafter ("Proposed Town
Budget").
   B.   Contents of the Proposed Town Budget I: The General Fund or Operating
Budget (including the Board of Education)695. The Proposed General Fund or
Operating Budget shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Itemization of all anticipated revenue, including from sources
other than the tax levy. The revenue estimates shall present, in parallel
columns that are itemized,
         (a)   Actual revenues collected in the last completed fiscal year;
         (b)   Revenues collected during the current fiscal year prior to the
time of preparing the estimates;
         (c)   Approved revenue for the current fiscal year;
         (d)   Estimated revenue to be collected during the current fiscal
year;
         (e)   Estimated revenue to be collected during the ensuing fiscal
year; and,
         (f)   Itemized average annual income from each source for the past
five years setting forth recurring and non-recurring revenues.
      The Legislative Council may, by Ordinance, establish criteria that the
Mayor must use for estimating cash receipts from sources other than the tax
levy.
      (2)   Itemized estimates of expenditures, presenting the actual
expenditures for each Department696 for the last completed fiscal year and for
the five (5) fiscal years prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total
expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year, and the requests of the
several Departments697 for the ensuing fiscal year.
      (3)   The contents of the Proposed Town Budget shall also contain698:
         (a)   an estimate of the available surplus or deficit, at the end of
the current fiscal year;
         (b)   proposed expenditures for debt service for the ensuing fiscal
year with a schedule of maturities of bond issues (debt analysis beyond the
duration of the five-year capital plan should be consistent with best
practices);
         (c)   the proposed property tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year;
         (d)   the amount required for interest on the Town debt, and for
maturing serial bonds and other maturing obligations, and other fixed charges,
and the amount required to fund pensions currently which amount shall be
determined by an independent actuary designated by the Mayor for that purpose
and shall not be subject to reduction or rejection by the Finance Commission or
the Legislative Council;
         (e)   the amount required to meet contractual provisions of collective
bargaining agreements (and other side agreements relating thereto) pertaining
to minimum mandatory workforce requirements;
         (f)   the recommendations of the Mayor and the Director of Finance of
the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for all items,
including those of the Board of Education (as outlined in §
10-3 of this Charter);
         (g)   such other information as the Finance Commission or Council may
require. The Mayor shall report to the Council the reason for all such
recommendations; and,
         (h)   The proposed goals and objectives of the Town and expenditures
for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund
by organization unit, and program purpose or activity, and the method of
financing such expenditures.
   C.   Contents of the Proposed Town Budget II: Capital Projects Budget
(including the Board of Education)699. The Proposed Capital Projects Budget for
the next and for four succeeding fiscal years thereafter 700 shall include the
recommendations of the Mayor for those expenditures to be undertaken during the
ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing the same 701 as well as the
following information:
      (1)   A detailed estimate of the cost of each proposed project, listed
according to the Department, Board or Commission or agency of the Town
principally concerned with the project, which are expected to be commenced in
the next fiscal year;
      (2)   A statement as to any off-setting reimbursements, such as state or
federal grants anticipated in connection with the project;
      (3)   Such comparison with any prior year's appropriation for capital
projects as the Mayor considers advisable, or the Finance Commission or
Legislative Council shall have requested;
      (4)   A report summarizing the status of each previously approved capital
project stating those which have been completed, and the balance of any
unexpended bond funds available with recommendations for either redemption of
bonds or other capital projects use; and
      (5)   Any other information the Mayor believes to be pertinent, or which
is requested by the Finance Commission or Legislative Council.
      The recommended method of financing proposed by the Mayor shall not be
binding on the Finance Commission or the Legislative Council as to the method
of financing any recommended project.
   D.   Contingency Appropriation702. The Mayor's Proposed General Fund or
Operating Budget may include an appropriation the purpose of which is to fund
unanticipated or unforeseeable expenses of the Town during the fiscal year. No
portion of this appropriation may be used to fund additional operating expenses
of a recurring nature, although it may be used to fund unanticipated
incremental increases of ordinary operating expenses.
   E.   Special, Enterprise Equity Assistance703 Funds. The Mayor, following
consultation with the Finance Director and Finance Commission, is required to
recommend and the Legislative Council is required to consider and act upon
policies pertaining to special funds or special revenue fund, equity assistance
fund and enterprise funds, in accordance with best practices, in particular the
standards of the Government Accounting Standards Board or its successor.
   F.   Required Actions of the Mayor and Legislative Council. The Mayor,
following consultation with the Finance Director and the Finance Commission, is
required to recommend and the Legislative Council is required to consider and
act upon Ordinances establishing the following formal policies:
      (1)   Fund Balance Ordinance704. Defining the level of unrestricted fund
balance that should be maintained in the general or operating fund for GAAP and
budgetary purposes as well as the procedures required for the withdrawal and
use of said funds.
      (2)   Equity Fund Ordinance. Defining the level of funding and methods of
allocation of such funds, to address issues of equity, justice and inclusion
for the people of the Town in accordance with the scope, priorities and
recommendations of the Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Commission.
      Transition Language Pertaining to §
10-3.F(1) - (2). The required Ordinances shall be adopted by the Legislative
Council not later than the first (1st) day of February 2023.
   G.   Public Inspection705. At the time of Budget Transmittal, the Mayor
shall make available for public inspection in the Town Clerk's Office and the
library system several copies of the Proposed Town Budget and all supportive
material and supplements which are available to the Council, in accordance with
the Public Notice provisions of this Charter. (See, 1-4.R). The Proposed Town
Budget shall also be available for remote public inspection and accessible for
the public through such electronic or digital platform either currently in
existence or those to be created in the future (See, 9-3).
   H.   Mayor's Budget Message706. On or before the eighteenth (18th) Day of
March the Mayor shall transmit a budget message to the Legislative Council. The
Mayor's Budget Message is required to address the following:
      (1)   Explanation of the Proposed Town Budget both in fiscal terms and in
terms of work programs, including any major changes from the current fiscal
year budget and any changes in expenditures and revenues (together with the
reasons for such changes);
      (2)   Outline of the proposed financial policies of the Town government
for the ensuing year;
      (3)   Description of the important features of the budget - including
major changes from the current fiscal year;
      (4)   Summary of the Town's debt position, including a statement of the
bonds to mature and the interest payable on bonds outstanding;
      (5)   Explanation of the assumptions that were taken into account for any
and all financial forecasts and estimates of expenditures or revenues in the
Proposed Town Budget, including the amount required to meet contractual
provisions of collective bargaining agreements pertaining to workforce
requirements707;
      (6)   Explanation of the provisions of the Proposed Town Budget that
comply with and advance the objectives of the plan of conservation and
development required by the General Statutes and the Long Term Finance Plan
required by this Charter708;
      (7)   Presentation of the reasons for all recommendations shall include a
statement from the Board of Education setting forth their reasons for their
budget recommendation following the same form and procedure with respect to the
detailed estimate for the education department as required of the Mayor under
this Charter for other departmental estimates709; and,
      (8)   Such other material as the Mayor deems desirable710.
                                        
693   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-2 derived from 1983
Charter § 18-2.
694   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-2.A derived from 983
Charter § 18-2 (first paragraph, first sentence). The inserted date replaces
the following: "...not later than one hundred five (105) days before the end of
the fiscal year."
695   2022 modification and recodification of 1983 Charter § 18-2.B (second
paragraph, first sentence).
696   "Department" includes "..., office or agency".
697   "Department" includes "..., office or agency".
698   1983 Charter § 18-2 (second paragraph, second sentence items 1-5).
699   2022 modification of 2011 § 10-2.C entitled "Proposed Capital
Expenditures".
700   1983 Charter § 18-2 (third paragraph, first sentence).
701   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-2.C (third sentence). Derived from 1983
Charter § 18-2 (third paragraph, third sentence).
702   NEW (2022).
703   Comment of the 2022 Charter Revision Commission: An "equity assistance
fund" is a fund to be used exclusively to assist efforts that reduce inequity
based on race, gender or economic status in the town; requiring the annual
budget to include a specified appropriation for the equity assistance fund."
The City of Baltimore adopted in 2018.
704   NEW (2022).
705   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-2.D. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 18-
2 (fourth paragraph, first and second sentences).
706   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-2.A (1) - (5) derived
from 1983 Charter § 18-2 (first paragraph, first sentence).
707   NEW (2022).
708   NEW (2022).
709   NEW (2022).
710   2022 modification of 1983 Charter § 18-2 (first paragraph, items 1-5).
SECTION 10-4: DELIBERATIONS ON THE PROPOSED TOWN BUDGET711.
   A.   Public Hearings by Legislative Council.
      (1)   Initial Public Hearing712. The Legislative Council, or a designated
committee of jurisdiction, shall conduct an initial public hearing on the
Proposed Town Budget (as formulated by the Mayor and the Board of Education)
pertaining to the public service components and work programs of the Proposed
Town Budget. Said hearing shall be held on or before the eighth (8th) day of
April after three (3) Days Public Notice. At that time any Elector or taxpayer
may have an opportunity to be heard regarding the Proposed Town Budget 713. At
that time any Elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be heard regarding
the Proposed Town Budget 714.
      Following said hearing the Legislative Council, or a designated committee
of jurisdiction is required to commence review of the public service components
and work programs set forth in the Proposed Town Budget.
      (2)   Final Public Hearing715. The Legislative Council, or a designated
committee of jurisdiction shall conduct a final public hearing following the
filing of recommendations by the Finance Commission and prior to final
deliberations on the Proposed Town Budget. The Council or said committee
thereof may conduct public hearings throughout the budget process on its own
motion.
      (3)   Additional Public Hearings716. The Council, or a designated
committee of jurisdiction, shall hold such additional public hearings as it
deems necessary.
      (4)   Meeting Notice717. The Council shall cause to be issued a Meeting
Notice (including a general summary of the Proposed Town Budget) for one or
more Public Hearings on the Proposed Town Budget as required by Law.
      (5)   Public Inspection718. In accordance with the Public Notice
provisions of this Charter and as otherwise may be required by Law (See, 1-
4.R), the Council shall make available for general distribution to the public
of the Town of Hamden, copies of the Proposed Town Budget including the Board
of Education budget in detail, containing the Mayor's proposals regarding
revenues and expenditures, the comparative figures for the current fiscal year,
and the amount to be raised by taxation.
      (6)   Modification of the Proposed Town Budget719. After the Public
Hearing(s) on the Proposed Town Budget, the Council may add or increase
programs or amounts and may delete or decrease programs or amounts, except that
no items of expenditure required by Law or for debt service may be deleted or
decreased. The Proposed Town Budget, as modified by the Legislative Council,
shall include a narrative of the assumptions and estimates relied upon by the
Legislative Council.
   B.   Deliberations by the Finance Commission720. The Finance Commission is
required to review the Proposed Town Budget in accordance with the
responsibilities under §
7-2A.(1)(a) of this Charter. Members of the Legislative Council committee of
jurisdiction shall be assigned by the President to participate in the
proceedings of the Finance Commission.
   C.   Transmittal of recommendations from the Finance Commission to
Legislative Council721. With respect to the Proposed Town Budget, the Finance
Commission shall, on or before the twenty-seventh (27th) day of April, transmit
its recommendations thereon to the Clerk of the Legislative Council in
accordance with its responsibilities under §
7-2A.(1)(a) of this Charter. The transmittal shall delineate its
recommendations referencing each of the applicable provisions of the Proposed
Town Budget.
      (1)   Finance Commission Statement on Estimates and Assumptions722. The
transmittal shall include the Finance Commission's analysis of the estimates
and assumptions contained in the expenditure and revenue lines of the budget in
accordance with and citing the best practices for municipal budget practices.
      (2)   Finance Commission Meeting with Legislative Council. At a date set
by the President of the Legislative Council, as soon as possible following
submission of the Mayor's Budget Message, the Finance Commission shall meet
with the Legislative Council or the committee of jurisdiction as set forth in
the call of the Meeting, to discuss their recommendations.
                                        
711   2022 amendment of 2011 § 10-2 derived from 1983 Charter § 18-2.
712   2022 modification of 1983 Charter § 18-3 (first paragraph, first
sentence). The inserted date replaces the following: "...sixty (60) days before
the end of the fiscal year". The 2022 change requires a hearing in early April
as opposed to not later than the 1st day of May.
713   Recodification of 2011 § 10-3.A (last clause).
714   Recodification of 2011 § 10-3.A (last clause).
715   NEW (2022).
716   NEW (2022).
717   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.A (1) which modified 1983 Charter §
18-3 (first paragraph, second sentence). The inserted date replaces the
following: "...At least five (5) days prior to said public hearing(s)".
Moreover, the term "Meeting Notice" is defined in the Charter thereby replacing
the specific delineation of notice requirements.
718   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.A (2). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-3 (first paragraph, third sentence).
719   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.A (3). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-3 (first paragraph, fourth sentence).
720   NEW (2022).
721   NEW (2022).
722   NEW (2022).
SECTION 10-5: LEGISLATIVE ACTION ON THE PROPOSED TOWN BUDGET.
   A.   Adoption of the Proposed Town Budget by the Legislative
Council723. Subject to the provisions of §
10-6 of this Charter, the Council shall adopt the Proposed Town Budget not
later than the fifth (5th) Day of June and shall make the same available for
public inspection in accordance with the Public Notice provisions of this
Charter ("Adopted Town Budget").
      (1)   Establishment of the Tax Levy724. At the time the Council adopts
said budget, it may also at said time or such later date as the General
Statutes may permit, fix the tax rate in mills, which shall be levied on the
taxable property in the Town for the ensuing fiscal year.
      (2)   Failure to Adopt a Town Budget725. Should the Council not have
adopted a Town Budget within the allotted time, the Proposed Town Budget, as
originally submitted by the Mayor, shall be deemed to have been adopted by the
Council as the Town Budget Ordinance and the Mayor shall have the right to
publish the tax rate and expenditures in accordance with the budget so adopted,
subject to the provisions of §
10-7 of this Charter726.
      (3)   Lapsed Funds.
         (a)   General or Operating Funds727. Any portion of an annual
appropriation unexpended and unencumbered at the close of a budget year shall
lapse.
         (b)   Capital Funds728. Appropriations for construction or other
permanent improvements, from whatever source made, shall not lapse until the
purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or
abandoned, provided any project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if five
(5) fiscal years elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the
appropriation therefor, provided, at the request of the Mayor, following
consultation with the Finance Commission, the Legislative Council may, at any
time by resolution, transfer any unencumbered balance or portion thereof from
one project to another.
                                        
723   2025 revision of section 10-5.A in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the date of budget adoption from May 17th to June 5th derived from the
2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.B which modified 1983 Charter § 18-3 (second
paragraph, first sentence). The inserted date replaces the following:
"...forty-five (45) days before the end of the fiscal year". In addition, the
reference to "Public Notice" as defined in the Charter replaces the language
pertaining to distribution at the library system.
724   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.B (1). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-3 (second paragraph, second sentence).
725   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.B (2). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-3 (second paragraph, third sentence).
726   The following provision of 1983 Charter § 18-3 (second paragraph, fourth,
fifth and sixth sentences) is repealed: "Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures
Fund. The Council may levy annually, a tax of not more than two mills to be
assessed upon the taxable property in the Town for the benefit of a fund to be
known as the "Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures Fund"726 to be used solely
to pay the cost of capital improvements for which the Town is authorized to
issue bonds. The Council shall have the power to transfer to this fund any
portion of the general fund cash surplus not otherwise appropriated.
Appropriations for construction or for other capital improvements shall not
lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been
accomplished or abandoned, provided any project shall be deemed to have been
abandoned if three fiscal years have elapsed without any expenditure from or
encumbrance of the appropriation."
727   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-3.B (3). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-3 (second paragraph, seventh sentence).
728   NEW (2022).
SECTION 10-6: APPROVAL, VETO, ACCEPTANCE AND VETO OVERRIDE OF THE ADOPTED TOWN
BUDGET.
   A.   Transmittal of Adopted Town Budget to Mayor729. Annually, the Adopted
Town Budget shall be transmitted to the Mayor by the Clerk of the Council not
later than the ninth (9th) Day of June.
   B.   Mayoral Action730. Not later than the twelfth (12th) Day of June, the
Mayor shall (a) approve; (b) fail to take action; or (c) veto the Adopted Town
Budget. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Mayor's veto power shall not extend
to appropriation items in the Town budget regarding debt service or the
auditing of Town Books and accounts731 . In the event the Mayor fails to take
action upon the Adopted Town Budget, the Town Clerk shall endorse such fact
upon the official copy of said Town Budget Ordinance732 .
   C.   Legislative Override of Mayoral Veto 733. The Adopted Town Budget
vetoed by the Mayor shall be returned within the two (2) Days to the Clerk of
the Council with a statement of the reasons for the veto.
      (1)   Following receipt of the Mayor's veto, but not later than the
eighteenth (18th) Day of June, any vetoed Adopted Town Budget, again approved
by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council present
and voting at a Meeting, shall become effective in accordance with this
section. At that time the Mayor shall have the right to publish the tax rate
and expenditures shall be made in accordance with the budget so adopted,
subject to the provisions of §
10-7 of this Charter.734
      (2)   In the event the Mayor's veto is sustained, the Proposed Town
Budget, as originally submitted by the Mayor, shall be deemed to have been
adopted by the Council as the Town Budget Ordinance and the Mayor shall have
the right to publish the tax rate and expenditures shall be made in accordance
with the budget so adopted, subject to the provisions of §
10-7 of this Charter.
   D.   Effective Date of Town Budget Ordinance735. The Town Budget Ordinance
shall become effective on the eleventh (11th) Day after Public Notice of Final
Action (unless otherwise required by Law); subject to the provisions of  §
10-7  of this Charter (See, §
1-4.R).
   E.   Public Notice736. Public Notice of Final Action shall be provided
within twenty-four (24) hours of Final Action, unless otherwise required by Law
(See, §
1-4.R).
                                        
729   2025 revision of section 10-6.A in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the budget transmittal date from not later than May 22nd to June 9th
derived from the 2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-4.A which modified 1983
Charter § 18-4 (second paragraph, first sentence).
730   2025 revision of section 10-6.B in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the date by which the Mayor must act on the budget from June 1st than
no later than June 12th derived from the 2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-4.A
(1) which modified 1983 Charter § 18-4 (first paragraph, first sentence and
second paragraph, second sentence).
731   1983 Charter § 18-4 (first paragraph, second sentence).
732   Charter Revision of 2011.
733   2025 revision of section 10-6.C in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the date by which the Mayor must return the veto message to the
Legislative Council from "within fifteen (15) Days" to "within two (2) Days" of
Mayoral action derived from the 2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-4.A (2) which
modified 1983 Charter § 18-4 (second paragraph, fourth and fifth sentence).
734   2025 revision of section 10-6.C(1) in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the date by which the Legislative Council must act to override the
Mayor's veto from "tenth (10th) Day of June" to "not later than the eighteenth
(18th) Day of June".
735   2025 revision of section 10-6.D in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the "Effective Date" from "the twenty-first (21st) Day after Public
Notice " to "the eleventh (11th ) Day after Public Notice" derived from the
2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-4.A (3) which modified 1983 Charter § 18-4
(second paragraph, third sentence), by repealing the following "...approved by
the Mayor and those accepted by the Mayor's not acting to approve or veto such
Town Budget within fifteen (15) days shall become effective in accordance with
this section".
736    2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-4.A (4).
SECTION 10-7: PETITION FOR BUDGET OVERRULE.
   A.   The Town Budget Ordinance, shall be subject to overrule. If within ten
(10) Days after Final Action on the budget as provided in §
10-6 of this Charter, a petition signed by not less than fifteen (15%) percent
of the Electors of the Town, as determined from the last official voting list,
is filed with the Town Clerk requesting a referendum, the Council shall, at its
next regular Meeting, fix a time not more than thirty (30) Days after such
Meeting for such election, which shall be called and held in the manner
provided by the General Statutes737.
      (1)   The Council may by a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of those present and
voting, add non-binding referenda to be on the ballot of such election738.
      (2)   The budget so referred to the Electors of the Town shall stand
approved unless a majority of those voting thereon at such election shall have
voted "no" and at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the Electors entitled to
vote on the question shall have voted 739.
   B.   Temporary financing and spending shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes740.
   C.   Failure of the Overrule741. In the event the conditions set forth in §
10-7.A (2) of this Charter are not achieved, the Final Action on the Adopted
Town Budget shall be effective immediately as the Town Budget Ordinance, upon
the certification of the election results.
   D.   Success of the Overrule742. In the event the conditions set forth in §
10-7.A (2) of this Charter are achieved, the Final Action on the Adopted Town
Budget shall be null and void. Within fifteen (15) Days thereafter, the
Legislative Council and the Mayor shall enact a Town Budget Ordinance in
accordance with procedures which shall be established by Ordinance. The
procedures shall include, at least one public hearing and, to the extent
practicable, follow the process set forth in §
10-5 and §
10-6 of this Charter along a compressed time-line; however, preserving the veto
and override authority as herein set forth. Moreover, in formulating the Town
Budget Ordinance, the Legislative Council and the Mayor shall take cognizance
of the results of the budget overrule.
                                        
737   2025 revision of section 10-7.A in accordance with C.G.S. §7-191b
changing the date by which petitions must be filed from twenty days to ten days
after Final Action on the Budget derived from the 2022 minor modification and
recodification of 2011 modification of 1983 Charter § 18-5 (first paragraph,
first and second sentences). The Commission reduced the threshold for petitions
to 15%.
738   2022 minor modification and recodification of 2011 modification of 1983
Charter § 18-5 (first paragraph, third sentence).
739   2022 minor modification and recodification of 2011 modification of 1983
Charter § 18-5 (first paragraph, fourth sentence).
740   2022 minor modification and recodification of 2011 modification of 1983
Charter § 18-5 (second paragraph) was changed in order to refer to the General
Statutes which governs in this instance. 1983 Charter § 18-6 is repealed in its
entirety since the issue is covered by the General Statutes.
741   2022 minor modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-5.C.
742   2022 minor modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-5.D.
SECTION 10-8: FISCAL YEAR743.
   The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first (1st) Day of July and
end on the thirtieth (30th) Day of June next following.
                                        
743   2022 recodification of 2011 §
10-6. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 18-7.
SECTION 10-9: EXPENDITURES AND ACCOUNTING.
   A.   Purchases, Payments, Authorization, Receipt of Funds. The Role of the
Director of Finance.
      (1)   No purchase shall be made on account of the Town except as
prescribed by this Charter. The Director of Finance shall record the amount of
authorized purchases and contracts for future purchases as encumbrances against
the appropriation from which they are to be paid744.
      (2)   No voucher, claim or charge against the Town shall be paid until
the same has been audited and approved by the Director of Finance or the
Director's agent for correctness and legality745. Checks shall be drawn by the
Director of Finance for the payment of approved claims.
      (3)   The Director of Finance shall prescribe the time at which and the
manner in which persons receiving money on account of the Town shall pay the
same to the Town746.
      (4)    In the absence or inability of the Director of Finance to act with
regard to the provisions of §
10-9.A of this Charter, the Mayor may designate a person to temporarily act in
place of the Director of Finance747.
   B.   The several Departments748, Commissions and Boards of the Town,
including the Board of Education, shall not involve the Town in any obligation
to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated therefore
until the matter has been approved and voted by the Council749.
   C.   Each order drawn shall state the Department750, Board or Commission or
the appropriation against which it is to be charged751.
   D.   General, Capital and Special Fund Transfers.
      (1)   Intradepartmental Transfers752. On or before the first (1st) day of
July each year, the Legislative Council shall establish, by Ordinance, an
amount of appropriation and restrictions, if any, under the approved budget
(general and special funds) which the Mayor or any Public Official753  of any
Department, Commission, Board (except the Board of Education) designated by the
Mayor, shall be authorized to transfer between line items within any
Department, Commission or Board. Said transfers under this section shall not
require approval by the Legislative Council unless the provisions of §
10-9.D(1)(b) of this Charter shall apply.
         (a)   Said Ordinance may establish individual and/or aggregate
transfer limitations754.
         (b)   No such transfer in excess of such authorized amount shall be
implemented unless it shall be (i) by Order proposed by the Mayor or any Public
Official755 of any Department, Commission or Board designated by the Mayor;
and, (ii) approved by majority vote of the Legislative Council756.
      (2)   Interdepartmental Transfers.
         (a)    Pertaining to the End of Fiscal Year757. The Legislative
Council, by Order, may authorize the Director of Finance to make during the
last ninety (90) Days of a fiscal year, interdepartmental transfers (general or
operating, capital and special funds) in an amount that shall be established by
the Legislative Council on or before the first (1st) day of July each year, by
Ordinance.
         (b)   Transfers of Unencumbered Appropriations758. The Council may by
Order, upon the approval of the Mayor, transfer any unencumbered appropriations
balance or portion thereof from one Department759 , Board or Commission to
another.
      (3)   Approved Transfers760. Each approved transfer shall be described in
the monthly financial report prepared in accordance with §
8-4.A(1)(d)(iv) of this Charter.
      (4)   Prohibited Transfers761. No transfer shall be made from any
appropriations for debt service and other statutory charges.
   E.   Additional Appropriations762.  Additional appropriations over and above
the total budget may be made from time to time by amendment of the Budget
Ordinance by the Council, upon recommendation of the Mayor and certification
from the Director of Finance that there is available an unappropriated and
unencumbered general or operating fund cash balance to meet such
appropriations.
   F.   Liability of Officials or Employees763.  If any Official or employee of
the Town or the Board of Education shall knowingly incur any obligation or
shall authorize or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this
Charter or take part therein, such action may be cause for removal as set forth
in §
3-10 of this Charter, civil action or both. In addition, the Town may, by vote
of the Legislative Council, undertake to recover from such Official or
employee, an amount equal to such obligation or expenditure so made.
                                        
744   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.A(1). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-8 A.
745   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.A(2). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-8 B (first sentence).
746   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.A(3). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-8 C.
747   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.A(4). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-8 B (second sentence).
748   "Department" includes "...offices".
749    2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.B. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 18-
8 D).
750   "Department" includes "...offices".
751   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.C. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 18-
8 E) (first sentence).
752   2022 modification and recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (1) which modified
1983 Charter § 18-8 E) (second sentence).
753   "Public Official" replaces "officers".
754   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (1) (a).
755   "Public Official" replaces "officers".
756   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (1)(b) which modified 1983 Charter §
18-8.E (second sentence), in lieu of the following: "...desire to secure a
transfer of funds set apart for one specific purpose to funds set apart for
another, before incurring any expenditure therefor, such or shall make
application to the Council, through the Director of Finance whose duty it shall
be to examine the matter, and upon approval of the Council, such transfer shall
be made, but not otherwise except as may be permitted under the terms of item
(I) below."
757   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (2) (a) which modified 1983 Charter
§ 18-8.I (first sentence), in lieu of the following: "...not to exceed an
accumulated Department total of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)".
758   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (2) (b) Consistent with 1983 Charter
§ 18-8 F) (first sentence).
759   "Department" includes "...or office".
760   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (3) which modified 1983 Charter §
18-8 I) (second sentence), in lieu of the following: "...Such transfers must be
approved by the Mayor and reported to the Council monthly."
761    2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.D (4). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
18-8 F) (second sentence).
762   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.E. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 18-
8 G).
763   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-7.F which modified 1983 Charter § 18-
8 H) by adding "...or both".
SECTION 10-10: PUBLIC FUNDS AND FINANCE764.
   A.   Issuance Authorized. The Town shall have the power to incur
indebtedness by authorizing the issuance of its bonds and notes for such
purposes, upon such terms and to such extent as is authorized by the General
Statutes and any applicable Special Acts. Said power shall extend to general
obligation bonds, bond anticipation notes, temporary notes, emergency bond
issues, revenue anticipation notes, tax anticipation notes and other issuances
permitted by the General Statutes and applicable Special Acts.
   B.   Procedures. The Legislative Council shall, by Ordinance, adopt
procedures for the authorization, structure and timing of the issuance of bonds
and notes for the purposes authorized by the General Statutes, applicable
Special Acts and this Charter.
      (1)   Capital Project Bonds. The vote of the Legislative Council to
approve the issuance of Capital Project Bonds shall be by an affirmative vote
of two-thirds (2/3rds) of all the members of the Council.
      (2)   Non-Capital Project Bonds. The vote of the Legislative Council to
approve the issuance of Non-Capital Project Bonds shall be by an affirmative
vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of all the members of the Council.
   C.   Approval of Mayor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless in
accordance with the provisions of §
10-8.B (1) or (2), whichever is applicable and approved by the Mayor in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
                                        
764   2022 recodification of new 2011 §
10-10.
SECTION 10-11: REFERENDUM ON BORROWING OF FUNDS765.
   A.   Debt Service Limitation.
      (1)   Capital Projects766. Borrowing for capital projects that will cause
the related debt service of the Town to exceed ten (10%) percent of the then
current fiscal year's budget shall be submitted to binding referendum.
      (2)   Non-Capital Projects767. Borrowing for non-capital projects that
will cause the related debt service of the Town to exceed four (4%) percent of
the then current fiscal year's budget shall be submitted to binding referendum.
   B.   The referendum shall take place at the next general election or at a
special election called for and held in the manner provided by the General
Statutes768.
   C.   Approval of the borrowing by the Council shall take place not less than
sixty (60) Days prior to such election769.
   D.   Any capital project that would cause the debt service of the Town to
exceed ten (10%) percent of the current fiscal year's budget shall not be
allowed to proceed past the design stage, and borrowing of funds shall not be
allowed to proceed unless a majority of those voting thereof at such election
shall have voted in favor thereof770.
                                        
765   See, C.G.S. 9-369d entitled "Submission of local question to voters who
are not electors. Vote by electors and voters held in conjunction with an
election". See also, C.G.S. 9-369b entitled "Local questions and proposals.
Explanatory text. Expenditure of state and municipal funds to influence vote
prohibited. Preparation and printing of certain materials permitted. Exception.
Civil penalty. Summaries of arguments for, against local questions". See also,
C.G.S. § 9-369 entitled "Procedure for holding referendum". See, C.G.S. 9-271
re referenda by paper ballots.
766   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-9.A (1). Consistent with 1983 Charter §
3-11 (first sentence).
767   2022 recodification of new 2011 § 10-9 (a) (2).
768   2022 recodification of 2011 § 10-9.B. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 3-11
(second sentence).
769   Recodification of 2011 § 10-9.C. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 3-11
(third sentence).
770   Recodification of 2011 § 10-9.D. Consistent with 1983 Charter § 3-11
(fourth sentence).
CHAPTER XI: TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS771
771   1983 Charter Chapter XIX.
                                        
SECTION 11-1: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS772.
   No action or proceedings, civil or criminal, pending on the effective date
of this Charter brought by or against the Town, or any Commission, Board or
Department773 thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this
Charter or by anything herein contained; but all such actions or proceedings
may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any
Commission, Board or Department774 which is a party thereto may by or under
this Charter be assigned or transferred to another Commission, Board or
Department775, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the
head of the Commission, Board or Department776 to which such functions, powers,
and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter.
                                        
772   1983 Charter § 19-4.
773   "Department" includes "...or office".
774   "Department" includes "...or office".
775   "Department" includes "...or office".
776   "Department" includes "...or office".
SECTION 11-2: PERIODIC REVIEW OF THE CHARTER777.
   No later than April of 2020, and no more than every ten (10) years
thereafter, the Council shall appoint a Charter Revision Commission, pursuant
to the General Statutes. Nothing in this section limits the right of the
Council to appoint one or more Charter Revision Commissions other than the
Commission required by this section, but no such Commission shall be appointed
if its appointment would preclude the Council from appointing a Commission as
required by this section.
                                        
777    Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 11-3: EXISTING LAWS AND ORDINANCES778.
   All special acts of the legislature and Ordinances of the Town, except as
the same are in conflict with this Charter, shall continue in full force and
effect until amended or repealed.
                                        
778   1983 Charter § 19-6.
SECTION 11-4: AMENDMENT OF CHARTER779.
   This Charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by Law and shall take
effect as set forth by the General Statutes.
                                        
779   1983 Charter § 19-7.
SECTION 11-5: SAVING CLAUSE780.
   If any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor
the context in which a section or part of a section so held invalid may appear,
except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be
inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of a
section to which such holding shall directly apply.
                                        
780   1983 Charter § 19-8.
SECTION 11-6: EFFECTIVE DATE781.
   The provisions of this Charter and amendments thereto, as to the
administration of the Town, shall become effective upon adoption by the voters
of the Town of Hamden; unless otherwise set forth in the Charter.
                                        
781   1983 Charter § 19-9.
SECTION 11-7: "TRANSITION PROVISION A" PERTAINING TO § 3-3.B(2) OF THIS CHARTER
- THE GENERAL ELECTION SCHEDULED FOR 2012.
   On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2012, the Electors
of the Town shall elect, in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes and the applicable provisions of this Charter, Registrars of Voters
for the term two years as set forth in "Transition Provision D" applicable to §
3-3.B(2) of this Charter.
SECTION 11-8: "TRANSITION PROVISION B" PERTAINING TO § 3-3.C(3) OF THIS CHARTER
- THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE REGISTRARS OF VOTER ELECTED IN THE GENERAL
ELECTION SCHEDULED FOR 2012.
   Commencing at twelve midnight on the Wednesday following the first Monday of
the January next succeeding their election, the Registrars of Voters, elected
in November 2012, pursuant to the transition provision applicable to §
3-3.C(3) of this Charter, shall hold their offices for a term of two (2) years,
until the Wednesday following the first Monday of the third January succeeding
their election.
SECTION 11-9: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR REGULAR MEMBERS
OF BOARD OF ETHICS DERIVED FROM § 19-5.A OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE CHARTER
(REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the regular members of the Board of
Ethics is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about January 1,
1984 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term of five (5)
years, one (1) member for a term of four (4) years, one (1) member for a term
of three (3) years, one (1) member for a term of two (2) years and one (1)
member for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, the members were appointed
annually for five year terms. It should be further noted that at some time,
based upon custom and practice, the commencement date of the term shifted from
January the 1st to February the 1st.
SECTION 11-10: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR ALTERNATE
MEMBERS OF BOARD OF ETHICS DERIVED FROM § 19-5.A OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE
CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the alternate members of the Board
of Ethics is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about January 1,
1984 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) alternate member for a term of
two (2) years and one (1) alternate member for a term of one (1) year. Annually
thereafter, during the month of January, one (1) alternate member shall be
appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, the members were appointed
annually for two year terms. It should be further noted that at some time,
based upon custom and practice, the commencement date of the term shifted from
January the 1st to February the 1st.
SECTION 11-11: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR REGULAR MEMBERS
OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION DERIVED FROM § 13-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF
THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the Regular Members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about
February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed three (3) members for a term
of one (1) year; three (3) for a term of two (2) years; and, three (3) for a
term of three years, all to take office February 1, 1966. Thereafter, three (3)
members were to be appointed, annually, during the month of January, for three
(3) year terms.
SECTION 11-12: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR ALTERNATE
MEMBERS OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION DERIVED FROM § 13-2 OF THE PRIOR
REVISION OF THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the Alternate Members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on
or about February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) alternate
member for a term of one (1) year; one (1) alternate member for a term of two
(2) years; and, one (1) alternate member for a term of three (3) years.
Thereafter, each member was to be appointed, annually, during the month of
January, for one (1) year term.
SECTION 11-13: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD DERIVED FROM § 17-5 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE
CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the members of the Personnel
Appeals Board is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about
February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term of
five (5) years; one (1) member for a term of four (4) years; one (1) member for
a term of three (3) years; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and, one
(1) for a term of one year. Thereafter, members were to be appointed, annually,
during the month of January, for five (5) year terms.
SECTION 11-14: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
LIBRARY BOARD DERIVED FROM § 14-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE CHARTER (REV.
NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office for the members of the Library Board is
derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about February 1, 1966 at
which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term of five (5) years; one
(1) member for a term of four (4) years; one (1) member for a term of three (3)
years; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and, one (1) for a term of
one year. Thereafter, members were to be appointed, annually, during the month
of January, for five (5) year terms.
SECTION 11-15: "TRANSITION PROVISION E" PERTAINING TO § 7-2.J OF THIS CHARTER -
THE INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION.
   The Legislative Council shall repeal §§ 33.104 through 33.106 of the Code of
Ordinances, within thirty (30) Days following the effective date of this
Charter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Charter shall be
determinative and dispositive of all matters under the jurisdiction of the
Inland Wetlands Commission, in the event conflicting Ordinance provisions have
not been repealed.
SECTION 11-16: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
BOARD OF TAX REVIEW DERIVED FROM § 4-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE CHARTER
(REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office of the members of the Board of Tax
Review (which has been renamed the Board of Assessment Appeals) is derived from
the appointments by the Legislative Council on or about February 1, 1966 at
which time the Legislative Council appointed one (1) member for a term of three
(3) years; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and, one (1) for a term
of one year. Thereafter, members were to be appointed, annually, during the
month of January, for three (3) year terms.
SECTION 11-17: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE SIX MEMBERS
OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION DERIVED FROM § 12-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE
CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office of the six members of the Board of
Education is derived from the elections in November of 1985 and 1989782.
                                        
782   1983 Charter §
12-1 (second and fifth sentences).
SECTION 11-18: HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE THREE
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION DERIVED FROM § 12-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF
THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).
   The baseline for the terms of office of the three members of the Board of
Education is derived from the elections in November of 1983783.
                                        
783   1983 Charter §
12-1 (six, seventh, eighth and ninth sentences).
CHAPTER XII: SUNSET PROVISIONS
SECTION 12-1: GENERALLY784.
   The provisions of this section shall expire and be of no force and effect
following any transition provisions in the Charter or upon enactment of
provisions to establish the Boards and Commissions as set forth in this
Charter. Upon the effective date of the enactment, the applicable provision may
be removed from the Charter and shall be replaced with the following: "This
provision is intentionally left blank in accordance with this Chapter of the
Charter and the enactment of the Ordinance dated ____________".
                                        
784   Charter Revision of 2011.
SECTION 12-2: ETHICS COMMISSION.
   The following provisions pertaining to the Board of Ethics shall remain in
full force and effect until such time as the code of ethics Ordinance is
enacted.
   A.   Duties and Powers: Advisory Opinions785. The Board shall render
advisory opinions concerning the application of this Charter and/or any code of
ethics adopted by the Town to any Public Official786  or employee upon his or
her request. Such advisory opinions shall be published and filed with the Town
Clerk with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent disclosures of the
identity of the Public Official787  or employee involved.
   B.   Duties and Powers: Investigations.
      (1)   Probable Cause788. Upon the written complaint of any person, signed
under penalty of false statement, or upon its own complaint, the Board shall
investigate any alleged violation of the Charter and/or any such code of
ethics. Any investigation whether or not there is probable cause to believe
that a violation of this Charter and/or any such code of ethics has occurred
shall be confidential and not open to the public unless the respondent requests
otherwise. If such probable cause is found, the Board shall initiate hearings
to determine whether there has been such violation.
      (2)   Hearings789. All hearings pursuant to this subsection shall be open
to the public. The Town Attorney or the designated representative of the Town
Attorney, who shall also be an attorney, shall attend such hearings and rule on
all matters concerning the application of the rules of evidence, which shall be
the same as in judicial proceedings. At such hearings, the respondent shall
have the right to be represented by legal counsel, the right to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents, records and
papers and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The Board may administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, documents, records and papers. At the request of the
Board, any judge may issue a capias for the appearance of the respondent,
witnesses, and the production of books, documents, records and papers. The
Board shall find no person in violation of the provisions of this Charter and/
or any such code of ethics except upon the concurring vote of four (4) of its
members.
                                        
785   1983 Charter § 19-5.B.1.
786   "Public Official" replaces "officer".
787   "Public Official" replaces "officer".
788    1983 Charter § 19-5.B.2.a.
789   1983 Charter § 19-5.B.2.b.
SECTION 12-3: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION790.
   The following provisions pertaining to the Parks and Recreation Commission
shall remain in full, force and effects, until such time as the replacement
enabling Ordinance(s) is (or are) enacted.
   A.   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the provisions of §
7-1 of this Charter, a Parks and Recreation Commission consisting of five (5)
Electors of the Town, not more than three (3) of whom shall be from the same
political party. Annually during the month of January the Mayor shall appoint
one (1) member for a term of five (5) years. The members of said Commission
shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified.
   B.   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall study the recreation
facilities and programs of the Town, shall develop proposals as to the
improvement of the facilities and programs, make recommendations to the
Director and Mayor concerning the activities of the Department, and aid the
Director in carrying out the program of the Department. The Parks and
Recreation Commission shall set the fees for the use of the Town's recreation
facilities and programs subject to the approval of the Council.
                                        
790   1983 Charter § 9-3.
CHAPTER XIII: HISTORICAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 13-1: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
   A.   Members of the Classified Services791. All persons holding permanent
positions in the service of the Town (at the effective date of January 1, 1966
under the 1966 Charter, hereinafter "1966 Charter Effective Date") including
employees of a Board or Commission, whose positions are included in the
classified positions by the terms of Chapter XVII of the 1966 Charter, shall
immediately become members of the classified service and retain such positions
until promoted, transferred, reduced or removed in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XVII of the Charter through the Charter of November 8,
1983 and as may now be set forth in Chapter VIII of this Charter.
      (1)   All other employees of the Town at the 1966 Charter Effective Date,
whose positions are not abolished by the provisions of said Charter, shall
retain such position pending action by the Council or the appropriate officer
charged by the Charter with the power of appointment and removal792.
      (2)   Any provision of Law in force on the effective date of the 1966
Charter, and not inconsistent with the provisions of said Charter, in relation
to personnel appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of office, promotions, removal,
pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges
of employees of the Town or any office, Department or agency thereof shall
continue in effect, until or unless amended or repealed by the Council793.
      (3)   Any permanent employee presently in the classified service of the
Town of Hamden whose position is abolished by the adoption of the 1966 Charter
shall be relocated to other comparable employment with the Town of Hamden at a
salary or wage not less than that such permanent employee is presently
receiving794.
   B.   Validation of Pension Rights795. The rights of all persons, (including
their eligible survivors), in the employment of the Town actually receiving or
entitled to receive pensions or retirement allowances prior to the 1966 Charter
Effective Date are expressly validated and preserved and the Town shall
continue to pay such pensions and allowances.
   C.   Retirement796. The Hamden Employees Retirement Act adopted May 8, 1962,
is not affected by the 1966 Charter, provided, wherever the words "First
Selectman" or "Board of Selectman" appear, the word "Mayor" shall be
substituted and further provided that where the words "Representative Town
Meeting" are used, the words "Legislative Council" shall be substituted and
further provided that where the words "Treasurer" or "Board of Finance" are
used the words "Director of Finance" shall be substantial.
                                        
791   Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-6 (first sentence).
792    Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-6 (second sentence).
793   Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-6 (third sentence).
794   Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-6 (fourth sentence).
795   Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-7.
796   Modification of 1983 Charter § 17-8.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; PRIOR ORDINANCES; ERRORS AND OMISSIONS
         
11.   ELECTIONS; VOTING DISTRICTS
         
12.   HEARING PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CITATIONS
         
13.   RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A MEMBER OF A BOARD, COMMISSION OR
RELEVANT POSITION OR PANEL OF ALTERNATES; ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; PRIOR ORDINANCES; ERRORS AND OMISSIONS
Section
   
10.01   Interpretation
   
10.02   Application to future legislation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions and rules of interpretation
   
10.05   Rule of severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
§ 10.01 Interpretation.
   (A)   The provisions of this and subsequent chapters in this volume shall
constitute and be designated and cited as "The Hamden Code of 1977." The
codification has been made in one ordinance under appropriate titles, chapters
and sections by authority of the Connecticut General Statutes.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
   (C)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Connecticut General Statutes, the reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to the Connecticut General Statute section. Footnotes,
cross references and other comments are by way of explanation only and should
not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (D)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although the same may not
be so limited specifically.
§ 10.02 Application to future legislation.
   All of the provisions of Title I, not incompatible with future legislation,
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.03 Captions.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 Definitions and rules of interpretation.
   (A)   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the town,
the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly
requires otherwise:
      (1)   The expressions "this code" or "this code of ordinances" shall mean
the Hamden Code as adopted by this ordinance, and as hereinafter modified by
amendment, revision and by the adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      (2)   The nouns "city", "town", "this town", "the town", "village",
"municipal corporation" or "municipality" when used in this code shall denote
the Town of Hamden irrespective of its population or legal classification.
      (3)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
      (4)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (5)   The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall
include a natural person, firm, partnership or a corporate body or any body of
persons corporate or incorporate.
      (6)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
      (7)   A general term following a specific enumeration of terms is not to
be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
      (8)   Either conjunction "and", "or" shall include the other as if
written "and/or."
      (9)   The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
      (10)   The word "council" shall mean the legislative council of Hamden,
Connecticut.
      (11)   The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
      (12)   "Personal property" includes every species of property except real
property.
      (13)   "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
shall embrace all chattels real.
      (14)   The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant
of the whole or a part of the building or land, either alone or with others.
      (15)   Except as provided in the traffic code, the word "street" means
the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever
nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, and the word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb
lines of the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines
intended for the use of pedestrians.
      (16)   Whenever the word "shall" appears in this code it shall be
considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided.
      (17)   "This state" when used in this code shall mean the State of
Connecticut.
      (18)   When the abbreviation "Conn. Gen. Stat." appears it shall mean
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 10.05 Rule of severability.
   Each chapter, section or, whenever divisible, part section of this code of
ordinances is declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter,
section or divisible part section, shall not be construed to affect the
validity of any other chapter, section or part section of this code.
§ 10.06 Reference to other sections.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter be changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07 Reference to offices.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the Town of Hamden exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer
of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 Errors and omissions.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word,
the omission of any word necessary to express the intention of the provisions
affected, the use of a word to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of
a word when another word was clearly intended to express such intent, such
spelling shall be corrected and such word supplied, omitted or substituted as
will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct word was contained in the text as originally
published. No such alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 Ordinances repealed.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances,
§ 10.12 Ordinances unaffected.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 Ordinances saved.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall
remain in effect and are saved.
CHAPTER 11: ELECTIONS; VOTING DISTRICTS
Section
Elections
   
11.01   Procedure for listing electors
   
11.02   Procedure for dissolving tie votes
   
11.03   Advisory nonbinding referenda
Municipal Elections Voting Districts
   
11.05   First voting district
   
11.06   Second voting district
   
11.07   Third voting district
   
11.08   Fourth voting district
   
11.09   Fifth voting district
   
11.10   Sixth voting district
   
11.11   Seventh voting district
   
11.12   Eighth voting district
   
11.13   Ninth voting district
State and Federal Elections Voting Districts
   
11.20     First voting district
   
11.21     Second voting district
   
11.22     Third voting district
   
11.23     Fourth voting district
   
11.24     Fifth voting district
   
11.25     Sixth voting district
   
11.26     Seventh voting district
   
11.27     Eighth voting district
   
11.28     Ninth voting district
   
11.29     Tenth voting district
ELECTIONS
§ 11.01 PROCEDURE FOR LISTING ELECTORS.
   The registrars of voters in this town, in perfecting the list of qualified
electors therein as provided by law, shall enter the names on the official
lists by the street and number, when the houses are numbered, and not
alphabetically, so that there shall be entered on the list first, the street,
avenue, road or alley; second, the number of the house or residence in
numerical order; and third, the resident electors in the house or residence, in
alphabetical order. Those electors, if any, who cannot be so registered, shall
be registered alphabetically.
(‘66 Code, § 81-1)
§ 11.02 PROCEDURE FOR DISSOLVING TIE VOTES.
   If the electors of this town shall fail to choose a candidate for any
office, by reason of an equality of votes at any electors' meeting, the mayor
shall forthwith warn an electors' meeting for the purpose of dissolving the tie
vote, which special electors' meeting shall be warned, organized, conducted and
proceeded with as are biennial electors' meetings, except that the ballots
shall contain only the names of the candidates to be voted for. The registry
list used at the meetings shall be the list last completed.
(‘66 Code, § 81-2)
§ 11.03 ADVISORY NONBINDING REFERENDA.
   (A)   Council may submit question to electors. The Legislative Council of
the town, upon written request of any member, and upon a two-thirds majority
vote of all of its members, present or absent, at a meeting of the Council, may
submit any question to a vote of the electors of the town as an advisory,
nonbinding referendum, to be voted upon at the next regular state or municipal
election.
   (B)   Elector may apply for petition papers.
      (1)   Likewise, any elector of the town may apply with the Town Clerk for
petition papers for an advisory, nonbinding referendum on any question. The
application shall contain a statement of the question for which the referendum
is sought. Within five business days, the Town Clerk shall provide the elector
with a sufficient number of copies of petition papers for seeking signatures
for the referendum. Each petition paper shall contain the same statement of the
referendum question, shall bear the certificate of the Town Clerk showing the
date on which the petition paper was issued, and shall indicate the name and
address of the person to whom it was issued. To bring the referendum question
to the Legislative Council for consideration, the petition papers must be
signed by 10% of the qualified electors of the town as determined from the last
official voting list.
      (2)   To be valid, any petition paper returned must be filed with the
Town Clerk within 90 calendar days after the date on which it was issued, must
have the name and address of the circulator (who must be an elector registered
to vote in the town) of the petition paper, contain a statement that the
circulator either knows personally or was given satisfactory evidence of the
identity of each petition signer, and each petition paper must be signed and
dated by the circulator under penalties of false statement.
      (3)   On the next business day following return of a petition paper, the
Town Clerk shall certify to the validity of the petition paper and refer it to
the Office of the Registrar of Voters, which within ten business days shall
verify which signatures are by registered voters and shall return the petition
paper to the Town Clerk with its findings endorsed thereon. On the next
business day after a sufficient number of verified signatures have been
returned to the Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall submit the petition papers to
the Council for its consideration at its next regular meeting.
      (4)   Upon receipt of the petition papers, the Council shall refer the
referendum question to an appropriate committee for public hearing before the
next regular meeting of the Council. At the Council meeting following the
public hearing, the Council, by a majority vote of all its members present may
submit the referendum question to a vote of the electors as described in
division (A) above. If the board takes no action within 40 days, the referendum
question shall be deemed approved.
   (C)   Question to appear on ballot if signatures equal certain amount.
Likewise, following (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) above, if the number of verified
signatures equals or exceeds 15% of the qualified electors of the town as
determined from the last official voting list, said advisory, nonbinding
referendum question shall appear on the ballot at the next regular state or
municipal election.
(Ord. 213, adopted 7-6-82)
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS VOTING DISTRICTS
§ 11.05 FIRST VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The First Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Shepard
Avenue and Rocky Top Road. East on Rocky Top to Sherman Avenue. East on Sherman
to a point opposite Kenwood Avenue, then overland to Kenwood. East on Kenwood
to Evergreen Avenue. South on Evergreen to Home Place. East on Home to Whitney
Avenue. North on Whitney to Sherman Avenue. East on Sherman to New Road.
Northeast on New Road to Scenic View Lane. Northeast on Scenic View, then
overland through the Quinnipiac University Campus onto Bobcat Way. East on
Bobcat to Hogan Road. Southeast on Hogan to the Hamden-North Haven town line.
South on the town line to the Mill River. South on the river to Whitney Avenue.
North on Whitney to Colonial Drive. West on Colonial to Hampton Road. North on
Hampton to Brenton Terrace. West on Brenton to Brentwood Drive. North on
Brentwood to Vernon Street. North on Vernon to Forest Street. West on Forest to
Knob Hill Road. North on Knob Hill to Ann's Farm Road, to a point on Ann's Farm
opposite the Farmington Canal Trail, overland to the trail. South on the trail
to Sherman Lane. West on Sherman Lane to Shepard Avenue. North on Shepard to
Rocky Top Road.
   (B) The polling place for the first voting district shall be the Thornton
Wilder Auditorium at Miller Memorial Library, 2901 Dixwell Avenue.
(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.06 SECOND VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)    The Second Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of
all the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of W. C.
Parkway and Circular Avenue. South on Circular to Arents Road. North on Arents
to Battis Road. North on Battis to Grandview Avenue. East and south on
Grandview to Haywood Lane. East on Haywood to Lake View Avenue. North on Lake
View to Red Rock Terrace. East on Red Rock to Dixwell Avenue. South on Dixwell
to Mather Street. East on Mather to the Farmington Canal Trail. South on the
trail to Putnam Avenue. Northwest on Putnam to Helen Street. Northwest on Helen
to Elmer Avenue. South on Elmer to Woodin Street. Northwest on Woodin to the
Belden Brook. North on the brook to the W.C. Parkway. North on the parkway to
the overpass at Circular Avenue.
   (B)   The polling place for the second voting district shall be the Booker
T. Washington Academy, 306 Circular Avenue.
(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5- 12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 664, adopted 9- 28-15;
Am. Ord. 667, adopted 1-19-16; Am. Ord. 737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.07 THIRD VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Third Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Shelton
Avenue and the Hamden-New Haven town line. West on the town line to Dixwell
Avenue. North on Dixwell to Cherry Ann Street. West on Cherry Ann to the
Hamden-New Haven town line. Northwest on the town line to the Belden Brook.
North on the brook to Woodin Street. East on Woodin to Elmer Avenue. North on
Elmer to Helen Street. Southeast on Helen to Circular Avenue. South on Circular
to Putnam Avenue. Southeast on Putnam to Gallagher Road. South on Gallagher to
Hamden Industrial Park Drive. West on Hamden Industrial Drive to Columbus
Street. South on Columbus to Morse Street. East on Morse to Shelton Avenue.
South on Shelton to the Hamden-New Haven town line.
   (B) The polling place for the third voting district shall be the M.L. Keefe
Community Center, ll Pine Street. (Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332,
adopted 5-12- 93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12;
Am. Ord. 737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.08 FOURTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Fourth Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Ann's Farm
Road and Knob Hill Drive. South on Knob Hill to Forest Street. East on Forest
to Vernon Street. South on Vernon to Brentwood Drive. South on Brentwood to
Hampton Road. South on Hampton to Colonial Drive. East on Colonial to Whitney
Avenue. South on Whitney to Park Avenue. West on Park to Woodbine Street. South
on Woodbine to Beverly Road. East on Beverly to Coram Avenue. South on Coram to
Waite Street. West on Waite to Mather Street. West on Mather to the Farmington
Canal Trail. North on the trail to the W.C. Parkway. West on the parkway to
Dixwell Avenue. North on Dixwell to Skiff Street. Northwest on Skiff to Mix
Avenue. Northeast on Skiff to Shepard Avenue. Northwest on Shepard to Sanford
Street. East on Sanford to Dixwell Avenue. Northeast on Dixwell to Evergreen
Avenue. North on Evergreen to Hamden Hills Drive. Northwest on Hamden Hills
Drive to the F.C. Trail. North on the trail to a point opposite the
intersection of Ann's Farm Road and Knob Hill Drive.
   (B)   The polling place for the fourth voting district shall be Spring Glen
School, 1908 Whitney Avenue. (Ord. 240, adopted ll-5- 84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted
5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord.
737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.09 FIFTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Fifth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Mather Street
and the Farmington Canal Trail. Southeast on Mather to Waite Street. East on
Waite to Lake Whitney. South along shoreline of the lake to Davis Street. East
on Davis to the Hartford Turnpike. South on the Hartford Turnpike to Rodgers
Road. East and north on Rodgers to Davis Street. East on Davis to Ridge Road.
South on Ridge to Park Road. South on Park to State Street. East on State to
the Hamden-New Haven town line. West on the town line to Shelton Avenue. North
on Shelton to Morse Street. West on Morse to Columbus Street. North on Columbus
to Hamden Industrial Park Drive. East on Hamden Industrial Park to Gallagher
Road. North on Gallagher to Putnam Avenue. Northwest on Putnam to the F.C.
Trail. North on the trail to Mather Street.
   (B)   The polling place for the fifth voting district shall be the Board of
Education Building, 60 Putnam Avenue. (Ord. 240, adopted 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 332,
adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12;
Am. Ord. 737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.10 SIXTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Sixth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Whitney Avenue
and the Hamden-New Haven town line. South on the town line to the Quinnipiac
River. South on the river to the Hamden-New Haven town line. West on the town
line to State Street. North on State to Park Road. North on Park to Ridge Road.
North on Ridge to Davis Street. West on Davis to Rodgers Road. South and west
on Rodgers to Hartford Turnpike. North on the Hartford Turnpike to Davis
Street. West on Davis to Lake Whitney. North along the shore of the lake to
Waite Street. West on Waite to Coram Avenue. North on Coram to Beverly Road.
West on Beverly to Woodbine Street. North on Woodbine to Park Avenue. East on
Park to Whitney Avenue. North on Whitney to the Hamden-North Haven town line.
   (B)   The polling place for the sixth voting district shall be the Ridge
Hill School, 120 Carew Road. (Ord. 240, adopted 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted
5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord.
737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.11 SEVENTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Seventh District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of West Shepard
Avenue and the Hamden-Bethany town line, southwest on West Shepard to Hill
Street. South on Hill to Paradise Avenue. South on Paradise to Howard Drive.
East on Howard to Denslow Hill Road. South on Denslow Hill to a point on the
north border of the Sacred Heart Academy Athletic Field, then east overland to
the UI Substation on Mix Avenue. South on Mix to Kay Vue Drive. South on Kay
Vue to Mix Avenue. South on Mix to the W.C. Parkway. Northeast on the parkway
to the Farmington Canal Trail. South on the trail to Mather Street. West on
Mather to Dixwell Avenue. North on Dixwell to Red Rock Terrace. West on Red
Rock to Lakeview Avenue. South on Lakeview to Haywood Lane. West on Haywood to
Grandview Avenue. West on Grandview to Battis Road. Southwest on Battis to
Arents Road. West on Arents to Circular Avenue. West on Circular to the W.C.
Parkway. South on the parkway to the Belden Brook. South on the brook to the
Hamden-New Haven town line. West and north on the town line to the Hamden-
Bethany town line. North on the town line to West Shepard Avenue.
   (B) The polling place for the seventh voting district shall be the Dunbar
Hill School, 315 Lane Street. (Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted
5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord.
737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.12 EIGHTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Eight District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of West Woods Road
and the Hamden-Bethany town line. Northeast on West Woods Road to Fans Rock
Road. Southeast on Fans Rock to Shepard Avenue. South on Shepard to Sherman
Avenue. East on Sherman Avenue to Sherman Lane. East and south on Sherman Lane
to Hamden Hills Drive. East and south on Hamden Hills to Evergreen Avenue.
South on Evergreen to Dixwell Avenue. West on Dixwell to Sanford Street.
Northwest on Sanford to Shepard Avenue. Southeast on Shepard to Mix Avenue.
South on Mix to Skiff Street. Southeast on Skiff to Dixwell Avenue. South on
Dixwell to the W.C. Parkway. Southwest on the parkway to Benham Street. West on
Benham to Mix Avenue. North on Mix to Kay Vue Drive. North on Kay Vue to Mix
Avenue. North on Mix to the UI Substation, then west overland along the
northern border of the Sacred Heart Academy Athletic Field to Denslow Hill
Road. North on Denslow Hill to Howard Drive. West on Howard to Paradise Avenue.
North on Paradise to Hill Street. West on Hill to West Shepard Avenue.
Northwest on West Shepard to the Hamden-Bethany town line. North on the town
line to West Woods Road.
   (B)   The polling place for the eighth voting district shall be the Bear
Path School, 10 Kirk Road. (Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-
12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord.
737, adopted 5-15-23)
§ 11.13 NINTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Ninth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of the Hamden-
Bethany town line and the Hamden-Cheshire town line, east along the Hamden-
Cheshire town line to the Hamden-Wallingford town line. South along the Hamden-
Wallingford town line to the Hamden-North Haven town line. South along the
Hamden-North Haven town line to Hogan Road. North on Hogan to a point opposite
the Quinnipiac University Athletic Field and the entrance to the QU Campus at
Bobcat Way. East on Bobcat across the campus to Scenic View Lane. East on
Scenic View to New Road. South on New Road to Sherman Avenue. West on Sherman
to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Home Place. North on Home to Evergreen
Avenue. North on Evergreen to Kenwood Avenue. West on Kenwood to Sherman
Avenue. South on Sherman to Rocky Top Road. West on Rocky Top to Shepard
Avenue. North on Shepard to Fans Rock Road. Northwest on Fans Rock to West
Woods Road. Northwest on West Woods to the Hamden-Bethany town line. North on
the Hamden-Bethany town line to the Hamden-Cheshire town line.
   (B)   The polling place for the ninth voting district shall be the West
Woods School, 350 West Todd Street. (Ord. 240, adopted ll- 5-84; Am. Ord. 332,
adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12;
Am. Ord. 737, adopted 5-15-23)
STATE AND FEDERAL ELECTIONS VOTING DISTRICTS
§ 11.20 FIRST VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the first voting district
of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following
limits: from the intersection of Mt. Carmel Avenue and the Hamden-North Haven
Town Line, West on Mt. Carmel to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Evergreen
Avenue. South on Evergreen to Forest Road. East on Forest to Whitney Avenue.
South on Whitney to Washington Avenue. South on Washington to Dixwell Avenue.
East on Dixwell to the Hamden-North Haven Town Line. North on the town line to
Mt. Carmel Avenue.
   (B) The polling place for the first voting district shall be the Miller
Library, 2901 Dixwell Avenue.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.21 SECOND VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the second voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the Farmington Canal Trail and
Putnam Avenue north on the trail to Oregon Avenue west on Oregon to Dixwell
Avenue. North on Dixwell to Concord Street. West on Concord to Dante Place.
North on Dante to Church Street. West on Church to Bank Street. North on Bank
to Taft Street. West on Taft to Circular Avenue. North on Circular to Gilbert
Avenue. West on Gilbert to Valley Road. North, west, and then south on Valley
to Gilbert Avenue. West on Gilbert to the Wilbur Cross Parkway. South west on
the parkway to the watercourse (Belden Brook) between Belden Road and Mueller
Drive. South on the brook to Woodin Street. East on Woodin to Dixwell Avenue.
North on Dixwell to Putnam Avenue. East on Putnam to the Canal Trail. North on
the Trail to Oregon Avenue.
   (B) The polling place for the second voting district shall be the Helen
Street School, 285 Helen Street.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.22 THIRD VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the third voting district
of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following
limits: from the intersection of Putnam Avenue and the F. Canal Trail, West on
Putnam to Dixwell Avenue. South on Dixwell to Woodin Street. West on Woodin to
a point opposite West Side Drive. South to the Hamden-New Haven Town Line.
South and east on the town line to Homelands Terrace. North on Homelands to
Morse Street. West on Morse to Wadsworth Street. North on Wadsworth to Mill
Rock Road. East on Mill Rock to Newhall Street. North on Newhall to Putnam
Avenue. West on Putnam to the Canal Trail.
   (B) The polling place for the third voting district shall be the M.L. Keefe
Center, 11 Pine Street.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.23 FOURTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the fourth voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the W. C. Parkway and the Canal
Trail, south on the trail to Mather Street. East on Mather to Waite Street.
East on Waite to Ridge Road. North on Ridge to the Hamden-North Haven Town
Line. West, north, and northeast on the town line to Dixwell Avenue. West on
Dixwell to Washington Avenue. North on Washington to Dixwell Avenue. North on
Dixwell to Forest Street. West on Forest to Evergreen Avenue. South on
Evergreen to Dixwell Avenue. Southwest on Dixwell to the W.C Parkway. East on
the Parkway to the F.Canal Trail.
   (B) The polling place for the fourth voting district shall be the Spring
Glen School, 1908 Whitney Avenue.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.24 FIFTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the fifth district of the
Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following limits:
from the intersection of the F. Canal Trail and Mather Street. South on the
Trail to Putnam Avenue. East on Putnam to Newhall Street. South on Newhall to
Mill Rock Road. East on Mill Rock to Wadsworth Street. South on Wadsworth to
Morse Street. East on Morse to Homelands Terrace. South on Homelands to the
Hamden-New Haven Town Line. East on the town line to the Mill River. North on
the river to Lake Whitney. Northwest along the western bank of the lake to
Waite Street. Southwest on Waite to Mather Street. West on Mather to the F.
Canal Trail.
   (B) The polling place for the fifth voting district shall be the Board of
Education Building, 60 Putnam Avenue.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.25 SIXTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) The sixth district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the
territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Ridge Road. and
the Hamden-North Haven Town line east, south, and then west on the town line to
the Mill River. North on the river to Lake Whitney. Northwest along the eastern
bank of the lake to Waite Street. East on Waite Street to Ridge Road. North on
Ridge to the Hamden-North Haven Town Line.
   (B) For State and Federal Elections and Primaries, the polling place for the
sixth district voting district shall be the Ridge Hill School, 120 Carew Road.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.26 SEVENTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the seventh district of
the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following
limits: from the intersection of the W.C. Parkway and the F. Canal Trail south
on the trail to Oregon Avenue. West on Oregon to Dixwell Avenue. North on
Dixwell To Concord Street. West on Concord to Dante Place. North on Dante to
Church Street. West on Church to Bank Street. Northwest on Bank to Taft Street.
Southwest on Taft to Circular Avenue. Northwest on Circular to Gilbert Avenue.
Southwest on Gilbert to Valley Road. North, southwest, and then south on Valley
to Gilbert Avenue. West on Gilbert to the W. C. Parkway. Southwest on the
Parkway to Belden Brook. South on the Brook to the Hamden-New Haven Town Line.
West, southwest, and then northwest to Wintergreen Avenue. North on Wintergreen
to Main Street. West and north on Main to Benham Street. East on Benham to
Dunbar Hill Road. North on Dunbar Hill to Cooper Lane. East and south on Cooper
to Benham Street. East on Benham to the W.C. Parkway. Northeast on the Parkwy
to the F. Canal Trail.
   (B) The polling place for the seventh voting district shall be the Dunbar
Hill School, 315 Lane Street.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.27 EIGHTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the eighth district of
the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following
limits: from the intersection of the W.C. Parkway and Dixwell Avenue North on
Dixwell to Skiff Street. West on Skiff to Howard Drive. North on Howard to
Shepard Avenue North on Shepard to Hillfield Road. West on Hillfield to Johnson
Road. Northwest on Johnson to the watercourse (Eatons Brook) that traverses
Johnson Road, Hotchkiss Lane and Choate Avenue South on the brook to Choate
Avenue West on Choate to Still Hill Road. North on Still Hill to Deerfield
Drive. West on Deerfield to Exeter Road. South on Exeter to West Woods Road.
West and south on West Woods to the Hamden-Bethany Town Line. South on the
Hamden-Bethany Town Line to the Hamden-New Haven Town Line. East on the Hamden-
New Haven Town Line to Wintergreen Avenue North on Wintergreen to Main Street.
West and north on Main to Benham Street. East on Benham to Dunbar Hill Road.
North on Dunbar Hill to Cooper Lane East and south on Cooper to Benham Street.
East on Benham to the W.C. Parkway. Northeast on the Parkway to Dixwell Avenue
   (B) The polling place for the eighth voting district shall be the Bear Path
School, 10 Kirk Road.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.28 NINTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A) For state and federal elections and primaries, the ninth district of the
Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following limits:
from the intersection of West Woods Road. and the Hamden-Bethany Town Line
north on the Town Line to the Hamden-Cheshire Town Line. East on the town line
to the Hamden-North Haven Town Line. Southwest on the town line to Mt. Carmel
Avenue Southwest on Mt. Carmel to Whitney Avenue Southeast on Whitney to
Sherman Avenue Southwest on Sherman to Rocky Top Road. West on Rocky Top to
Shepard Avenue North on Shepard to Hillfield Road. West on Hillfield to Johnson
Road. Northwest on Johnson to the watercourse (Eatons Brook) that traverses
Johnson Road, Hotchkiss Lane, and Choate Avenue South on the brook to Choate
Avenue West on Choate to Still Hill Road. North on Still Hill to Deerfield
Drive. West on Deerfield to Exeter Road. South on Exeter to West Woods Road.
West and south on West Woods to the Hamden-Bethany Town Line.
   (B)   The polling place for the Ninth Voting District shall be West Woods
School, 350 West Todd Street.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
§ 11.29 TENTH VOTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   For state and federal elections and primaries, the tenth district of
the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the following
limits: from the intersection of Dixwell Avenue and Skiff Street. west on Skiff
to Howard Drive. North on Howard to Shepard Avenue North on Shepard to Rocky
Top Road. East on Rocky Top to Sherman Avenue Northeast on Sherman to Whitney
Avenue Southeast on Whitney to Evergreen Avenue South on Evergreen to Dixwell
Avenue Southwest on Dixwell to Skiff Street.
   (B)   The polling place for the tenth voting district shall be the Hamden
Middle School, 2623 Dixwell Avenue.
(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)
CHAPTER 12: HEARING PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CITATIONS
Section
   
12.01   Appointment of hearing officer
   
12.02   Procedure
   
12.03   Miscellaneous provisions
§ 12.01 APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other than
police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the
hearings authorized by this section.
(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)
§ 12.02 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for
the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-148 or
22a-226d, for an alleged violation thereof, shall send notice to the person
cited. Such notice shall inform the person cited:
      (1)   Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees due;
      (2)   That he or she may contest his or her liability before a citation
hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten
days of the date thereof;
      (3)   That if he or she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him or her; and
      (4)   That such judgment may issue without further notice.
   (B)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division (A) of this
section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by
such municipality. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil
or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing
within ten days of the date of the first notice provided for in division (A) of
this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated
municipal official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the
hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and
shall follow the procedures set forth in division (D) of this section.
   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided
the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
any interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing official or
policeman shall be filed and retained by the municipality, and shall be deemed
to be a business record within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and
evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official
or policeman shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A
person wishing to contest his or her liability shall appear at the hearing and
may present evidence in his or her behalf. A designated municipal official,
other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the
municipality. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an
assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and
liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer may
accept from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citation
reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that
the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct
the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he or she
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence
shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his or her decision at the end
of the hearing. If he or she determines that the person is not liable, he or
she shall dismiss the matter and enter his or her determination in writing
accordingly. If he or she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he or she shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of
the municipality.
   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk
of a superior court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator
together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of the notice of
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12-month
period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person in favor of the
municipality. Notwithstanding any provision of the general statutes, the
hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the
effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may
issue without further notice to such person.
   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing
a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-
259, at a Superior Court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator,
which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of
the judges of the Superior Court.
(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)
§ 12.03 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   In construing this chapter, feminine or neutral pronouns shall be
substitutes for those of masculine form and vice versa and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.
(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)
CHAPTER 13: RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A MEMBER OF A BOARD,
COMMISSION OR RELEVANT POSITION OR PANEL OF ALTERNATES;
ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL
Section
   
13.01   Removal
   
13.02   Appeal
   
13.03   Grounds for removal
§ 13.01 REMOVAL.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor may believe any person appointed to a Board,
Commission, Relevant Position or Panel of Alternates ("Appointee"), by the
Mayor, or any predecessor Mayor, to have engaged in conduct qualifying as a
ground for removal as set forth in § 13.03, or that the requirements of the
public service demand said Appointee's removal, the Mayor may summon said
Appointee to appear at a place and time specified in said summons to show cause
why said Appointee should not be removed from said Board, Commission, Relevant
Position or Panel of Alternates.
   (B)   Said notice shall be either (1) mailed by registered or certified
mail, in each case, return receipt requested and postage prepaid or national
recognized overnight courier, with receipt and all fees paid; or (2) addressed
to an officer authorized to serve legal process with a direction to make
personal or abode service within the time prescribed. Said notice of the
grounds for removal, process for appeal and time and place of hearing shall be
given at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing.
   (C)   With said summons, the Mayor shall leave with said Appointee a written
statement of the charges, the process for appeal and if, after a full hearing,
the Mayor shall find that a ground for removal as set forth in § 13.03 has been
satisfied, the Mayor may remove such person.
(Ord. 727, passed 6-6-22)
§ 13.02 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any such Appointee so removed may appeal the Mayor's order of removal
from said Board, Commission, Relevant Position or Panel of Alternates to the
Legislative Council not more 30 business days from the date of the order of
removal of said Mayor. A vote to overturn the decision of the Mayor shall be by
2/3 vote of the entire membership of the Council.
   (B)   Any such Appointee may, within 30 business days from the date of
decision of the Legislative Council, take any appeals as may be permitted by
law.
   (C)   No such Appointee so removed shall exercise any of the powers of
office during the pendency of the appeal.
(Ord. 727, passed 6-6-22)
§ 13.03 GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Misconduct in the performance of duties.
   (B)   Persistent absence.
   (C)   Conviction of a felony during the current term.
   (D)   Conviction of a misdemeanor during the current term which would
undermine the public confidence in the Appointee's ability to perform the
duties of office.
   (E)   No longer a resident of Hamden.
   (F)   Neglect or dereliction of official duties.
   (G)   A finding by the Board of Ethics of neglect or dereliction of official
duty or a violation of (a) the conflict of interest policy and ethics provision
of the Charter and/or Ordinances; or (b) any other provisions of law pertaining
to unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities (including
violations of federal, state, or local law).
(Ord. 727, passed 6-6-22)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   CODE OF ETHICS
         
31.   PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
         
32.   REGIONAL AUTHORITIES AND COUNCILS
         
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
         
34.   CIVIL PREPAREDNESS
         
35.   OTHER OFFICIALS
         
36.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
37.   OTHER DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER 30: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
   
30.01   Definitions
   
30.02   Code established; purpose
   
30.03   Violation of code
   
30.04   Responsibilities of public office
   
30.05   Conflict of interest
   
30.06   Personal interest to be filed with clerk
   
30.07   Disclosure of private interest
   
30.08   Gifts and favors
   
30.09   Disclosure of confidential information
   
30.10   Improper use of official position
   
30.11   Board of ethics, members
   
30.12   Board to adopt rules and regulations
   
30.13   Board to receive complaints, hold hearings
   
30.14   Board to report findings; render advisory opinions
   
30.15   Reserved
   
30.16   Applicability of code
§ 30.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively.
   (A)   "APPEARS BEFORE." A person appears before a board commission, agency
or department when such person addresses a board, commission, agency or
department and if applicable publicly states his/her name and address for the
record.
   (B)   "EMPLOYEES." All employees of the town and of all governmental bodies
created under the provisions of the town charter, ordinances, or applicable
statutes.
   (C)   "FINANCIAL INTEREST." Ownership of any interest as the result of which
a person has received within the past calender year or is presently receiving
or in the future is entitled to receive more than $1,000 per calendar year or
ownership of, or interest in more than two (2%) percent of a business entity.
   (D)   "GIFT." A favor, hospitality or economic benefit other than
compensation but which does not include campaign contributions reported as
required by state law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of
kinship, or any value received by will, intestate succession, or as a
distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust if established by a
spouse ancestor.
   (E)   "INCOME." Economic benefit received.
   (F)   "INTENTIONALLY." A person acts intentionally, or with intent, with
respect to the nature of his/her conduct or to a result of his/her conduct when
it is his/her conscious objective or desire to engage in the conduct or cause
the result.
   (G)   "INTEREST." Having a share or concern in some project or affair, as
being involved, as liable to be affected or prejudiced, as having self-
interest, and as being the opposite of disinterest.
   (H)   "KNOWINGLY." A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect
to the nature of his/her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his/her
conduct when he/she is aware of the nature of such conduct or that the
circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect
to a result of his/her conduct when he/she is aware that such conduct is
reasonably certain to cause the result.
   (I)   "OFFICIALS." Elected and appointed officials, whether paid or unpaid,
members of the legislative council and of all governmental bodies created under
the provisions of the town charter, ordinances, or applicable statutes.
   (J)   "PARTICIPATING." The rendering of advice, or recommendation,
investigation, approval, disapproval, or otherwise.
   (K)   "PERSON INTEREST." Either an interest in the subject matter or a
relationship with the parties before a Board of Commission impairing the
impartiality expected to characterize each member of such Board or Commission.
   (L)   "THIS CODE." The code of ethics for the town officials and employees.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.02 CODE ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is established a code of ethics for all town officials and
employees.
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards for all
officials and employees by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the
best interests of the town and by directing disclosure by the officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
town.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.03 VIOLATION OF CODE.
   Violation of this code or § 19-3 of the charter, may constitute a cause for
suspension, removal from office or employments, or other disciplinary actions.
The provisions and purpose of this code and the rules, regulations and
standards as shall be established hereunder are declared to be in the best
interests of the town.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.04 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE.
   Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the
United States and the constitution of this state and to carry out impartially
the laws of the nation, state and municipality and thus to foster respect for
all government. Violation of any provisions of this code should raise
conscientious questions for the councilman or other official or employees
concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to
promote the best interests of the town.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.05 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   No official or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or
shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public
interest, or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties.
   (B)   No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment
or render services for private interests when the employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to
impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his
official duties.
   (C)   No paid official or employee shall:
      (1)   Appear in behalf of private interests before any governmental body
of the town.
      (2)   Accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a
specific action by a governmental body.
      (3)   Represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the
interests of the town in any litigation to which the town is a party.
   (D)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Inland Wetlands Board or Commission or nay town agency exercising the powers of
any zoning commission or board, zoning board of appeals or inland wetland board
or commission shall participate on behalf of the town in any manner is such
board member or commissioner has a financial or personal conflict of interest
including but not limited to those conflicts set forth above in divisions (A)
through (C) of this section.
   (E)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board or Zoning Board of Appeals
or nay town agency exercising the powers of any zoning commission or board or
board of appeals, shall participate in the hearing or decision of the board or
commission of which he or she a member upon any matter in which he or she is
directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial sense.
   (F)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board or Zoning Board of
Appeals, or any town agency exercising the powers of any zoning commission or
board or zoning board of appeals, shall appear for or represent any person,
firm, corporation or other entity in any matter pending before the Planning or
Zoning Commission or Board or said Board of Appeals or any agency exercising
the powers of any such commissioner board in the same town, whether or not he
or she is a member of the board or commission hearing the matter.
   (G)   No member of the Inland Wetlands Board or Commission shall participate
in the hearing or decision of such board or commission of which he or she is a
member upon any matter in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested
in a personal or financial sense.
   (H)   No member of any land use board or commission or board or commission
having jurisdiction or exercising any power over any land use or purchasing
decisions may appear before their agency in any matter in which they knowingly
have a pecuniary interest or from representing anyone else before the agency.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.06 PERSONAL INTEREST TO BE FILED WITH CLERK.
   Any official or employee who has a substantial or controlling financial or
significant personal interest in any transaction or contract with the town, or
in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies, or services to the town, shall
make known promptly by a writing filed with the town clerk such interest in any
matter on which he may be called to act in his official capacity. He shall
refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction or the
making of the contract or sale, except as may be requested by the Legislative
Council in accordance with the provisions of §
30.07.
(Adopted 3-3-69, Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.07 DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE INTEREST.
   A member of the council who has a private interest in any matter pending
before the council shall disclose on the records of the council the full nature
and extent of the interest. This provision shall not apply if the councilman
abstains from all discussion and disqualifies himself from voting on the
matter. Any other official or employee who has a financial or other private
interest, and who, at the request of the council, participates in discussion
with or gives an official opinion to the council, shall disclose on the records
of the council the full nature and extent of the interest.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-28-07)
§ 30.08 GIFTS AND FAVORS.
   No official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form
of service, loan, thing or promise from any person, firm or corporation which
to his knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever
in business dealings with the town having any relationship or connection with
the official or employee, in the discharge of his duties.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.09 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No official or employee, without proper legal authorization, shall disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the
town. No official or employee shall use information acquired in the course of
his public duties, to advance the financial or other private interest of
himself or others.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84)
§ 30.10 IMPROPER USE OF OFFICIAL POSITION.
   (A)   No official or employee shall request or permit the use of town-owned
vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit,
except when the services are available to the public generally or are provided
as municipal policy for the use of the official or employee in the conduct of
official business.
   (B)   No official or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every
other citizen.
   (C)   No official or employee, without proper legal authorization, shall
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the town. No official or employee shall use information acquired in
the course of his or her public duties to advance the financial or other
private interest of himself or herself or others.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, adopted 6-18-07;
Am. Ord. 601, adopted 2-7-11)
§ 30.11 BOARD OF ETHICS, MEMBERS.
   The administration of this code of ethics shall be charged to the mayor, who
shall appoint a board of ethics, subject to the approval by two-thirds vote of
the members of the council, consisting of five members, not more than three of
whom shall be members of the same political party and two alternates, all of
whom shall be resident electors of the town. The mayor shall initially appoint
one member for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term
of three years, one for a term of four years, and one for a term of five years.
The Mayor shall also initially appoint one alternate member for a term of two
years and one for a term of one year. Annually thereafter during the month of
January, the mayor shall appoint one member for a term of five years and one
alternate member for a term of two years. Each member of the board shall serve
until his successor has been appointed and qualified.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.12 BOARD TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to § 19-5 of the town charter, the board shall adopt and promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of § 19-3 and § 19-5 of
the town charter and of this code consonant with the provisions hereof. The
rules and regulations so adopted and promulgated and all amendments thereof
shall be made available at the office of the legislative council.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.13 BOARD TO RECEIVE COMPLAINTS, HOLD HEARINGS.
   The board shall receive written complaints of violations of the town charter
and/or of this code and shall, upon such complaint or on its own initiative,
investigate same, and may hold hearings thereon as provided in § 19-5 of the
town charter and in accord with its rules and regulations.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.14 BOARD TO REPORT FINDINGS; RENDER ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The board shall report its findings of a violation of the charter and/
or any such Code of Ethics to the Council in the case of any elected officer,
to the appointing authority in the case of any appointed officer and to the
persons's supervisor in the case of any employee for appropriate disciplinary
action.
   (B)   The board may also render advisory opinions to any official or
employee of the town pursuant to his or her written request.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
§ 30.15 RESERVED.
§ 30.16 APPLICABILITY OF CODE.
   This code shall apply in all instances except when superseded by an
applicable ,statutory or charter provision and when the statutory or charter
provision is mandatory, or when the statutory or charter provision is
discretionary but deemed by the board to be more appropriate or desirable.
(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)
CHAPTER 31: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
Rules and Regulations
   
31.01   Scope and application
   
31.02   Hours of employment
   
31.03   Holidays
   
31.04   Vacations
   
31.05   Additional annual payments for salaried employees
   
31.06   Sick leave
   
31.07   Authorized absence
   
31.08   Health and insurance benefits
   
31.09   Benefits maintained if employee transferred
   
31.10   Retirement age
Medical Examinations
   
31.15   Purpose
   
31.16   Employees affected
   
31.17   Procedure
   
31.18   Control
Retirement Plan
   
31.30   Definitions
   
31.31   Rules of construction
   
31.32   Participation
   
31.33   Credited service; break in service
   
31.34   Member contributions
   
31.35   Service employees; eligibility for pension
   
31.36   Guardian employees; eligibility for pension
   
31.37   Service employees; amount of benefits
   
31.38   Guardian employees; amount of benefits
   
31.39   Form and commencement of benefits
   
31.40   Service employees; death benefits
   
31.41   Guardian employees; death benefits
   
31.42   Cost of living benefit
   
31.43   Funding
   
31.44   Administration
   
31.45   Amendments and terminations
   
31.46   Certain rights and limitations
   
31.47   Rollover provisions
Retiree Health Care Plan
   
31.50   Retiree health care trust
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 31.01 SCOPE AND APPLICATION.
   The following personnel policies shall apply to all regular employees of the
town, except where any provision here covered is a matter of contract. Regular
employees are those who have completed a & month period of employment, and who
work an average of 20 or more hours per week. These policies shall be
applicable upon completion of an employee's 6-month period of employment and
shall be retroactive. Each department head shall administer these policies and
post a copy in their respective offices.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.02 HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   The working hours for personnel shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. with
one hour for lunch. Each employee, at the discretion of the department head, is
entitled to a 10 minute break in the morning and a 10 minute break in the
afternoon. All departments shall arrange to keep the office manned all day,
except departments with only one employee, who shall notify the switchboard
operator when it is necessary to leave an office unmanned temporarily. Salaried
employees required to work overtime shall be allowed compensatory time off at
the discretion of the department head, and when the compensatory time off does
not interfere with the operation of the department. Salaried employees of the
public works department, working overtime, designated lay the department head
as emergency, shall be compensated at an hourly rate commensurate with their
salary rate.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.03 HOLIDAYS.
   Official holidays are the days on which are celebrated New Years' Day,
Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas. If any of the above holidays fall on a Sunday, the following Monday
shall be deemed the official date of the holiday. If the holiday falls on a
Saturday, a substitute day shall be granted at the discretion; of the
department head and when the time off does not interfere with the operation of
the department. Employees on an hourly basis must work the day before and the
day after the holiday to get credit for the holiday. If there is a conflict
between these rules and the federal Monday holiday law, the federal law shall
prevail.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.04 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Regular full-time employees shall accrue paid vacations: after 6
months' service in the current fiscal year, 5 days; after one year, 10 days;
after 5 years, 10 days plus one additional day for each complete additional
year of service to a maximum of 20 days.
   (B)   Vacations may not be accumulated from year to year unless written
approval is granted by the mayor upon application by the department head. Not
more than 10 days' vacation time may be taken at any one time, unless an
employee obtains the approval of the department head. A holiday observed while
an employee is on vacation entitles the employee to one more day of vacation
time.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.05 ADDITIONAL ANNUAL PAYMENTS FOR SALARIED EMPLOYEES.
   Salaried employees shall be entitled to annual payments on account of
continuous years of service on the anniversary date of the commencement of
their employment, based on the following schedule: 7 years, $100; 10 years,
$200; 15 years, $300; 20 years, $400.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.06 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Sick leave shall be accrued at the rate of 1-1/4 working days for each
calendar month of service during the fiscal year, and may be accumulated,
commencing with 1948, to a total of not more than 90 days. Sick leave is not a
privilege which an employee may use at his discretion, but shall be allowed
only for:
      (1)   Personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes
beyond the employee's control.
      (2)   The illness of a member of the employee's household that requires
the employee's personal care and attention.
      (3)   Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with community
health regulations.
   (B)   On request, substantiation of illness by a doctor's certificate must
be furnished.
   (C)   An employee eligible for workmen's compensation shall receive from the
town an amount which, when added to the workmen's compensation benefits, shall
equal his base salary; the benefit shall not be charged against sick leave due
him. They mayor may deny the additional payment by the town upon recommendation
by a department head. An employee may not receive both sick leave pay and pay
to supplement his workmen's compensation when he is eligible for workmen's
compensation benefits.
   (D)   Upon written application, sick leave may be granted to an employee
beyond his accrued time on written approval of the mayor.
   (E)   On the first working day of every month, each department head shall
file with the personnel office a record of the total number of sick days used
by each employee in his department.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.07 AUTHORIZED ABSENCE.
   (A)   Military leave without pay will be granted to employees on regular
duty. An employee with military status for whom a two-week active duty period
each year is mandatory will be granted the difference in pay which, when added
to his military pay, will equal his normal week's pay, exclusive of his
vacation. If he desires to take his vacation during the two-week training
period, he will receive his vacation pay in addition to an amount, which, when
added to his military pay, will equal his normal week's pay. If an employee's
military pay is equal to, or more than, his normal week's pay, he will receive
no compensation from the town for the two-week military training period. Before
applying for this benefit, an employee in the military will produce from his
commanding officer a letter stating his military pay.
   (B)   Employees shall be granted three days' personal leave in the event of
a death in the immediate family, and one day in the event of the death of other
relatives. "IMMEDIATE FAMILY" means parent, child, sibling or spouse of the
employee or the employee's spouse, or any other related person of the employee
actually resident in his household.
   (C)   The mayor may grant a regular employee leave of absence without pay
for study or such other reason as is deemed in the best interests of the town.
If, at the expiration of the leave of absence, the employee does not file a
request to return to work within 30 days, the mayor shall consider his action
as a resignation effective on the first day of the leave of absence.
   (D)   Employees drawn for jury duty will be paid their regular salary less
compensation received for the duty.
   (E)   No absence is authorized unless prior report is made to immediate
supervisor. Compensation adjustment shall be made for unauthorized absence.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.08 HEALTH AND INSURANCE BENEFITS.
   All salaried employees are provided with the following benefits:
   (A)   Blue Cross, semi-private with maternity rider.
   (B)   C.M.S., Century Basic Contract.
   (C)   Major Medical.
   (D)   Retirement plan, as defined.
   (E)   Participating life insurance, plus double indemnity and weekly
disability benefits; optional and contributory.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.09 BENEFITS MAINTAINED IF EMPLOYEE TRANSFERRED.
   Employees in a covered department on transfer to some other department to
which these regulations apply shall maintain all benefits accrued during his
employment in former department.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
§ 31.10 RETIREMENT AGE.
   The maximum retirement age for all town employees shall be 70 years.
(Adopted 10-6-70)
MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS
§ 31.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Protection of retirement program.
   (B)   More efficient-less time loss.
   (C)   Workmen's compensation-retrospective rating plan.
('66 Code, Appendix V, § 1)
§ 31.16 EMPLOYEES AFFECTED.
   Employees affected are all classified positions.
('66 Code, Appendix V, § 2)
§ 31.17 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Specifications of all classified positions shall be amended to include
medical examination and chest %-ray requirement for new employees to insure
that their physical condition will be satisfactory to carry out the duties they
will be required to perform.
   (B)   When a new employee is appointed and before he commences work, the
personnel director shall refer the appointee to the health department for tests
on vision, color perception, hearing, height and weight.
   (C)   Thereafter, he will be required to have a chest X-ray and a medical
examination by a physician prescribed by the civil service commission.
   (D)   The department head and the personnel director will determine from the
medical report if the appointee's physical condition is satisfactory to carry
out the duties required of the position.
('66 Code, Appendix V, § 3)
§ 31.18 CONTROL.
   All payroll notifications for new employees shall carry the signatures of
the department head, the director of finance and the personnel director.
('66 Code, Appendix V, § 4)
RETIREMENT PLAN
§ 31.30 DEFINITIONS.
   "ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS." The sum of a member's contributions to the plan
plus interest credited as provided in §
31.34(C).
   "ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT." A benefit calculated to be of equal value to the
standard form of benefit otherwise payable, computed using a 7% interest rate
and the 1983 Group annuity mortality table weighted 50% male and 50% female.
   "ANNUITY STARTING DATE."
      (1)   The first day of the first month for which a retirement benefit is
paid to a member under the plan, provided that on that date the member must:
         (a)   Be eligible for retirement benefits from this plan and have
actually retired; and
         (b)   Have filed a completed application for benefits with the
Retirement Board.
      (2)   The annuity starting date shall not be later than the later of:
         (a)   The April 1 following the calendar year in which the member
reaches age 70-1/2, or;
         (b)   The April 1 following the calendar year in which the member
retires or otherwise terminates employment.
   "APPLICATION FOR BENEFITS." The form provided by the Retirement Board, which
shall have been completed by the member or his/her beneficiary or spouse and
filed with the Retirement Board in advance of the first month for which
benefits are payable. An application for benefits shall contain such
information as the Retirement Board shall require to establish the member's
rights and benefits under the plan.
   "APPROVED LEAVE OF ABSENCE."
      (1)   Periods of absence during which the member is not receiving pay
from the town. An approved leave of absence shall not constitute a termination
of employment of a member. However, an approved leave of absence in excess of
90 days shall constitute an interruption in the credited service of such
member, unless such member repays the contributions and interest for such
period upon his/her return to employment in accordance with §
31.33(E). Periods of absence within the meaning of this definition are:
         (a)   Approved leave, including leave under the Family and Medical
Leave Act;
         (b)   Temporary illness or temporary disability;
         (c)   Worker's compensation;
         (d)   Voluntary or involuntary service in the armed forces of the
United States while any law requiring military service is in effect.
      (2)   If any member fails to return to work on the date fixed by the
Retirement Board or Personnel Department with respect to any leave, his/her
credited service shall be determined to have ended on the date next preceding
the first day of such absence.
   "AVERAGE ANNUAL COMPENSATION."
      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean the average compensation received by
the member for the most recent 24-month period immediately prior to termination
or, if greater, the average of the highest two consecutive plan years of annual
compensation paid to a member by the town out of the last ten years of credited
service. For periods prior to June 1, 1999, average annual compensation means
the average of the highest three consecutive plan years out of the last ten
years that produce the highest annual compensation.
      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean compensation received by the member
for the most recent 12-consecutive-month period immediately prior to
termination or, if greater, the highest one plan year of annual compensation
paid to a member by the town out of the last ten years of credited service.
   "BENEFICIARY."
      (1)   Any individual (other than a pensioner), estate or other recipient
designated by an employee to receive a death benefit payable under this plan as
set forth in §
31.39(D). Such designation must be filed with the Retirement Board on a form
provided by the Retirement Board. Any such designation or change of designation
of beneficiary shall take effect as of the date of execution of such notice
whether or not the member is living at the time of such filing, provided there
has not been an unreasonable delay in the filing of such designation.
      (2)   A member's spouse is automatically designated as the beneficiary as
of the date of the marriage, unless a member subsequently files a new
designation of beneficiary. However, the designation of a spouse as beneficiary
is revoked upon a divorce absolute from such spouse, except as otherwise
provided by any valid terms of an outstanding approved Domestic Relations Order
received by the plan prior to any payment. The member must expressly notify the
plan in writing of such a divorce. The plan shall not be liable for any
payments made in accordance with the designation of beneficiary on file if it
had no prior written notice of such a divorce.
   "BREAK IN SERVICE." A one-year non-paid period of absence beginning on the
date a member leaves employment with the town and no longer contributes to the
plan.
   "CODE." The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or replaced from time
to time.
   "COMPENSATION."
      (1)   Service employees. Compensation shall mean the regular basic salary
paid to an employee for services rendered to the town each year. Compensation
shall exclude bonuses, special pay, pay for overtime or premium pay and the
town's cost for any public or private employee benefit plan including this
plan. Compensation shall include longevity payments and workers' compensation
payments. Compensation in respect of any town clerk who elects to receive
credited service in accordance with the provisions of §
31.33(D), shall mean the regular basic salary paid to the town clerk.
      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean the regular basic salary paid to an
employee for services rendered to the town each year. Compensation shall
exclude bonuses, special pay, pay for overtime or premium pay and the town's
cost for any public or private employee benefit plan including this plan.
Compensation shall include longevity payments, worker's compensation payments
and holiday pay.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, effective July 1, 1996,
the amount of annual compensation used to determine the retirement benefit of
an employee who becomes a member in the plan on or after July 1, 1996 shall be
limited to $150,000, as indexed, in accordance with Section 401(a)(17) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
   "CREDITED SERVICE." A member's service with the town as an eligible employee
for purposes of determining the amount of his/her benefits hereunder and
determining eligibility for a pension. The calculation of credited service
shall begin on the member's date of hire and shall end on the member's date of
termination and shall not include periods during which a member incurs a break
in service or does not make the required contributions. Credited service shall
also include the purchase of military service as provided in §
31.33(B) and (D), and sick leave buy-out as applicable to police guardian
employees in accordance with the provisions of §
31.33(C). Credited service shall also include any credited service which an
employee elects to receive for service as town clerk in accordance with the
provisions of §
31.33(D).
   "DATE OF ADOPTION." The date upon which this revised plan is adopted by the
Legislative Council of the town.
   "DEPENDENT CHILD." A biological or legally adopted child of a member who has
survived the member and has not attained the age of 18 years.
   "DISABILITY PENSION." Payments under the plan as provided in §
31.35(D) and (E) or §
31.36(D) and (E).
   "DOMESTIC RELATIONS ORDER." Any judgment, decree, order or approval of a
property settlement agreement relating to child support, alimony payments or
marital property rights to an alternate payee and made pursuant to a state
domestic relations law, including a community property law.
   "EARLY RETIREMENT DATE."
      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean the first day of any calendar month
elected at the option of the member as his/her annuity starting date, provided
that the member has reached age 55 and has at least ten years of credited
service. The benefits for which the member is eligible for under this section
shall be actuarially reduced to take into account such early retirement.
      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean the first day of any calendar month
elected at the option of the member as his/her annuity starting date, provided
that the member has at least 15 years of credited service and is within five
years of his/her normal retirement date. The benefits for which the member
otherwise would be eligible under this section shall not be actuarially reduced
to take into account such early retirement.
   "EFFECTIVE DATE." The original effective date of this plan is October 3,
1949. The effective date of this amended and restated plan shall be July 1,
2015 except as otherwise specifically provided in §§
31.30 through
31.47.
   "ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE OR EMPLOYEE."
      (1)   "Employee" means any person who is employed by the town.
      (2)   "Eligible employee" means any individual who is an employee of the
town, also known as either a service employee or a guardian employee, who meets
the following requirements:
         (a)   Employee is regularly scheduled to work more than 20 hours per
week; and
         (b)   Employee makes the mandatory employee contributions.
      (3)   Eligible employee shall not include the following types of
employees:
         (a)   Seasonal or temporary employee;
         (b)   Employees that participate in any other plan that the town is
required to contribute to;
         (c)   An employee who participates in the Connecticut State Teacher's
Retirement System;
         (d)   An officer of the town elected by popular vote except for an
employee who elects to receive for service as town clerk in accordance with the
provisions of §
31.33(D).
         (e)   A person receiving a pension or annuity benefit from the town or
receiving severance pay, retainer or fee under contract;
         (f)   A guardian employee hired by the town after July 1, 2006 who has
been accepted to participate in the Connecticut Municipal Employee Retirement
System "CMERS", other that any of the three police guardian employees hired by
the town between July 1, 2006 and January 24, 2007 who have elected to
participate in the plan prior to April 1, 2007;
         (g)   "Floater" custodians hired by the Board of Education;
         (h)   Part-time employees working more than 20 hours per week on a
cumulative basis;
         (i)   Employees who are crossing guards; and
         (j)   Effective July 1, 2007, a service employee hired by the town
after July 1, 2007 who has been accepted to participate in the Connecticut
Municipal Employee Retirement System ("CMERS").
      (4)   The term "employee" or "eligible employee" shall not include a
leased employee of an employer, within the meaning of Section 414(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code, who otherwise meets the conditions for participation,
vesting and/or benefit accrual under the plan.
   "GUARDIAN EMPLOYEE." Any employee of the town who is duly sworn in, affirmed
or otherwise authenticated and employed by the Town of Hamden as a police
officer in the Police Department or a firefighter in the Fire Department and
the executive officers of both such departments such as the Police and Fire
Chiefs and their respective deputies.
   "MEMBER." Any person included in the membership of the plan as provided in §
31.32.
For purposes of the plan, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   "ACTIVE MEMBER." A member who is an eligible employee and is
participating in the plan;
      (2)   "RETIRED MEMBER." A member who is no longer an eligible employee
and has begun receiving a retirement pension from the plan; and
      (3)   "TERMINATED VESTED MEMBER." A member who has a vested interest in
the plan but who is no longer an employee of the town.
   "NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE."
      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean age 65, or the completion of 30 years
of credited service, or age 55 and the completion of 20 years of credited
service, whichever is earlier. A member's annuity starting date shall be the
first day of the month following attainment of his/her normal retirement date
and completion and receipt of an application for benefits.
      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean age 60, or the completion of 20
years of credited service, whichever is earlier. A member's annuity starting
date shall be the first day of the month following attainment of his/her normal
retirement date and completion and receipt of an application for benefits.
   "PLAN." The employees' retirement plan of the Town of Hamden as described in
§§
31.30 through
31.47 as they may be amended from time to time.
   "PLAN YEAR." A period of 12 consecutive months commencing each July 1 or any
anniversary thereof, and the basis on which the records of the plan are kept.
   "RETIREMENT BOARD." The Retirement Board which shall manage and administer
the plan, as provided for in §
31.44.
   "RETIREMENT PENSION." Payments under the plan payable as provided in §§
31.37 or
31.38.
   "SERVICE EMPLOYEE." Any employee of the town that is not a guardian
employee.
   "TOWN." The Town of Hamden, Connecticut.
   "TRUST AGREEMENT." The Trust Agreement between the town and the Retirement
Board of the employees retirement plan of the town effective July 1, 1997
adopted pursuant to Ord. 399.
   "VESTED STATUS." A member's right to a non-forfeitable benefit under the
plan.
   "VESTING SERVICE." Service as an eligible employee that qualifies him/her
for a retirement pension under the plan. Vesting service shall be equal to
years of credited service earned by the member, plus periods of non-service
required to be credited for vesting purposes in accordance with the Uniformed
Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act and the Family and Medical
Leave Act.
   "YEAR." A year as used in calculating credited service and vesting service
shall mean a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, and shall include a
fractional part of a year based upon completed calendar months. A fraction of a
month in excess of 15 days is to be counted as a completed month.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 557, passed 3-
3-08; Am. Ord. 575, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7- 15; Am. Ord. 692,
passed 11-20-17)
§ 31.31 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Number. Words used in the singular or plural shall be construed as if
plural or singular, respectively, where they would so apply.
   (B)   Titles. Titles of articles and section headings are inserted for
convenience and shall not affect the meaning or construction of the plan.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.32 PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Participation. Each employee shall become a member in the plan
effective as of the first day of the month following completion of 12 months of
credited service, provided he/she is an eligible employee. All eligible
employees shall participate in the plan as a condition of employment with the
town, and shall make any mandatory employee contributions so required for non-
bargaining unit employees or by the applicable collective bargaining agreement.
   (B)   Termination of participation.
      (1)   A member's membership in the plan shall terminate under the
following conditions:
         (a)   Termination of employment with the town other than by reason of
the member's death, retirement or disability, provided such member was not
entitled to a vested pension under the plan.
         (b)   Withdrawal of the member's accumulated contributions.
      (2)   Membership shall be continued during an approved leave of absence
from service without pay or for periods when the member is not an eligible
employee as herein defined, but is in the employ of the town in another
capacity. However, such member shall not receive credited service for any
period in excess of 90 days in which no contributions were made.
   (C)   Reinstatement of participation.
      (1)   An employee who has lost his/her status as a member in accordance
with division (B) of this section shall again become a member, effective the
first day of the month following his/her return to employment as an eligible
employee, provided the member was previously employed for more than one year
and he/she did not incur a permanent break in service.
      (2)   In the event such employee had previously received a return of his/
her accumulated contributions, he/she shall be considered a new employee for
all plan purposes, unless the employee returns his/her accumulated
contributions in accordance with §
31.34(E).
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.33 CREDITED SERVICE; BREAK IN SERVICE.
   (A)   Credited service.
      (1)   A member shall receive credited service for each year and completed
months of service (a fraction of a month in excess of 15 days shall count as a
full month) from the date he/she became an eligible employee to his/her date of
termination, death or retirement, provided that such employment was continuous.
Employment is continuous if service is not interrupted by a termination of
employment or a non-paid approved leave of absence in excess of 90 days. Except
as provided in division (E) of this §
31.33, in no event may a member receive credited service for any period longer
than 90 days during which he/she was required to make member contributions and
failed to do so.
      (2)   The accrual of credited service shall be limited to a maximum of 35
years for members who were first employed by the town on or after July 1, 1978.
For members hired before July 1, 1978, the maximum retirement pension may
exceed 35 years of credited service, provided however, that the member retires
prior to June 30, 2008. A member with more than 35 years of credited service as
of June 30, 2008 who continues to work shall not accrue additional years of
credited service on and after such date.
      (3)   The credited service of a member who has been employed by the town
as both a service employee and a guardian employee shall be considered separate
and distinct periods of credited service for benefit accrual purposes, but
shall be combined for vesting purposes.
      (4)   Guardian employees first employed after January 1, 1989 shall be
credited with past service employee service, if applicable, but shall receive
guardian employee credited service equal to one year of guardian employee
credited service for each two years of service employee credited service,
prorated proportionately as appropriate.
   (B)   Military service purchase prior to employment with the town.
      (1)   A member shall be allowed to purchase credited service for active
military duty prior to employment with the town. A member may purchase a
minimum of six months, up to a maximum of four years. A member must provide
documentation of military service in the form of a D.D.214, and must have been
honorably discharged.
      (2)   The cost to purchase such military service shall be calculated as
follows:
         (a)   For members hired prior to April 1, 1992, the cost to purchase
military service shall be equal to 5% of the compensation of the member on the
effective date of employment, multiplied by the number of years and/or months
in active military duty as specified on the member's D.D.214, plus 5% interest
compounded annually from initial date of employment through March 31, 1992.
         (b)   For members hired on or after April 1, 1992, the cost to
purchase military service shall be equal to 5% of the compensation of the
member on the effective date of employment, multiplied by the number of years
and/or months in active military duty as specified on the member's D.D.214,
plus 5% interest compounded annually from initial date of employment through
the date the member elects to purchase such service and begins repayment.
      (3)   Any new employee shall have a period of 36 months from the date of
hire to buy back said military time, and can pay by voluntary payroll deduction
on a post-tax basis, in an approved equal payment plan, or other arrangement
agreed to by the Retirement Board.
   (C)   Non-work periods credited. Except as provided in this division (C), a
member shall not receive credited service for periods of absence from
employment with the town in excess of 90 days.
      (1)   Military service. The plan shall grant credited service and years
of vesting service in accordance with the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-
employment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA) for a member who was an eligible
employee immediately prior to the commencement of military service as defined
in USERRA, provided such member returns to employment with the town within the
required period of time set forth in divisions (2)(a)l. through 4., below.
Credited service shall only be granted if the member fulfills the requirements
of division (C)(3). Effective January 1, 2007, if a member dies while
performing qualified military service (as defined in Section 414(u) of the
Internal Revenue Code), the member's beneficiaries are entitled to any
additional benefits (other than benefit accruals related to the period of
qualified military service) provided under the plan had the member resumed and
then terminated employment with the town on account of death. Effective for
plan years commencing after December 31, 2008, "compensation" for purposes of
determining benefits and/or member contributions shall include "differential
wage payments" as that term is defined in Section 414(u)(12) of the Internal
Revenue Code that a member receives from the town while on active duty and
performing services for the U.S. uniformed services.
      (2)   (a)   Under USERRA, the required period depends on the length of
military service. In general, the required period is:
            1.   One day after a member's military service ends (if such
service was less than 31 days);
            2.   Fourteen days after a member's military service ends (if such
service was more than 30, but less than 181 days); and
            3.   Ninety days after a member's military service ends (if such
service was more than 180 days).
            4.   If a member is hospitalized for or recovering from an illness
or injury which was incurred or aggravated during military service, USERRA
requires that such member register for re-employment with the town as soon as
he/she has recovered. Except as otherwise provided by USERRA, this recovery
period cannot exceed two years.
         (b)   A member who enters the Armed Forces of the United States for a
period of not more than five years (consecutive or individual years), is
separated from active duty under conditions other than a dishonorable
discharge, and returns to or is available for work within the period specified
in division (2)(a)l. through 4. above shall be granted not to exceed one year
of credited service or years of vesting service in any one calendar year, up to
a maximum of five years of credited service or years of vesting service, for
such active duty in the Armed Forces.
      (3)   A member returning from military service who meets the requirements
of division (C)(1) and (2) shall have the right to make up his/her member
contributions and thereby receive credited service equal to his/her period of
military service, to a maximum of five years of credited service. Such member
must notify the Retirement Board upon re-employment of his/her desire to repay
his/her member contributions. Such contributions shall be made either in a lump
sum payment or on a pre-tax basis over a period equal to the lesser of three
times his/her military service or five years. The amount of member
contributions owed to the plan shall be equal to a percentage of the member's
earnings (determined in accordance with the member's contribution rate in
effect at the time the member entered military service) for the preceding 12-
month period prior to his/her military service, multiplied by the number of
years and months of military service, to a maximum of five years; plus
compounded interest at the rate of 5% annually.
      (4)   To the extent required by USERRA, a member must inform the town in
writing before entering military service in order to be eligible for years of
vesting service as described above.
   (D)   Break in service.
      (1)   If a member has a break in service before attaining vested status,
it has the effect of canceling the member's standing under this plan; that is,
the forfeiture of his/her participation, his/her previously accrued years of
vesting service and years of credited service. However, a break in service may
be temporary, subject to repair by a return to employment with the town.
      (2)   A break in service is repairable, in the sense that its effects are
eliminated if, before incurring a permanent break in service, the member
subsequently returns to employment with the town. Previously earned vesting
service and credited service shall be restored, provided previously refunded
contributions are returned in accordance with division (D)(4). However, nothing
in this division (D)(2) shall change the effect of a permanent break in
service.
      (3)   Permanent break in service. A break in service for a period longer
than the member's years of credited service will result in a permanent break in
service and the cancellation of credited service and vesting service. A break
in service will be considered a permanent break in service and all previously
accrued years of vesting service and years of credited service will be canceled
if the member does not return to employment with the town as of the last day of
the plan year in which the number of one-year breaks in service equals or
exceeds the number of previously earned credited service or years of vesting
service, whichever is greater.
      (4)   Effect of a permanent break in service. If a member who has not
achieved vested status has a permanent break in service:
         (a)   Previous years of credited service and vesting service are
canceled; and
         (b)   Participation is canceled and new participation is subject to
the provisions of §
31.32(A).
      (5)   A member who returns to employment with the town before incurring a
permanent break in service may have previous credited service and vesting
service restored upon returning his/her accumulated contributions plus interest
within 60 days of his/her re-employment, in accordance with the provisions of §
31.34(E). If such member fails to return his/her accumulated contributions, the
member shall be considered a new member for all purposes of the plan and
forfeit previously earned credited service and vesting service with the town.
      (6)   In no event shall a member who is inducted into the armed services
of the United States incur a break in service if the member returns to
employment with the town in accordance with the provisions of division (C)(2)
of this section.
      (7)   In no event shall a member who is on an approved leave of absence
incur a break in service, unless such member does not return to employment on
the date specified by the Retirement Board.
      (8)   If a member is laid off and is called back to active service within
two years, no permanent break in service shall occur, subject to the return of
contributions in accordance with division (D)(4) of this section.
   (E)   Service as town clerk. Subject to the conditions hereafter set forth,
the plan shall grant credited service and years of vesting service for service
as town clerk for a member who was an eligible employee immediately prior to
the commencement of service as town clerk. Such grant of credited service and
years of vesting service for any active continuous service as town clerk shall
be conditioned upon the member informing the town in writing within 60 days of
becoming town clerk (or within 60 days of the effective date of this amendment,
if later) of his/her desire to receive credited service and vesting service
credit during his/her service as town clerk and his/her election to make
contributions on a regular periodic basis during the term of his/her service as
town clerk calculated upon such member's compensation during his/her service as
town clerk. If, when such election is made, there are periods of service as
town clerk for which contributions were not made because the election was not
available for such earlier period(s), then the contributions attributable to
such prior period of time, together with accumulated interest at the rate of 5%
per annum, shall be made in a lump sum payment at the time of the election or
over a period of the lesser of (i) three years or (ii) the period of such
service during which contributions were not made.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15; Am. Ord. 692, passed 11-20-17)
§ 31.34 MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Required contributions.
      (1)   Service employees. As a condition of employment, eligible employees
are required to make mandatory employee contributions to the plan.
Contributions shall be based on a percentage of an employee's compensation for
service and shall be equal to the following:
               Contribution
   Effective Date         Rate
   July 1, 2007         5.5%
   July 1, 2008         5.5%
   July 1, 2009         5.5%
   July 1, 2010         6.0%
   July 1, 2011         6.0%
   July 1, 2012         6.5%
   July 1, 2013         7.0%
   July 1, 2014         7.5%
   July 1, 2015         7.75%
   July 1, 2016         8.0%
      (2)   Guardian employees. Effective January 1, 2000, as a condition of
employment, eligible employees are required to make mandatory employee
contributions to the plan. Contributions shall be based on an employee's
compensation, but shall exclude holiday pay, for service on and after January
1, 2000, and shall be equal to the following:
         (a)   For guardian employees who were members of the plan on July 1,
1998:
               Contribution
   Effective Date         Rate
   July 1, 2001         5%
   July 1, 2000         4%
   January 1, 2000      3%
         (b)   For guardian employees who first become members of the plan on
or after January 1, 2000, the contribution rate shall equal 5% of compensation.
         (c)   For all guardian employees who are eligible employees,
regardless of when they became members of the plan, the contribution rate shall
be equal to the following:
               Contribution
   Effective Date         Rate
   July 1, 2006         5%
   July 1, 2007         6%
   July 1, 2008         6.5%
   July 1, 2009         7%
   July 1, 2010         7.5%
   July 1, 2011         8%
   July 1, 2012         8.%
   July 1, 2013         8.5%
   July 1, 2014         8.5%
         (d)   Employees who became members prior to July 1, 1986 were required
to make member contributions under the terms of the plan and the collective
bargaining agreement in existence prior to that date. From July 1, 1986 through
December 31, 1999, member contributions were neither required nor permitted.
      (3)   Service employees who continue to work beyond July 1, 2008 and have
reached the cap on credited service shall not be required to make the above
referenced contributions. Guardian employees who continue to work beyond June
30, 2006 and have reached the cap on credited service shall not be required to
make the above referenced contributions.
   (B)   Employer pick-up contributions.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2000, pursuant to Section 414(h)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code, the town shall pick up and pay the contributions that
otherwise would be payable by each member. The contributions so picked-up shall
be treated as employer contributions for purposes of determining the amounts of
federal income taxes to withhold from each member's earnings.
      (2)   Member contributions picked up by the town shall be paid from the
same source of funds used for the payment of salaries to employees. A deduction
shall be made from each member's compensation equal to the amount of the member
contributions picked up by the town, provided that such deduction shall not
reduce the member's compensation for purposes of computing benefits under this
plan.
      (3)   Member contributions picked-up by the town shall be credited to a
separate account for each member, so that member contributions made prior to
January 1, 2000 may be distinguished from the member contributions picked-up by
the town on and after January 1, 2000.
   (C)   Interest on member contributions. Member contributions shall be
credited with interest compounded annually as follows:
   Interest Rate         Effective Date
   2%            Prior to May 29, 1969
   4%            June 1, 1969 - June 30, 1981
   5%            July 1, 1981
   (D)   Return of member contributions. Any person ceasing to be a member for
any cause other than death, retirement under the plan, or under circumstances
which entitle the member to a vested pension, shall be paid in one lump sum
his/her accumulated contributions within six months after termination of
participation in the plan.
   (E)   Repayment of member contributions upon re-employment.
      (1)   A non-vested member with a minimum of one year of credited service
with the town who terminates employment, receives a distribution of accumulated
contributions and again becomes re-employed by the town may have his/her
previous service with the town restored, provided the member returns to
employment with the town within five years of his/her termination date and upon
repaying the amount of his/her accumulated contributions, plus interest at the
rate of 5% calculated from the date of distribution to the date of re-
employment. Payment must be made in one lump sum payment within 60 days of the
member's date of reemployment.
      (2)   In no event may a member's credited service and vesting service be
restored if he/she has incurred a permanent break in service under the
provisions of §
31.33(D).
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 575, passed 6-
1-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.35 SERVICE EMPLOYEES; ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSION.
   (A)   Regular pension. A service employee member may retire on a regular
pension upon attaining his/her normal retirement date and submitting an
application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board.
   (B)   Early retirement pension. A service employee member may retire on an
early retirement pension upon attaining age 55 and if he/she has accumulated at
least ten years of credited service.
   (C)   Vested pension. Any service employee member who ceases to be an
employee of the town for any cause other than his/her death or retirement, and
has accumulated at least ten years of credited service with the town, shall be
entitled to receive a vested pension commencing at normal retirement age (the
date he/she would have been entitled to submit an application for benefits for
approval by the Retirement Board for a regular pension under division (A) if
he/she had remained in employment with the town through his/her normal
retirement date).
   (D)   Service related disability pension.
      (1)   Any service employee member who is found by the Retirement Board to
have become totally and permanently disabled from engaging in any and every
duty of his/her or her occupation with the town during the first 24 months of
continuous disability or, after the first 24 months of disability, from
engaging for profit in any occupation or employment reasonably comparable in
nature with that in which the member has engaged at the time such disability
occurred, shall be entitled, upon approval of his/her written application for
benefits filed with the Retirement Board, to retire and receive a service
related disability pension. No member may make more than one application to the
Retirement Board per 12-month period for a disability retirement, unless such
subsequent request is based upon a separate injury or illness.
      (2)   The right of such service employee member to receive and to
continue to receive a service related disability pension shall be subject to
the member becoming totally and permanently disabled as a result of injuries
arising out of and in the course of his/her employment by the town within the
meaning of the workers' compensation laws of the State of Connecticut.
      (3)   The Retirement Board may inquire from time to time into the
continued disability of any service employee member receiving a disability
pension and may terminate such disability pension at any time if:
         (a)   The Retirement Board finds that the member is no longer totally
and permanently disabled; or
         (b)   The member refuses to comply with any reasonable request of the
Retirement Board for a medical examination of the member or for requests for
other evidence as to his/her condition.
   (E)   Non-service related disability pension. Any service employee member
who is found by the Retirement Board to have become totally and permanently
disabled due to an injury or illness not arising out of the course of a
member's employment with the town shall be entitled to retire on a non-service
related disability pension, following the completion of at least ten years of
credited service. For service employees hired on or after July 1, 1991, such
service employee member shall be entitled to retire on a non-service related
disability pension, following the completion of at least 15 years of credited
service.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.36 GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSION.
   (A)   Regular pension. A guardian employee member may retire on a regular
pension upon attaining his/her normal retirement date and submitting an
application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a guardian employee who has not previously retired shall be
retired effective the first of the month following his 65th birthday.
   (B)   Early retirement pension. A guardian employee member may retire on an
early retirement pension if he/she is within five years of age 60 and has
accumulated at least 15 years of credited service.
   (C)   Vested pension.
      (1)   Any guardian employee member who ceases to be an employee of the
town for any cause other than his/her death or retirement and has accumulated
at least ten years of credited service with the town shall be entitled to
receive a vested pension according to the following schedule:
Years of Credited Service   Percent of Vested Pension
   1-9            0%
   10            50%
   11            60%
   12            70%
   13            80%
   14            90%
   15 or more         100%
      (2)   A guardian employee member who is entitled to receive a vested
pension may begin commencement of such benefit on the earlier of the first full
month following:
         (a)   The month that the guardian employee member would have completed
20 years of credited service had he/she remained in service for the town; or
         (b)   The month the guardian employee member attains his/her normal
retirement date (the date he/she would have been entitled to submit an
application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board for a regular
pension under division (A) if he/she had remained in employment with the town
through his/her normal retirement date).
   (D)   Service related disability pension.
      (1)   Any guardian employee member who is found by the Retirement Board
to have become totally and permanently disabled from engaging for profit in any
occupation or employment reasonably comparable in nature with that in which the
guardian employee member has engaged at the time such disability occurred shall
be entitled, upon approval of his/her written application for benefits filed
with the Retirement Board, to retire and receive a service related disability
pension. No guardian employee member may make more than one application to the
Retirement Board during a 12-month period for a disability retirement unless
such subsequent request is based upon a separate injury or illness.
      (2)   The right of such guardian employee member to receive and to
continue to receive a service related disability pension shall be subject to
the guardian employee member becoming totally and permanently disabled as a
result of injuries arising out of and in the course of his/her employment with
the town within the meaning of the workers' compensation laws of the State of
Connecticut.
      (3)   The Retirement Board may inquire from time to time into the
continued disability of any guardian employee member receiving a disability
pension and may terminate such disability pension at any time if:
         (a)   The Retirement Board finds that the guardian employee member is
no longer totally and permanently disabled; or
         (b)   The guardian employee member refuses to comply with any
reasonable request of the Retirement Board for a medical examination of the
guardian employee member or for requests for other evidence as to his/her
condition.
   (E)   Non-service related disability pension. Any guardian employee member
who is found by the Retirement Board to have become totally and permanently
disabled due to an injury or illness not arising out of the course of a
guardian employee member's employment with the town shall be entitled to retire
on a non-service related disability pension following the completion of at
least ten years of credited service.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.37 SERVICE EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT OF BENEFITS.
   (A)   Amount of regular pension.
      (1)   The monthly regular pension for a service employee member employed
by the town as an eligible employee on and after July 1, 1999 shall, except as
otherwise provided in division (A)(5) of this section, be equal to the
following:
         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2.5% of a service employee member's
average annual compensation multiplied by the service employee member's years
of credited service to a maximum of 20 years; plus
         (b)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a service employee member's average
annual compensation multiplied by the service employee member's years of
credited service in excess of 20, to a maximum of 35 years.
         (c)   A service employee member's retirement pension shall not exceed
80% of his/her average annual compensation, subject to the provisions of
division (A)(2).
      (2)   The maximum retirement pension for service employee members hired
on or after July 1, 1978 shall be limited to 35 years of credited service. For
service employee members hired before July 1, 1978, the maximum retirement
pension payable may exceed 35 years of credited service, provided that a
service employee member with more than 35 years of credited service as of June
30, 2008, who continues to work shall have his/her benefit frozen as of June
30, 2008, based on the service employee member's average annual compensation on
such date. In no event shall it exceed 85% of average annual compensation.
      (3)   The monthly regular pension for a service employee member who
terminated service or retired prior to July 1, 1999 shall be equal to the
following, unless the provisions of the plan in effect when the service
employee member terminated set forth a different pension benefit:
         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a service employee member's average
annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of credited service, up
to a maximum of 25 years; plus
         (b)   An additional one-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a service employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of
credited service rendered in excess of 25.
      (4)   For service employee members who terminated employment prior to
July 1, 1995, the amount of the service employee member's regular pension
calculated in accordance with division (A)(3) of this section shall be offset
by a percentage of the service employee member's social security determined as
follows:
         (a)   A service employee member's regular pension shall be offset by
the lesser of the set social security offset percent in division (A)(4)(b) or
the formulated social security offset in division (A)(4)(c), based upon the
service employee member's primary amount of social security at age 65 under the
Federal Social Security Act; such amount to be determined based on the level of
compensation received by the service employee member at the date of termination
of employment with the town.
         (b)   The "set social security offset percent" is as follows for each
of the plan years:
Retirement Date On or After      Social SecurityOffset
   January 1, 1986         58%
   January 1, 1987         56%
   January 1, 1988         54%
   January 1, 1989         52%
   January 1, 1990         50%
   January 1, 1991         48%
   January 1, 1992         40%
   January 1, 1993         30%
   January 1, 1994         20%
   January 1, 1995         10%
   July 1, 1995            0%
         (c)   The "formulated social security offset percent" is calculated as
follows: divide the service employee member's number of years of credited
service with the town by 30 and multiply by 60%.
         (d)   Any service employee member who retired between July 1, 1991,
and February 1, 1992, had their social security offset reduced to 30%, provided
that they applied for a retirement and completed the appropriate application
forms between July 1, 1991 and February 1, 1992.
      (5)   In the event a service employee member has service as both a
service employee and a guardian employee, his/her regular pension attributable
to his/her service as a guardian employee shall be calculated separately, in
accordance with the provisions of §
31.38 and based upon his/her compensation and years of credited service accrued
while as a guardian employee.
   (B)   Minimum retirement benefit.
      (1)   For service employee members who terminate employment on or after
July 1, 1985, the monthly regular pension benefit under division (A) of this
section shall not be less than sixty hundredths (60/100) of 1% of the service
employee member's average annual compensation, divided by 12, for each year of
credited service, or $3.25, whichever is greater.
      (2)   For service employee members who terminated with a vested benefit
before July 1, 1985, their minimum benefit shall be calculated using the
applicable provisions of the plan in effect prior to July 1, 2000.
   (C)   Amount of disability pension.
      (1)   A service employee member retiring on a service related or non-
service related disability pension as defined in §
31.35(D) shall receive a monthly benefit equal to the greater of:
         (a)   50% of the service employee member's average annual
compensation; or
         (b)   The service employee member's monthly regular pension calculated
in accordance with division (A) of this section as of his/her date of
disability.
      (2)   A service employee member who is eligible for a regular pension
pursuant to §
31.35(A) shall have a non-service related disability pension calculated as if
the service employee member was retiring on a regular pension.
   (D)   Amount of early retirement pension benefit. The amount of the early
retirement pension benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as the
monthly regular pension in division (A) of this section, but shall be reduced
to take into account such early retirement as follows:
      (1)   From age 60 to age 65, 0.6% for each month early retirement
precedes age 65; and
      (2)   From age 55 to age 60, 0.3% for each month early retirement
precedes age 60.
   (E)   Vested pension.
      (1)   A service employee member shall be entitled to a vested pension
after completion of at least ten years of credited service or ten years of
vesting service. The amount of the vested pension shall be calculated in the
same manner as a regular pension, in accordance with the provisions of the plan
and benefit formula in effect on the date the service employee member
terminated employment.
      (2)   The vested pension benefits provided by this division (E) shall be
in lieu of all other benefits provided by the plan for such service employee
member, his/her spouse and his/her dependent children, except for the return of
the service employee member's accumulated contributions.
   (F)   Maximum benefit limitation.
      (1)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary,
for plan years beginning on or after June 30, 2002 and prior to July 1, 2007
the annual benefit of a service employee member hereunder (adjusted to an
actuarially equivalent straight life annuity based upon the interest rate as
determined by the PBGC on January 1 each year) shall not at any time within the
limitation year exceed the lesser of $140,000 (the "dollar limitation") or 100%
of the member's average compensation for his/her high three years.
         (b)   For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 2007 in no event
shall the maximum annual retirement benefit attributable to town contributions
and payable to a service employee member who has not yet retired under the term
of the plan, exceed $160,000 (the defined benefit dollar limitation).
      (2)   The annual retirement benefit payable to a service employee member
under the plan shall be deemed not to exceed the applicable maximum limitation
of division (F)(l) if:
         (a)   The annual retirement benefit payable with respect to such
service employee member under the plan and under all defined benefit plans of
the town does not exceed $10,000 for the limitation year, or for any prior
limitation year; and
         (b)   The town has not at any time maintained a defined contribution
plan in which the service employee member participated.
      (3)   In the event that a service employee member has been a member in
the plan less than ten years, the dollar limitation and the defined benefit
dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which is his years of participation in the plan (or part thereof)
and the denominator of which is ten. In the event that a member has less than
ten years of vesting service, the $10,000 benefit above, shall be reduced by
multiplication by a fraction, the numerator of which is his years of service
(or part thereof) and the denominator of which is ten.
   (G)   Maximum benefit limitation definitions. For purposes of divisions (F)
through (K) of this section:
      (1)   The term "ANNUAL BENEFIT" shall mean the benefit the service
employee member would be entitled to at his/her or her normal retirement date,
assuming he or she continues employment until such date, and that all other
relevant facts used to determine benefits under the plan remain constant as of
the current limitation year for all future limitation years.
      (2)   "ANNUAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT" means a benefit payable annually in the
form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a plan to
which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions (as
defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code) are made. A benefit payable in any other form shall be converted to the
actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity for purposes of applying these
limits based on a 5% interest assumption. Other required adjustments are
provided for in this division. In the event that a service employee member's
annual retirement benefit is payable in a form other than a straight life
annuity, or if the members contribute to the plan or make rollover
contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code), the determinations as to whether the limitation
described in division (F)(1) has been satisfied shall be made, in accordance
with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary, by adjusting such benefit so
that it is the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no
ancillary benefits). For purposes of this division (G)(2), any ancillary
benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits shall not
be taken into account; and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity which
constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined in Section 417
of the Internal Revenue Code) shall not be taken into account. For purposes of
adjusting any benefit, the interest rate assumption shall not be less than the
greater of 5% or the rate specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.
      (3)   "COMPENSATION" for purposes of the maximum benefit limitations
under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, shall mean any and all earnings
reported on W-2 forms completed by the town in respect to the plan year
specified. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for plan years
commencing after December 31, 1997, "Compensation" for this section shall
include (1) any elective deferral (as defined in Section 402(g)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code), (2) any amount which is contributed or deferred by the
town at the election of the member and which is not includable in the gross
income of the member by reason of Sections 125 (cafeteria plan) or 457 (non-
qualified deferred compensation plan) of the Internal Revenue Code. For plan
years commencing on and after January 1, 2001, "Compensation" shall also
include elective amounts that are not includable in the gross income of the
participant by reason of Section 132(f)(4) (qualified transportation fringes)
of the Internal Revenue Code. Effective for plan years commencing on or after
July 1, 2007, "Compensation" under this section for any plan year shall not be
greater than the limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code
that applies for that year.
      (4)   "LIMITATION YEAR" shall mean a plan year.
   (H)   Adjustment for early or late commencement of benefits.
      (1)   (a)   For plan years commencing prior to July 1, 2007, if the
annual pension benefit of a member begins before age 62, as described in
Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code, the $140,000 limitation set
forth in division (F)(1)(a) of this section shall be reduced so that it is
equivalent to such a benefit beginning at the Social Security retirement age as
described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. The reduction of
this division shall not reduce the limitation of division (F)(1) of this
section below $75,000 if the benefit begins at or after age 55, or, if the
benefit begins before age 55, the equivalent of the $75,000 limitation for age
55.
         (b)   Effective for plan years commencing after June 30, 2007, if the
annual benefit of a service employee member begins prior to age 62, the defined
benefit dollar limitation applicable to the service employee member at such
earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity
beginning at the earlier age that is the actuarial equivalent of the defined
benefit dollar limitation applicable to the service employee member at age 62
(adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if required). The defined benefit dollar
limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is determined as the lesser of
(i) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the defined benefit dollar
limitation computed using a 5% interest rate assumption and the applicable
mortality table and expressing the service employee member age based on
completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date; or (ii) the product
of the defined benefit dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual
amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at
the service employee member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the
immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 62, both
determined without applying the limitations of Section 415 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (2)   In the event that a service employee member's annual benefit
commences after age 65, the dollar limitation or defined benefit dollar
limitation, as applicable, shall be increased for the service employee member's
age such that it is the actuarial equivalent of the defined benefit dollar
limitation (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if required) commencing at
age 65. For purposes of adjusting the dollar Limitation or the defined benefit
dollar limitation, the interest rate assumption shall not be greater than the
lesser of 5% or the rate specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalence under this division (H) shall be determined
using a 5% interest assumption. The defined benefit dollar limitation shall be
adjusted annually as provided in Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code
pursuant to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. The
adjusted limitation is effective as of January 1st of each calendar year and is
applicable to "limitation years" ending with or within that calendar year. The
dollar limitation shall not be adjusted except as provided in this division
(H).
      (4)   In the case of disability or survivor benefits provided under the
plan, the limitations of division (F)(3), (H)(1)(a) and (b) of this section
shall not apply to:
         (a)   Income received from the plan as a pension, annuity, or similar
pension as the result of the recipient becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness; or
         (b)   Amounts received from a governmental plan by the beneficiaries,
survivors or the estate of a service employee member as the result of the death
of the service employee member.
      (5)   For purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation no adjustment
for cost of living increases shall be taken into account before the year for
which such adjustment first takes place.
   (I)   Protection of prior benefits. For any year before 1986, the
limitations prescribed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect
before enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and all subsequent legislation
shall apply, and no pension earned under this plan prior to 1986 shall be
reduced on account of the provisions of divisions (F) through (K) of this
section if it would have satisfied those limitations under that prior law.
   (J)   Application of maximum limitations.
      (1)   The benefit paid under this plan shall not exceed the limitations
set forth in division (F) of this section.
      (2)   If a member on the annuity starting date is not eligible for full
monthly benefits under this plan because of the operation of division (F) of
this section, the monthly benefit shall thereafter be recalculated annually
until the member is receiving a full monthly benefit under the plan's terms
without the operation of this division (J). Each such recalculation shall be
based on this division, with any applicable adjustment to reflect cost of
living increases as permitted by the Treasury Regulations.
   (K)   For plan benefits subject to Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, the actuarial equivalent of the annual retirement benefit is equal to the
greater of actuarial equivalent for the particular form of benefit payable and
the equivalent annual benefit computed using the applicable interest rate and
applicable mortality table described below, determined in accordance with
regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
      (1)   The applicable mortality table means the table prescribed by the
Secretary of the Treasury. Such table shall be based on the prevailing
Commissioner's standard table (described in Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code) used to determine reserves for group annuity contracts
issued on the date as of which present value is being determined (without
regard to any other subparagraph of Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the Internal
Revenue Code). The prevailing Commissioner's standard table for these purposes
currently is the GAM '83 Mortality Table, blended equally between male and
female mortality rates. Effective for distributions occurring after December
31, 2002 the applicable mortality table shall be the table prescribed in Rev.
Rul. 2001-62. Effective for plan years commencing on or after January 1, 2008,
the applicable mortality table shall mean the applicable Section 417(e)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code mortality table as adjusted in accordance with the
provisions of Rev. Rul. 2007-67.
      (2)   The applicable interest rate is the rate of interest set forth in §
31.37(H)(3).
   (L)   For purposes of applying the foregoing limitations of divisions (F)
through (K):
      (1)   All defined benefit plans of the town, whether or not terminated,
are to be treated as one defined benefit plan and all defined contribution
plans of the town, whether or not terminated, are to be treated as one defined
contribution plan;
      (2)   For purposes of divisions (F) through (K), the term "town" shall
include all departments and agencies of the Town of Hamden, Connecticut.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 571, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)
§ 31.38 GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT OF BENEFITS.
   (A)   Amount of regular pension.
      (1)   The monthly regular pension for guardian employee members employed
by the town as an eligible employee on and after July 1, 1998 shall, except as
otherwise provided in division (A)(4), be equal to the following:
         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2.5% of a guardian employee member's
average annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee member's years
of credited service to a maximum of 20 years; plus
         (b)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a guardian employee member's average
annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee member's years of
credited service from 21 to 25 years; plus
         (c)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a guardian employee member's average
annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee member's years of
credited service in excess of 25, to a maximum of 35 years.
         (d)   A guardian employee member's retirement pension shall not exceed
80% of his/her average annual compensation, subject to the provisions of
division (A)(2), below.
      (2)   The maximum retirement pension for guardian employee members hired
on or after July 1, 1981 shall be limited to 80% of his/her average annual
compensation. For guardian employee members hired before July 1, 1981, the
maximum retirement pension payable may exceed 80% of average annual
compensation, provided that a guardian employee member with more than 80% of
average annual compensation as of June 30, 2006 who continues to work shall
have his/her benefit frozen as of June 30, 2006, based on the guardian employee
member's average annual compensation on such date and benefit accrued as of
such date.
      (3)   The monthly regular pension for a guardian employee member who
terminated service or retired prior to July 1, 1998 shall be equal to the
following, unless the provisions of the plan in effect when the guardian
employee member terminated set forth a different pension benefit:
         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a guardian employee member's average
annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of credited service up to
a maximum of 25 years; plus
         (b)   An additional one-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a guardian employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of
credited service rendered in excess of 25.
         (c)   For guardian employees first hired after July 1, 1981, not more
than a total of 35 years of credited service shall be counted.
      (4)   In the event a guardian employee member has service as both a
guardian employee and a service employee, his/her regular pension attributable
to his/her service as a service employee shall be calculated separately, in
accordance with the provisions of §
31.37, and based upon his/her compensation and years of credited service
accrued while as a service employee.
   (B)   Minimum retirement benefit.
      (1)   For guardian employee members who terminate employment on or after
July 1, 1985, the monthly regular pension benefit under division (A) of this
section shall not be less than sixty-hundredths (60/100) of 1% of the guardian
employee member's average annual compensation, divided by 12, for each year of
credited service, or $3.25, whichever is greater.
      (2)   For guardian employee members who terminated with a vested benefit
before July 1, 1985, their minimum benefit shall be calculated using the
applicable provisions of the plan in effect prior to July 1, 2000.
   (C)   Amount of disability pension.
      (1)   Service related disability pension. A guardian employee member
retiring on a service related disability pension as defined in §
31.36(D) shall receive a monthly benefit equal to the greater of:
         (a)   50% of the guardian employee member's average annual
compensation; or
         (b)   The guardian employee member's monthly regular pension
calculated in accordance with division (A) of this section as of his/her date
of disability.
      (2)   Non-service related disability pension. A guardian employee member
retiring on a non-service related disability pension as defined in § 31.36(E)
shall receive a non-service related disability pension equal to the greater of:
         (a)   For guardian employee employees hired on and after July 1, 1981,
30% of the guardian employee member's average annual compensation determined as
of the date of disability. For guardian employee members hired on or after July
1, 1987, 25% of the guardian employee member's average annual compensation
determined as of the date of disability; or
         (b)   The guardian employee member's monthly regular pension
calculated in accordance with division (A) of this section as of his/her date
of disability.
   (D)   Amount of early retirement pension benefit. The amount of the early
retirement pension benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as the
monthly regular pension in division (A) of this section. The early retirement
pension shall not be actuarially reduced to take into account such early
retirement.
   (E)   Vested pension.
      (1)   A guardian employee member shall be entitled to a vested pension
after completion of at least ten years of credited service or ten years of
vesting service. The amount of the vested pension shall be calculated in the
same manner as a regular pension, in accordance with the provisions of the plan
and benefit formula in effect on the date the guardian employee member
terminated employment. The amount of a vested pension shall then be multiplied
by the following percentages if the guardian employee member has less than 15
years of credited service or vesting service:
Years of Credited Service   Percent of Vested Pension
   1-9            0%
   10            50%
   11            60%
   12            70%
   13            80%
   14            90%
   15            100%
      (2)   Entitlement to a vested pension provided by this division (E) shall
be in lieu of all other benefits provided by the plan for such guardian
employee member, his/her spouse and his/her dependent children, except for the
return of the guardian employee member's accumulated contributions.
   (F)   Maximum benefit limitation.
      (1)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary,
for plan years beginning prior to July 1, 2007, the annual benefit of a
guardian employee member hereunder (adjusted to an actuarially equivalent
straight life annuity based upon the interest rate as determined by the PBGC on
January 1 each year) shall not at any time within the limitation year exceed
the lesser of $140,000 (the "dollar limitation") or 100% of the guardian
employee member's average compensation for his/her high three years.
         (b)   For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 2007,
notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, in no event shall
the maximum annual retirement benefit attributable to town contributions and
payable to a guardian employee member who has not yet retired under the terms
of the plan, exceed $160,000 (the "defined benefit dollar limitation").
      (2)   The annual retirement benefit payable to a guardian employee member
under the plan shall be deemed not to exceed the applicable maximum limitation
of division (F)(l) if:
         (a)   The annual retirement benefit payable with respect to such
guardian employee member under the plan and under all defined benefit plans of
the town does not exceed $10,000 for the limitation year, or for any prior
limitation year; and
         (b)   The town has not at any time maintained a defined contribution
plan in which the guardian employee member participated.
      (3)   In the event that a guardian employee member has been a member in
the plan less than ten years, the dollar limitation and the defined benefit
dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which is his years of participation in the plan (or part thereof)
and the denominator of which is ten. In the event that a member has less than
ten years of vesting service, the $10,000 benefit above, shall be reduced by
multiplication by a fraction, the numerator of which is his years of service
(or part thereof) and the denominator of which is ten.
   (G)   Maximum benefit limitation definitions. For purposes of divisions (F)
through (K) of this section:
      (1)   The term "ANNUAL BENEFIT" shall mean the benefit the guardian
employee member would be entitled to at his/her or her normal retirement date,
assuming he or she continues employment until such date, and that all other
relevant facts used to determine benefits under the plan remain constant as of
the current limitation year for all future limitation years.
      (2)   "ANNUAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT" means a benefit payable annually in the
form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a plan to
which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions (as
defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code) are made. A benefit payable in any other form shall be converted to the
actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity for purposes of applying these
limits, based on a 5% interest assumption. Other required adjustments are
provided for in this division. In the event that a guardian employee member's
annual retirement benefit is payable in a form other than a straight life
annuity, or if the member's contribute to the plan or make rollover
contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code), the determinations as to whether the limitation
described in division (F)(1) has been satisfied shall be made, in accordance
with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary, by adjusting such benefit so
that it is the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no
ancillary benefits). For purposes of this division (G)(2), any ancillary
benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits shall not
be taken into account; and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity which
constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined in Code Section
417) shall not be taken into account. For purposes of adjusting any benefit,
the interest rate assumption shall not be less than the greater of 5% or the
rate specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.
      (3)   "COMPENSATION" for purposes of the maximum benefit limitations
under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, shall mean any and all earnings
reported on W-2 forms completed by the town in respect to the plan year
specified. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for plan years
commencing after December 31, 1997, "Compensation" for this section shall
include (1) any elective deferral (as defined in Section 402(g)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code), (2) any amount which is contributed or deferred by the
town at the election of the member and which is not includable in the gross
income of the member by reason of Sections 125 (cafeteria plan) or 457
(nonqualified deferred compensation plan) of the Internal Revenue Code. For
plan years commencing on and after January 1, 2001, "Compensation" shall also
include elective amounts that are not includable in the gross income of the
participant by reason of Section 132(f)(4) (qualified transportation fringes)
of the Internal Revenue Code. Effective for plan years commencing on or after
July 1, 2007, "Compensation" under this code section for any plan year shall
not be greater than the limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue
Code that applies for that year.
      (4)   "LIMITATION YEAR" shall mean a plan year.
   (H)   Adjustment for early or late commencement of benefits.
      (1)   (a)   For plan years commencing on or after July 1, 2002 and prior
to July 1, 2007, if the annual pension benefit of a member begins before age
62, as described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code, the
$140,000 limitation set forth in division (F)(1)(a) of this section shall be
reduced so that it is equivalent to such benefit beginning at the Social
Security retirement age as described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code, the $140,000 limitation set forth in division (F)(1)(a) of this
section shall be reduced so that it is equivalent to such a benefit beginning
at the Social Security retirement age as described in Section 415(b)(8) of the
Internal Revenue Code. The reduction of this division shall not reduce the
limitation of division (F) of this section below $75,000 if the benefit begins
at or after age 55, or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the equivalent of
the $75,000 limitation for age 55. Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for
plan years commencing on July 1, 1997 any guardian employee member who has been
a full time employee of the Town Police or Fire Department for at least 15
years shall not have his or her retirement benefit adjusted under this division
(H)(1)(a).
         (b)   Effective for plan years commencing after June 30, 2007, if the
annual benefit of a guardian employee member begins prior to age 62, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the guardian employee member at
such earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form of a straight life
annuity beginning at the earlier age that is the actuarial equivalent of the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the guardian employee member at
age 62 (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if required). The defined benefit
dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is determined as the
lesser of (i) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the defined benefit
dollar limitation computed using a 5% interest rate assumption and the
applicable mortality table and expressing the guardian employee member's age
based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date; or (ii) the
product of the defined benefit dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the
annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the
plan at the guardian employee member's annuity starting date to the annual
amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at
age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of Section 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any guardian employee
member with at least 15 years of Guardian as a full time employee of the Police
or Fire Department shall not have their retirement benefit adjusted under this
division (H)(1)(b).
      (2)   In the event that a guardian employee member's annual benefit
commences after age 65, the dollar limitation and defined benefit dollar
limitation, as applicable, shall be increased for the guardian employee
member's age such that it is the actuarial equivalent of defined benefit dollar
limitation commencing at age 65. For purposes of adjusting the defined benefit
dollar Limitation (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if required), the
interest rate assumption shall not be greater than the lesser of 5% or the rate
specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalence under this division (H) shall be determined
using a 5% interest assumption. The defined benefit dollar Limitation shall be
adjusted annually as provided in Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code
pursuant to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. The
adjusted limitation is effective as of January 1st of each calendar year and is
applicable to "limitation years" ending with or within that calendar year. The
dollar limitation shall not be adjusted except as provided in this division
(H).
      (4)   In the case of disability or survivor benefits provided under the
plan, the limitations of division (F)(3) and (H)(1)(a) and (b) of this section
shall not apply to:
         (a)   Income received from the plan as a pension, annuity, or similar
pension as the result of the recipient becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness; or
         (b)   Amounts received from a governmental plan by the beneficiaries,
survivors or the estate of a guardian employee member as the result of the
death of the guardian employee Member.
      (5)   For purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation no adjustment
for cost of living increases shall be taken into account before the year for
which such adjustment first takes place.
   (I)   Protection of prior benefits. For any year before 1986, the
limitations prescribed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect
before enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and all subsequent legislation
shall apply, and no pension earned under this plan prior to 1986 shall be
reduced on account of the provisions of divisions (F) through (K) of this
section if it would have satisfied those limitations under that prior law.
   (J)   Application of maximum limitations.
      (1)   The benefit paid under this plan shall not exceed the limitations
set forth in division (F) of this section.
      (2)   If a member on the annuity starting date is not eligible for full
monthly benefits under this plan because of the operation of division (F) of
this section, the monthly benefit shall thereafter be recalculated annually
until the member is receiving a full monthly benefit under the plan's terms
without the operation of this division (J). Each such recalculation shall be
based on this division, with any applicable adjustment to reflect cost of
living increases as permitted by the Treasury Regulations.
   (K)   For plan benefits subject to Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, the actuarial equivalent of the annual retirement benefit is equal to the
greater of actuarial equivalent for the particular form of benefit payable and
the equivalent annual benefit computed using the applicable interest rate and
applicable mortality table described below, determined in accordance with
regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
      (1)   The applicable mortality table means the table prescribed by the
Secretary of the Treasury. Such table shall be based on the prevailing
Commissioner's standard table (described in Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code) used to determine reserves for group annuity contracts
issued on the date as of which present value is being determined (without
regard to any other subparagraph of Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the Internal
Revenue Code). The prevailing Commissioner's standard table for these purposes
currently is the GAM '83 mortality table, blended equally between male and
female mortality rates. Effective for distributions occurring after December
31, 2002 the applicable mortality table shall be the table prescribed in Rev.
Rul. 2001-62. Effective for plan years commencing on or after January 1, 2008,
the applicable mortality table shall mean the applicable Section 417(e)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code mortality table as adjusted in accordance with the
provisions of Rev. Rul. 2007-67.
      (2)   The applicable interest rate is the rate of interest set forth in §
31.38(H)((3).
   (L)   For purposes of applying the foregoing limitations of divisions (F)
through (K):
      (1)   All defined benefit plans of the town, whether or not terminated,
are to be treated as one defined benefit plan and all defined contribution
plans of the town, whether or not terminated, are to be treated as one defined
contribution plan;
      (2)   For purposes of divisions (F) through (K), the term "town" shall
include all departments and agencies of the Town of Hamden, Connecticut.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 571, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)
§ 31.39 FORM AND COMMENCEMENT OF BENEFITS.
   (A)   Lifetime benefit. The normal form of retirement pension whether
regular, early, disability or vested pension is the lifetime benefit with a
modified cash refund as set forth in §§
31.40(F) or
31.41(E). Payments shall be made in monthly installments, commencing on the
date of retirement and ceasing with the last monthly payment prior to death. In
any case, upon direction of the Retirement Board, an actuarial equivalent lump-
sum payment shall be made in lieu of all benefits if any retirement pension is
less than $120 per annum or has a present value of $5,000 or less.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective March 28, 2005, the member's written
consent shall be required for distributions with a present value of $1,000 or
more.
   (B)   Husband and wife benefit. At or before retirement, a member or
terminated vested member may elect to convert his or her lifetime benefit to an
actuarial equivalent husband and wife benefit, which will pay a reduced
retirement amount during the pensioner's life, with the provision that after
his or her death either 100%, 66-2/3% or 50% of his or her retirement pension
will be paid to the person designated by him, by written designation and duly
acknowledged by the Retirement Board. Should both husband and wife die before
the member's accumulated contributions have been paid out, then §§
31.40(F) or
31.41(E) shall apply.
   (C)   Ten-year certain and life benefit. At or before retirement, a member
may elect to convert his or her life benefit into an actuarial equivalent ten-
year certain and life benefit, which will pay a reduced retirement amount
during the pensioner's life, with a guarantee of 120 payments. Should a member
die prior to receiving 120 payments, the payments shall continue to his or her
designated beneficiary until a combined total of 120 payments have been made.
Should both the member and designated beneficiary die before the member's
accumulated contributions have been paid out, then §§
31.40(F) or
31.41(E) shall apply.
   (D)   Beneficiary election. A member's beneficiary must have been designated
by the member by written designation received by the Retirement Board prior to
the member's death. A member may change his or her beneficiary by similar
written designation received by the Retirement Board prior to receipt of
written notification of the member's death.
   (E)   Required minimum distributions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions in this plan to the contrary, a
member's benefits shall not commence later than the member's required beginning
date which is April 1 of the calendar year following the later of:
         (a)   The calendar year in which the member attains age 70-1/2; or
         (b)   The calendar year in which the member terminates employment. In
any case where a lump sum death benefit is payable to a deceased member's
beneficiary, such benefit shall be paid no later than 60 days following the
member's date of death.
         (c)   Requirements of Treasury Regulations Incorporated. All
distributions required under this division will be determined and made in
accordance with the Treasury regulations under Section 401(a)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   The member's entire interest in the plan must be distributed over
the life of the member or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary,
over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or the
life expectancy of the member and designated beneficiary.
      (3)   When a member dies after distribution of benefits has begun, the
remaining portion of the member's interest shall be distributed at least as
rapidly as under the method of distribution prior to the member's death.
      (4)   When a member dies before distribution of benefits has begun, the
entire interest of the member shall be distributed within five years of the
member's death. The five-year payment rule does not apply to any portion of the
member's interest which is payable to a surviving spouse payable over the life
or life expectancy of the spouse, and which begins no later than the date the
member would have reached 70-1/2.
      (5)   The benefits payable must meet the minimum distribution incidental
benefit requirements of Section 401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (6)   If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the
year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest
will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the member's death.
      (7)   If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated
beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before
distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this division other than division
(E)(1) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member.
      (8)   Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed
in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single
sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution
calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with divisions (E)(9),
(E)(10) and (E)(ll). If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an
annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be
made in accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal
Revenue Code and the Treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest
which is in the form of an individual account described in Section 414(k) of
the Internal Revenue Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the
requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the Treasury
regulations that apply to individual accounts.
      (9)   Determination of amount to be distributed each year.
         (a)   General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid
in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity
will satisfy the following requirements:
            1.   The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments
made at intervals not longer than one year;
            2.   The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over
a period certain not longer than the period described in division (E)(10) or
(E)(11).
            3.   Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period
certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the
maximum permitted;
            4.   Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as
follows:
               a.   By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the
annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of
all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics;
               b.   To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the
member's payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the
beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the distribution period
described in division (E)(10) dies or is no longer the member's beneficiary
pursuant to a qualified Domestic Relations Order within the meaning of Section
414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   To provide cash refunds of employee contributions upon the
member's death; or
               d.   To pay increased benefits that result from a plan
amendment.
         (b)   Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date.
The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required
beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date
distributions are required to begin under divisions (E)(1) or (E)(4) is the
payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not
be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment
interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for
which payments are received, e.g., bimonthly, monthly, semi-annually, or
annually. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first
distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of
the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's
required beginning date.
         (c)   Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any
additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first
distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment
interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which such amount accrues.
      (10)   Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during member
lifetime.
         (a)   Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member's
spouse. If the member's interest is being distributed in the form of a joint
and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member and a non-spouse
beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's required
beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's death must not
at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such
period that would have been payable to the member using the table set forth in
Q&A-2 of Section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of the Treasury regulations. If the form of
distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the
member and a non-spouse beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the
requirement in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made
to the designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain.
         (b)   Period certain annuities. Unless the member's spouse is the sole
designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no
life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing during
the member's lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the
member under the uniform lifetime table set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of
the Treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity
starting date if the annuity starting date precedes the member is the
distribution period for age 70 under the uniform lifetime table set forth in
Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations plus the excess of 70 over
the age of the member as of the member's birthday in the year that contains the
annuity starting date if the member's spouse is the member's sole designated
beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life
annuity, the period certain may not exceed the longer of the member's
applicable distribution period, as determined under this division (E)(10)(b),
or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the member's
spouse as determined under the joint and last survivor table set forth in
Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations, using the member's and
spouse's attained ages as of the member's and spouse's birthdays in the
calendar year that contains the annuity starting date.
      (11)   Requirements for minimum distributions where member dies before
date distributions begin.
         (a)   Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies
before the date distribution of his or her interest begins and there is a
designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be distributed,
beginning no later than the time described in divisions (E)(1) or (E)(4) and
except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) over the life of the designated
beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding:
            1.   Unless the annuity starting date is before the first
distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary
determined using the beneficiary age as of the beneficiary birthday in the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the member's death; or
            2.   If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution
calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined
using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar
year that contains the annuity starting date.
         (b)   No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date
distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30
of the year following the year of the member's death, distribution of the
member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death.
         (c)   Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving
spouse begin. If the member dies before the date distribution of his or her
interest begins, the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated
beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the
surviving spouse begin, division (E)(ll) will apply as if the surviving spouse
were the member, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be
determined without regard to division (E)(1).
      (12)   Definitions.
         (a)   Designated Beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the
beneficiary under §
31.39(D) and is the designated beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code and Section 1.401 (a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury
regulations.
         (b)   Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum
distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's
death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately
preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning
date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first
distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are
required to begin pursuant to division (E)(4).
         (c)   Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the
single life table in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations.
   (F)   Return to employment after commencement of benefits.
      (1)   A retired member who returns to employment with the town after
benefits have commenced shall have his or her benefit suspended for each month
he or she is in the employ of the town, unless the member meets the following
conditions:
         (a)   The member's application for active employment is approved by
the Retirement Board; or
         (b)   In the case of a service employee, the member is regularly
scheduled to work less than 20 hours per week; or
         (c)   The member is a guardian employee who is rehired as a service
employee or the member is a service employee who is rehired as a guardian
employee.
      (2)   A retired member whose benefits are suspended in accordance with
this division shall have his or her pension amount recalculated to recognize
the additional credited service earned during his or her period of re-
employment.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 458, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 538, passed 7-
5-06; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.40 SERVICE EMPLOYEES; DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   Lump sum death benefit.
      (1)   A lump sum death benefit of $5,000 shall be payable to the
surviving spouse of a service employee member, or if there is no surviving
spouse, to the surviving dependent child(ren) in equal shares, upon the death
of such service employee member; provided, however that the service employee
member's death:
         (a)   Occurs due to bodily injury arising out of the course of the
service employee member's employment with the town within the meaning of the
worker's compensation laws of the State of Connecticut; and
         (b)   Was sustained by an injury solely through external, violent or
accidental means; and
         (c)   Occurs within one year of the date injury was sustained and such
death is the direct result of such injury.
      (2)   The Retirement Board shall maintain sole discretion in the
determination of eligibility for a lump sum death benefit. The lump sum death
benefit described herein shall be in addition to all other benefits provided
under this section.
   (B)   Pre-retirement surviving spouse pension.
      (1)   Effective on and after July 1, 1991, the surviving spouse of an
active service employee member who has earned at least five years of credited
service, and who dies prior to retirement shall receive a monthly surviving
spouse pension equal to the greater of:
         (a)   50% of the service employee member's accrued monthly benefit
calculated as if the service employee member retired with a regular pension and
died the next day; or
         (b)   50% of the service employee member's compensation at the time of
death and divided by 12.
      (2)   For periods prior to July 1, 1991, the monthly surviving spouse
pension payable to the surviving spouse of a service employee member was equal
to 25% of the average annual compensation of the service employee member,
divided by 12 and determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan in
effect at the time the service employee member died.
      (3)   The surviving spouse of a terminated, vested service employee
member who dies prior to retirement shall not be entitled to receive a monthly
surviving spouse pension but shall receive a return of the service employee
member's accumulated contributions in accordance with division (F) of this
section.
      (4)   The former spouse of an active service employee member shall not be
entitled to a pre-retirement surviving spouse pension unless a Domestic
Relations Order determined to be approved by the Retirement Board requires the
payment of such a benefit.
      (5)   The pre-retirement surviving spouse pension shall be payable until
the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse. In the event the surviving
spouse does not notify the Retirement Board within 30 days of her remarriage,
the Retirement Board shall have the right to seek a return of the benefits paid
to her in error after the date of her remarriage.
   (C)   Post-retirement surviving spouse pension.
      (1)   The surviving spouse of any service employee member who retires on
or after July 1, 1991 with a life annuity shall receive, until his/her death or
remarriage, a monthly benefit equal to 50% of the monthly benefit that the
retired service employee member was receiving at the time of death.
      (2)   In the event the service employee member elected a husband and wife
benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit, death benefits shall not be
payable under this division (C) but shall be payable in accordance with the
terms of the form of benefit elected by the member.
   (D)   Surviving children's pension.
      (1)   Upon the death of an active service employee member, a monthly
benefit shall be payable to the surviving dependent child(ren) of the service
employee member in an amount equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of 25% of the service
employee member's average annual compensation in addition to all other benefits
hereunder. Such monthly benefit shall be divided equally in the case of more
than one dependent child and shall be payable until the dependent child attains
age 18. In the event the benefit is divided between multiple dependent
children, the monthly benefit to such dependent children shall be increased
proportionately to each remaining dependent child when the payment to a child
who has reached the age of 18 ceases.
      (2)   The Retirement Board shall direct payment of this benefit on behalf
of the dependent child(ren) at its discretion, to the surviving spouse of the
service employee member or to the guardian of the person of such surviving
dependent child(ren) or to the person with whom such child or children reside.
In no event shall the benefit be paid to a state or governmental agency with
custody of the dependent child(ren) unless the benefits shall be held in trust
for the child until the child reaches the age of 18.
      (3)   The benefit provided under this division shall terminate upon the
attainment of age 18 by the last dependent child.
   (E)   Social security offset. The death benefits provided for in divisions
(B) through (D) of this section shall be offset by a percentage of social
security, if applicable, determined pursuant to §
31.37(A)(4).
   (F)   Modified cash refund. If a service employee member dies and the death
benefits and/or pension payments payable do not exceed the service employee
member's accumulated contributions, then the amount by which the accumulated
contributions exceed the death benefits and/or pension payments payable shall
be paid to the member's surviving spouse, surviving dependent children equally,
duly designated beneficiary, or other executor or administrator of the service
employee member's estate as designated by the Retirement Board.
   (G)   Non-duplication of benefits. If a service employee member has elected
a husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit and has
retired, the election of such benefit shall be in lieu of any post-retirement
survivor amounts as described in division (C) of this section.
   (H)   Burial allowance. Upon the death of an active or retired service
employee member, whether before or after retirement, there shall be paid a
burial allowance of $5,000, to be paid to the service employee member's
executors or administrators, if any, or, if none, to such person or persons as
the Retirement Board may find to have paid or assumed financial responsibility
for such expenses.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.41 GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   Lump sum death benefit.
      (1)   A lump sum death benefit of $5,000 shall be payable to the
surviving spouse of a guardian employee member, or if there is no surviving
spouse, to the surviving dependent child(ren) in equal shares, upon the death
of such guardian employee member; provided, however that the guardian employee
member's death:
         (a)   Occurs due to bodily injury arising out of the course of the
guardian employee member's employment with the town within the meaning of the
worker's compensation laws of the State of Connecticut; and
         (b)   Was sustained by an injury solely through external, violent or
accidental means; and
         (c)   Occurs within one year of the date injury was sustained and such
death is the direct result of such injury.
      (2)   The Retirement Board shall maintain sole discretion in the
determination of eligibility for a lump sum death benefit. The lump sum death
benefit described herein shall be in addition to all other benefits provided
under this section.
   (B)   Pre-retirement surviving spouse pension.
      (1)   Effective on and after July 1, 1991, the surviving spouse of an
active guardian employee member who dies prior to retirement shall receive a
monthly surviving spouse pension equal to the greater of the following:
         (a)   Fifty percent of the guardian employee member's accrued monthly
benefit calculated as if the guardian employee member retired with a regular
pension and died the next day; or
         (b)   Fifty percent of the guardian employee member's compensation at
the time of death and divided by 12.
      (2)   For periods prior to July 1, 1991, the monthly surviving spouse
pension payable to the surviving spouse of a guardian employee member was equal
to 25% of the average annual compensation of the guardian employee member,
divided by 12 and determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan in
effect at the time the guardian employee member died.
      (3)   The surviving spouse of a terminated vested guardian employee
member who dies prior to retirement shall not be entitled to receive a monthly
surviving spouse pension but shall receive a return of the guardian employee
member's accumulated contributions in accordance with division (E) of this
section.
      (4)   The former spouse of an active guardian employee member shall not
be entitled to a pre-retirement surviving spouse pension unless a Domestic
Relations Order determined to be approved by the Retirement Board requires the
payment of such a benefit.
      (5)   The pre-retirement surviving spouse pension shall be payable until
the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse. In the event the surviving
spouse does not notify the Retirement Board within 30 days of her remarriage,
the Retirement Board shall have the right to seek a return of the benefits paid
to her in error after the date of her remarriage.
      (6)   Effective on and after July 1, 2022, the surviving spouse of a
former Active Member who passes away after the last day of employment, but
prior to the Member’s finalizing the employee’s Application For Benefits
inclusive of designating the form of benefit to be provided under §
31.39 and prior to the Member receiving the first monthly pension benefit, will
be entitled to a monthly benefit based on the 100% husband and wife benefit
(including the actuarial adjustment for such payment) payable over the same
time period as noted in item (5) above, provided that the following criteria
are met:
         (a)   The Member was required to retire by the terms of the ordinance
based on age and retired on or not more than 30 days prior to the mandatory
retirement date, and
         (b)   The noted Annuity Starting Date is the first of the month
following the last day of employment.
   (C)   Post-retirement surviving spouse pension.
      (1)   The surviving spouse of any active guardian employee member who
retires on or after July 1, 1991 with a life annuity shall receive, until her
death or remarriage, a monthly benefit equal to 50% of the monthly benefit that
the retired guardian employee member was receiving at the time of death. The
spouse of a terminated vested guardian employee member shall not be eligible
for a benefit under this division (C).
      (2)   In the event the guardian employee member elected a husband and
wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit, death benefits shall not
be payable under this division but shall be payable in accordance with the
terms of the form of benefit elected by the guardian employee member.
   (D)   Surviving children's pension.
      (1)   Upon the death of an active guardian employee member, a monthly
benefit shall be payable to the surviving dependent child(ren) of the guardian
employee member in an amount equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of 25% of the guardian
employee member's average annual compensation in addition to all other benefits
hereunder. Such monthly benefit shall be divided equally in the case of more
than one dependent child and shall be payable until the dependent child attains
age 18. In the event the benefit is divided between multiple dependent
children, the monthly benefit to such dependent children shall be increased
proportionately to each remaining dependent child when the payment to a child
who has reached the age of 18 ceases.
      (2)   The Retirement Board shall direct payment of this benefit on behalf
of the dependent child(ren) at its discretion, to the surviving spouse of the
guardian employee member or to the guardian of the person of such surviving
dependent child(ren) or to the person with whom such child or children reside.
In no event shall the benefit be paid to a state or governmental agency with
custody of the dependent child(ren) unless the benefits shall be held in trust
for the child until the child reaches the age of 18.
      (3)   The benefit provided under this division shall terminate upon the
attainment of age 18 by the last dependent child.
   (E)   Modified cash refund. If a guardian employee member dies and the death
benefits and/or pension payments payable do not exceed the guardian employee
member's accumulated contributions, then the amount by which the accumulated
contributions exceed the death benefits and/or pension payments payable shall
be paid to the guardian employee member's surviving spouse, surviving dependent
children equally, duly designated beneficiary, or other executor or
administrator of the guardian employee member's estate as designated by the
Retirement Board.
   (F)   Non-duplication of benefits. If a guardian employee member has elected
a husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit and has
retired, the election of such benefit shall be in lieu of any post-retirement
survivor amounts as described in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Burial allowance. Upon the death of an active or retired guardian
employee member, whether before or after retirement, there shall be paid a
burial allowance of $5,000, to be paid to the guardian employee member's
executors or administrators, if any, or, if none, to such person or persons as
the Retirement Board may find to have paid or assumed financial responsibility
for such expenses.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15; Am. Ord. 731, passed
9-19-22)
§ 31.42 COST OF LIVING BENEFIT.
   (A)   Cost of living benefit. On each May 1, subsequent to the date
retirement benefits become payable to any pensioner or beneficiary, an
adjustment shall be made in the yearly amount of the benefit payable to the
retired member, as described in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Determination of cost of living adjustment.
      (1)   For the purposes of determining the cost of living benefit, the
following terms are defined:
         (a)   "ANNUITANT." Each pensioner, contingent annuitant or beneficiary
who is receiving retirement benefits under this plan.
         (b)   "BASE INDEX."
            1.   Shall mean the Consumer Price Index for the month of January
in the calendar year in which the pensioner or beneficiary's benefit first
became payable.
            2.   If the Bureau of Labor Statistics subsequently adjusts the
basis upon which the Consumer Price Index is determined, then the base index
will be adjusted, as of the next January, by multiplying the base index by the
ratio of that Consumer Price Index for said January on the new basis bears to
the Consumer Price Index for the said January on the prior January.
         (c)   "BASE PENSION." The monthly pension benefit which first became
payable to the pensioner or Beneficiary, whichever is applicable.
         (d)   "CONSUMER PRICE INDEX." The Consumer Price Index (U.S. All Items
Index) published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
      (2)   On each May 1, the cost of living benefit shall be determined. The
adjustment with respect to each pensioner or beneficiary shall be equal to the
excess of (a) over (b) below, if any, where:
         (a)   Is equal to the amount obtained by dividing the Consumer Price
Index, as of the immediately preceding January, by the pensioner's base index.
This quotient shall be multiplied by the pensioner's base pension. In no event
may the amount determined in this division be greater than 3% of the last
amount determined in accordance with this division (B)(2)(a); and
         (b)   Is equal to the annuitant's base pension.
      (3)   Such cost of living benefit will be applicable to such annuitant
only if division (B)(2)(a) above exceeds division (B)(2)(b). Any excesses over
3% described in division (B)(2)(a) will be carried over to succeeding years, to
be utilized in the event that the maximum rate is not achieved in succeeding
years.
      (4)   On the May 1 on which a cost of living benefit is first applicable
to an annuitant and on the first day of each month thereafter on which such
individual continues to receive retirement benefits under this plan, he/she
will be eligible for a cost of living benefit in an amount equal to one-twelfth
(1/12) of the yearly cost of living benefit most recently determined for him,
if applicable, in accordance with this division (B).
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above, the cost of
living benefit applied as of each May 1 in certain years prior to 2014, up to
and including May 1, 2013 inclusive was 3% (the “3% Presumption”) regardless of
whether the formula in division (B)(2) would have yielded a lower percentage
cost of living benefit. This division (B)(5), effective as of the date of
enactment and retroactively as necessary, confirms and ratifies all pension
payments made to Members or their Beneficiaries prior to September 1, 2020, to
the extent such payments were higher than would otherwise have been the case
because of the application of the 3% Presumption. This division (B)(5) shall
have no effect on pension payments made on or after September 1, 2020, which
shall be calculated and paid under the regular provisions of the Plan without
regard to the 3% Presumption.
   (C)   Adjustment for former retired members. A member who retired prior to
July 1, 1986 shall be entitled to an increase in his/her retirement benefit as
effective July 1, 1986, of 1% of his/her retirement benefit for each full year
from his/her annuity starting date to the effective date of this provision.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15; Am. Ord. 732, passed
11-9-22)
§ 31.43 FUNDING.
   (A)   Member contributions.
      (1)   As a condition of employment, a member shall make member
contributions to the plan in accordance with the provisions of the plan or such
other previous or subsequent agreement that sets forth the requirement of
member contributions to the plan.
      (2)   A member shall be 100% vested in his/her member contributions at
all times.
   (B)   Contributions by the town. It is the intention of the town to continue
the plan and to make regular contributions thereto each year.
      (1)   The contributions of the town shall consist of the following:
         (a)   A normal contribution each year equal to the percentage of the
compensation of all members computed to be required to cover the cost of
benefits currently accruing under the plan not provided by member contributions
and the administrative expenses of the plan.
         (b)   Until the cost (not covered by normal contributions) of the
credits of members for service prior to the date of adoption of the plan with
regular interest on any unpaid amounts of such cost has been liquidated, the
contribution of the town each year shall include a prior service contribution
towards the payment thereof, in such amount, as determined by the actuary, as
shall be sufficient to liquidate such prior service cost (including regular
interest on the unpaid portion thereof) in full within 40 years from the date
of adoption of plan changes.
         (c)   The full amount of all accidental death benefits payable under
the plan, to be paid to the trustee within 90 days after the payment of such
benefit from the fund.
      (2)   The percentage normal contribution rate shall be computed at the
time of each actuarial valuation as the percent of the compensation of all
members required each year to cover the cost of all benefits to be provided by
contributions of the town not covered by the sum of the funds in hand held
therefor plus any prior service contributions remaining to be paid. Following
each actuarial valuation, the actuary shall certify to the Retirement Board
his/her recommendation as to the percentage normal contribution rate.
      (3)   As of the date of the effective date of the plan, the actuary shall
determine the present value of all benefits to be provided by contributions of
the town on account of members as of said date, and shall subtract therefrom
the sum of the funds in hand as of the date of adoption held therefor and the
present value of future normal contributions on account of such members at the
rate required to provide the membership service benefits under the plan to be
provided by contributions of the town for the average member. The difference
shall be known as the "initial prior service cost."
   (C)   Forfeitures. No part of any forfeitures resulting from the application
of any provision of this plan shall be applied to increase the benefits any
member would otherwise receive under this plan. Forfeitures shall be used to
reduce contributions of the town.
   (D)   Management of assets.
      (1)   Until and unless otherwise determined by the Retirement Board, all
the funds of the plan shall be held by a trustee, which shall be the Retirement
Board itself, for use in providing the benefits of the plan and paying the
expenses of the plan.
      (2)   The Retirement Board, with the prior approval of the Mayor of the
town, may at any time and to any extent use the funds of the plan in whole or
in part to fund the retirement pensions and other benefits provided by the plan
by means of one or more annuity or life insurance contracts issued by any
insurer selected by the Retirement Board.
      (3)   No part of the corpus or income of the trust shall be used for or
diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of members or their
beneficiaries and contingent annuitants under the plan, prior to the
satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to them; and no person shall have
any interest in or right to any part of the earnings of the trust, or any
rights in, or to, or under the trust or any part of the assets thereof, except
as and to the extent expressly provided for in the plan and in the trust
instrument. The town shall have no liability for the payment of benefits under
the plan nor for the administration of the funds paid over to the trustee.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.44 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Retirement Board. The general administration of the plan and the
responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the plan shall be placed in a
Board of 11 persons consisting of the following:
      (1)   Two guardian employee members of the plan who are members of a
guardian bargaining unit who shall be elected by guardian employee members of
the plan of the same category, as of July 1 each year for a term of two years,
but in 1982 one shall be appointed for a one-year term, so that one membership
of this category shall thereafter become vacant each year;
      (2)   Two service employee members of the plan who are members of a
service bargaining unit, who shall be elected by service employee members of
the plan of the same category as of July 1 of each year for a term of two
years, whose terms shall expire in rotation as of June 30 so that one new
member of this category is elected each year;
      (3)   One member of the plan, who is not a member of a bargaining unit,
who shall be elected by the members of the plan of the same category, as of
July 1 for a term of two years;
      (4)   Four persons who are not members of the plan, whose terms and
manner of appointment shall be such as provided for by legislative action of
the town;
      (5)   The Mayor; and
      (6)   The Finance Director.
   (B)   Resignation. Any member of the Retirement Board may resign by
delivering his/her written resignation to the Mayor of the town, who shall have
the power to fill for the unexpired term any vacancy occurring by resignation
or death.
   (C)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The members of the Retirement Board shall have the power to:
         (a)   Elect a Secretary who may be but need not be one of the members
of the Retirement Board;
         (b)   Appoint from its members such Boards with such powers as it
shall determine;
         (c)   Authorize one or more of its members or any agent to execute or
deliver any instrument or make a payment on its behalf; and
         (d)   Retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical,
accounting and actuarial services as it may require in carrying out the
provisions of the plan.
      (2)   The Retirement Board shall hold meetings upon such notice, at such
place or places, and at such time or times as it may determine.
      (3)   Any act which the plan authorizes or requires the Retirement Board
to do may be done by a majority of its members. The action of such majority
expressed from time to time by a vote at a meeting or in writing without a
meeting, provided that reasonable notice thereof is given to the entire
Retirement Board, shall constitute the action of the Retirement Board and shall
have the same effect for all purposes as if assented to by all members of the
Retirement Board at the time in office.
      (4)   No member of the Retirement Board who is an employee of the town
shall receive any compensation for his/her services as such, and no bond or
other security shall be required of him/her in such capacity in any
jurisdiction.
      (5)   Subject to the limitations of the plan, the Retirement Board from
time to time may establish rules for the administration of the plan and the
transaction of its business. The determination of the Retirement Board shall be
conclusive as to any disputed question within its jurisdiction.
      (6)   The Retirement Board shall adopt from time-to-time tables and the
rate of regular interest, compounded annually, which shall be used in all
actuarial calculations required in connection with the plan. As an aid to the
Retirement Board in adopting tables and in fixing the rates of contributions
payable by the town to the plan, the actuary designated by the Retirement Board
shall make annual actuarial valuations of the contingent assets and liabilities
of the plan and shall recommend to the Retirement Board tables and rates of
contribution for use by the Retirement Board. The Retirement Board shall
maintain accounts showing the fiscal transactions of the plan, and shall keep
in convenient form such data as may be necessary for actuarial valuations of
the plan. The Retirement Board shall submit a report each year to the Mayor of
the town giving a brief account of the operation of the plan during the past
year, a copy of which shall be filed in the office of the Mayor, where it shall
be open to inspection by any member of the plan.
      (7)   The Retirement Board shall prepare and submit to the Director of
Finance of the town on or before July 15 of each year a budget of the estimated
receipts and expenses of the plan for the following fiscal year of the town.
      (8)   The members of the Retirement Board shall use ordinary care and
diligence in the performance of their duties, but no member thereof shall be
personally liable by virtue of any contract, agreement, bond, or other
instrument made or executed by him/her or on his/her behalf as a member of the
Retirement Board, nor for any loss unless resulting from his/her own bad faith
or willful misconduct.
   (D)   Trust agreement for the plan. The town employees' retirement plan
shall utilize the separate trust agreement ("Trust Agreement") between the town
and the Retirement Board of the employees retirement plan of the town adopted
by Ord. 399, setting forth the duties and responsibility of said Retirement
Board in connection with the management of assets of the employees retirement
plan.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.45 AMENDMENTS AND TERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Amendments. This plan may be discontinued or amended in any respect at
any time by action of the Legislative Council of the town, subject to
applicable general laws and special acts of the State of Connecticut, provided
that no such discontinuance or amendment shall adversely affect the rights of
members or their beneficiaries which had become fully vested at the date of
discontinuance or amendment, nor to make it possible for any part of the funds
of the plan to be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive
benefit of members and their beneficiaries or contingent annuitants under the
plan, prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan with respect
to them.
   (B)   Termination. The town, by action of its Legislative Council, may
terminate the plan for any reason at any time. In case of termination of the
plan, the funds of the plan on the date of termination shall be used for the
exclusive benefit of members or their beneficiaries and contingent annuitants
as of the last date of payment of any contributions hereunder, except that any
funds not required to satisfy all liabilities of the plan for benefits because
of erroneous actuarial calculations shall be returned to the town. Each member
not yet retired shall be entitled to a share equal to his/her accumulated
contributions, and each retired member or his/her contingent annuitant in
receipt of a retirement pension shall be entitled to a share equal to any
excess of the accumulated contributions at retirement over the amount of
benefits received. Each such member, retired member or contingent annuitant
shall then be entitled to the additional share required to provide a total
share equal to such proportionate part of the funds of the plan as the reserve
computed to be required for his/her credits bears to the total of all such
reserves required under the plan, as determined by the Retirement Board on the
basis of actuarial valuation; provided that if the funds remaining are
insufficient to provide in full for such additional shares, the additional
shares shall be reduced proportionately. The Retirement Board may require that
any such share be withdrawn in cash, or in immediate or deferred annuities or
other periodic payments, as it may determine.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.46 CERTAIN RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Minors and incompetents. If any person to whom a benefit is payable
from the plan is a minor, or if the Retirement Board determines that any person
to whom such benefit is payable is incompetent by reason of age, physical or
mental disability, any payment due (unless a proper claim therefor shall have
been made by a duly appointed guardian, conservator or legal representative)
may be made to the spouse, a child, a parent or a brother or sister of such
person, or to any person deemed by the Retirement Board to have incurred
expenses for such person otherwise entitled to payment. Any such payment shall
be a complete discharge of any liability for such payment under the plan.
   (B)   Non-alienation of benefits.
      (1)   No benefit under the plan shall be subject at any time, in any
manner to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, attachment, or
encumbrances of any kind. Any attempt to alienate, sell, transfer, assign,
pledge or otherwise encumber any such benefits, whether presently or thereafter
payable, shall be void. No retirement benefit nor the trust fund shall in any
manner be liable for or subject to the debts or liability of any employee,
terminated vested member, member, beneficiary or pensioner entitled to any
retirement benefit. If the employee, member, former member, beneficiary or
pensioner shall attempt to alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge or
otherwise encumber the member benefit under the plan or any part thereof, or if
by reason of the member's bankruptcy or other event happening at any time, such
benefits would devolve upon anyone else or would not be enjoyed by him, then
the town, in its discretion, may terminate the member's interest in any such
benefit, and hold or apply it to or for the benefit of such person, the
member's spouse, children, or other dependent or any of them, in such manner as
the town may deem proper.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) shall not apply to the creation, assignment or
recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a member pursuant
to a Domestic Relations Order that is approved by the Retirement Board in
accordance with the provisions of the plan and the approved domestic relations
order policies and procedures which are made a part of the plan by reference.
   (C)   Tenure of employment. Neither the action of the town in the
establishment of this plan nor any action taken by it or by the Retirement
Board hereunder shall be construed as giving any employee or member the right
to be retained in the employ of the town or any other right whatsoever, except
to the extent of the benefits provided by the plan to be paid or made available
from the fund.
   (D)   Non-liability of town. All benefits under the plan shall be paid or
provided for solely from the trust fund and the town assumes no liabilities or
responsibilities therefor.
   (E)   Unclaimed benefits. Whenever reasonable efforts fail to locate any
member or beneficiary entitled to benefits under the plan within seven years
from the time the notice is first received that he/she is not to be found at
the address in the records of the town, or the trustee, the Retirement Board
may direct that any benefits to which the member may be entitled shall
thereupon be canceled and no payment shall be made thereafter to anyone with
respect to the benefits so canceled.
   (F)   Applicable law. The validity of the provisions of this plan shall be
determined and construed according to the laws of the State of Connecticut and
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   (G)   Claims procedure. Any denial of a claim for benefits under the plan
shall be stated in writing by the Retirement Board and delivered or mailed to
the member or beneficiary whose claim for benefits has been denied, and shall
set forth specific reasons for such denial, written in a manner calculated to
be understood by such member or beneficiary. Within 60 days after receiving the
notification of such denial, any such member or beneficiary may notify the
Retirement Board in writing of the member's desire for a review of such
decision. Upon such notification, the Retirement Board shall schedule a review
proceeding at which the member shall restate the member's arguments for such
claim to a representative of the Retirement Board. The Retirement Board's
decision following such hearing shall be made within 30 days, and shall be
communicated in writing to the member.
   (H)   Qualified plan. The plan is intended to be a governmental plan under
Section 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, and "qualified" as such under
Section 401 (a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (I)   Return of town contributions under special circumstances. Any town
contribution made under a mistake of fact or law may be returned to the town
within one year following the date the town became aware of such mistake.
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)
§ 31.47 ROLLOVER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the
contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
division a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by
the Retirement Board in accordance with applicable regulations, to have any
portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
      (1)   A distributee who is entitled to elect a direct rollover with
respect to all or any portion of a distribution but who does not make any
election shall be deemed to have rejected the direct rollover option.
      (2)   A distributee who elects a direct rollover with respect to any
eligible rollover distribution that is one in a series of installment payments
made at least annually over a period of less than ten years shall be deemed to
have made the same election with respect to all subsequent eligible rollover
distributions in the series unless and until the distributee changes the
election. A change of election shall be accomplished by notifying the
Retirement Board of the change in the form and manner prescribed by the
Retirement Board.
      (3)   Within a reasonable period of time before an eligible rollover
distribution is to be made, the Retirement Board shall provide to the
distributee an explanation of the right to elect a direct rollover and the
federal tax withholding consequences of failing to elect a direct rollover. A
distributee who elects a direct rollover must provide all information that the
Retirement Board may require to complete the direct rollover.
      (4)   For the purposes of this division, the following definitions will
apply:
         (a)   A "DIRECT ROLLOVER" is a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
         (b)   Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former
employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and
the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the
alternate payee under a qualified Domestic Relations Order, as defined in
Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, are distributees with regard to
the interest of the spouse or former spouse. A distributee also includes the
member's nonspouse designated beneficiary under § 31.39(D). In the case of a
non-spouse beneficiary, the direct rollover may be made only to an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or Section 408(b)
("IRA") of the Internal Revenue Code that is established on behalf of the
designated beneficiary and that will be treated as an inherited IRA pursuant to
the provisions of Section 402(c)(ll) of the Internal Revenue Code. Also, in
this case, the determination of any required minimum distribution under Section
401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code that is ineligible for rollover shall be
made in accordance with Notice 2007-7, Q&A 17 and 18, 2007-5 I.R.B. 395.
         (c)   Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an
individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover
distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the
surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement
account or individual retirement annuity. For plan years commencing after
December 31, 2001, an eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity
contract described in Code Section 403(b) and an eligible plan under Code
Section 457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a
state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of
a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also
apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or
former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relation
order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. For
distributions made after December 31, 2007, a participant or beneficiary may
elect to roll over directly an "eligible rollover distribution" to a Roth IRA
described in Section 408A(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (d)   Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover
distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does
not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or
life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent
such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue
Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross
income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized
appreciation with respect to employer securities), any hardship distribution
described in Section 401(k)(2)(B)(i)(IV) of the Internal Revenue Code received
after December 31, 1998 and effective for plan years commencing after December
31, 2001, any amount that is distributed on account of hardship. For plan years
commencing after December 31, 2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail
to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of
after-tax employee contributions that are not includable in gross income.
However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement
account or annuity described in Sections 408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue
Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Sections 401(a)
or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such
distribution which is includable in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includable.
      (5)   A distribution of less than $200 that would otherwise be an
eligible rollover distribution as defined above shall not be an eligible
rollover distribution if it is reasonable to expect that all such distributions
to the distributee from the plan during the same calendar year will total less
than $200.
   (B)   Rollovers to the plan. In no event shall the plan accept eligible
rollovers from any source unless a re-employed member is making a repayment of
his/her member contributions in accordance with the provisions of §
31.34(E).
(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 458, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)
RETIREE HEALTH CARE PLAN
§ 31.50 RETIREE HEALTH CARE TRUST.
   (A)   Establishment. In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-450(a), the
town shall establish a trust fund (“Trust”) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., or
such other qualified financial institution approved by the Legislative Council,
to hold and invest all contributions and assets of the town’s retiree health
care plan (“Plan”). The Legislative Council shall have the authority to amend
or terminate the Trust.
   (B)   Purpose. The Trust shall be for the purpose of funding current and
future postemployment health care benefits for eligible retired employees of
the town in accordance with the Plan. The Trust may also be used for the
purpose of funding any other postemployment health and life plans as the town
may establish.
   (C)   Trustees. The Mayor and the President of the Legislative Council shall
serve as the trustees (“Trustees”) of the Trust. The Trustees shall have such
powers and duties as set forth in the terms of the Trust, including, but not
limited to, making payments or other disbursements in accordance with the Plan
and the terms of the Trust and directing the investment of the assets of the
Trust. The approval of both Trustees shall be required for the transaction of
all business pertaining to the Trust.
   (D)   Administration. The Trustees shall serve as the Plan Administrator of
the Plan and shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the Plan and the
Trust with respect to the administration of the Plan, including, but not
limited to, providing all proper instructions and directions to the Trustee
regarding the investment of moneys on deposit in the Trust and disbursements
from the Trust. The Trustees shall provide a report to the Legislative Council,
including deposits, disbursements and assets held in the Trust, and such other
information as shall be requested by the Legislative Council, on at least an
annual basis, or more frequently as requested by the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 642, passed 10-8-13)
CHAPTER 32: REGIONAL AUTHORITIES AND COUNCILS
Section
Regional Planning Authority
   
32.01   Purpose
   
32.02   Adoption
   
32.03   Representation
   
32.04   Appropriations
Regional Council of Elected Officials
   
32.10   Creation
   
32.11   Representation
   
32.12   Powers and duties
South Central Council of Governments
   
32.20   Purpose
   
32.21   Adoption
   
32.22   Powers and duties
   
32.23   Representation
   
32.24   Existing ordinances
REGIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY
§ 32.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose is to join the Regional Planning Authority of the South Central
Connecticut, hereinafter referred to as planning authority.
('66 Code, § 52-1)
§ 32.02 ADOPTION.
   The town joins the Regional Planning Authority of South Central Connecticut
in accordance with and subject to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 8-31A to 8-37A,
inclusive.
('66 Code, § 52-2)
§ 32.03 REPRESENTATION.
   The town shall have representatives on the planning authority in the number
permitted by law, who shall hold office for the terms, and shall be appointed
in the manner, prescribed below:
   (A)   Upon the passage hereof, the town plan and zoning commission shall
appoint one member of the planning authority to serve until September 1, 1961,
and upon the expiration of the term and every 3 years thereafter, the member or
his successors shall be appointed by the commission to serve for a term of 3
years.
   (B)   Upon the passage hereof, and subsequent to the appointment by the town
plan and zoning commission as set forth in paragraph (A) of this section, the
legislative council shall appoint 2 members of the planning authority, one to
serve until September 1, 1962 and the other to serve until September 1, 1963,
and upon the expiration of each of the terms and every 3 years thereafter, the
respective member or his successors shall be appointed by the council for a
term of 3 years, and in the event that the town shall be entitled to more than
3 representatives at any time in the future, then the additional
representatives shall be appointed for 3 year terms.
   (C)   All appointments to the planning authority shall be made in accordance
with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 9-167A.
   (D)   Every member of the planning authority appointed under §§
32.01 to
32.04, inclusive, shall be an elector of the town, and any member who ceases to
be an elector of the town shall, by operation of law, vacate his position as a
member of the authority.
   (E)   Whenever any position on the planning authority is vacant, for
whatever reason, then the commission or the council responsible to appoint the
member who last served in the vacant position shall fill the vacancy for the
unexpired portion of the term.
('66 Code, § 52-3)
§ 32.04 APPROPRIATIONS.
   The members of the planning authority appointed underto
32.04, inclusive, may, acting as a committee, submit and prosecute budget
requests for funds to be contributed to the authority, in the same manner as
the town planning commission. Sections
32.01 to
32.04, inclusive, shall not be construed to permit the members, or any of them,
to expend, or to commit the town to expend, any sums of money without prior
legal appropriations.
('66 Code, § 52-4)
REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 32.10 CREATION.
   The town joins with the towns and cities within the South Central
Connecticut Planning Region as defined by the Connecticut Development
Commission, as may enact a similar ordinance, to create a Regional Council of
Elected Officials of South Central Connecticut, as the council is defined by
state law.
(Adopted 3-4-68)
§ 32.11 REPRESENTATION.
   The representative to the regional council shall be the mayor, or his
designate.
(Adopted 3-4-68)
§ 32.12 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The regional council shall have such powers, purposes, responsibilities and
duties as stated by state law.
(Adopted 3-4-68)
SOUTH CENTRAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 32.20 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to help establish, and to authorize the
participation of the town in, the South Central Council of Governments.
(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)
§ 32.21 ADOPTION.
   The town hereby adopts the provisions of Sections 4-124i to 124p, inclusive,
of the Connecticut General Statutes concerning regional councils of government.
(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)
§ 32.22 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The South Central Council of Governments shall be entitled to exercise
all the rights and authority and shall be subject to all the responsibilities
and duties provided for in the General Statutes; said powers and duties shall
consist of consideration of such matters of a public nature common to two or
more members of the council as it deems appropriate, including matters
affecting the health, safety, welfare, education, and economic conditions of
the area comprised of its members.
   (B)   The council shall promote cooperative arrangements and coordinate
action among its members and make recommendations therefore to the members and
such other public and private agencies as exist or perform functions within the
region.
   (C)   The planning duties and responsibilities of the council of governments
shall be carried out exclusively by a regional planning commission in
accordance with Section 4-124o of the General Statutes.
(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)
§ 32.23 REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   The town planning commission shall appoint one of its members to be
its representative to the regional planning commission, said appointment
subject to the concurrence of the mayor.
   (B)   The mayor, or the mayor's designee, is hereby authorized to represent
the town in the deliberations of the council of governments.
(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)
§ 32.24 EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   Upon the creation of the council of governments, all ordinances, or sections
thereof, pertaining to membership in the Regional Planning Authority (Agency)
and/or the Regional Council of Elected Officials shall be repealed.
(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Community Development Advisory Committee
   
33.01   Establishment
   
33.02   Organization
   
33.03   Powers and duties
   
33.04   Limitations
Parking Division
   
33.10   Created; membership
   
33.11   Terms of office
   
33.12   Authorization; powers of division
   
33.13   Power to adopt parking regulations
   
33.14   Publication of regulations; enforcement
   
33.15   Violation prohibited
Natural Resources and Open Space Commission
   
33.25   Establishment
   
33.26   [Reserved]
   
33.27   Membership; compensation; vacancies
   
33.28   Terms of office; removal
   
33.29   Organization: records and annual report
   
33.30   Subcommittees
Economic Development Commission
   
33.35   Created
   
33.36   Terms of office
   
33.37   Additional members
   
33.38   Statutory authority; powers of commission
   
33.39   Amended powers
   
33.40   Organization of the Commission
Youth Advisory Board
   
33.45   Establishment of Board
   
33.46   Board's Organization
   
33.47   Purpose
   
33.48   Duties and responsibilities
Plan and Zoning Commission
   
33.55   Establishment; powers
   
33.56   Appointment and membership
   
33.57   Reserved
   
33.58   Division of Commission
   
33.59   Public hearings on zoning regulations
   
33.60   Reserved
   
33.61   Disqualifications of members
   
33.62   Zoning board of appeals
   
33.63   Prior acts validated
   
33.64   Adoption of street maps or plans validated
   
33.65   Fee schedule
   
33.66   Fees for processing applications by Zoning Board of Appeals
   
33.66A    Fees for Inland-Wetlands Commission
   
33.67   Designating Commission as Aquifer Protection Agency
   
33.67A    Fee schedule for aquifer protection area registration of activities,
permits and various types of review
Fair Rent Commission
   
33.70   Creation; purpose
   
33.71   Definitions
   
33.72   Membership
   
33.73   Terms of office
   
33.74   Powers
   
33.75   Organization and procedures
   
33.76   Special procedures for consolidated complaints
   
33.77   Hearings on a complaint
   
33.78   Orders of the commission
   
33.79   Excessive charge standards
   
33.80   Amount of rent due during pendency of complaint
   
33.81   Escrow account
   
33.82   Commission's decision
   
33.83   Complaints regarding retaliatory evictions
   
33.84   Continuation of proceedings
   
33.85   Notice
   
33.86   Enforcement
   
33.87   Appeal
   
33.88   Other remedies
Arts Commission
   
33.90   Creation; purpose
   
33.91   Appointment; terms and vacancies
   
33.92   Organization
   
33.93   Duties and responsibilities
   
33.94   Financial and contractual responsibilities
   
33.95   Expenditures and employment rights
   
33.96   Arts auxiliary
Human Services Commission
   
33.97   Creation; purpose
Solid Waste And Recycling Commission
   
33.100   Establishment
   
33.101   Organization
   
33.102   Powers and duties
   
33.103   Limitations
Technology Commission
   
33.107   Establishment
   
33.108   Organization
   
33.109   Powers and duties
   
33.110   Limitations
Clean and Green Commission
   
33.115   Establishment
   
33.116   Organization
   
33.117   Powers and duties
   
33.118   Limitations
Veterans' Commission
   
33.125   Establishment
   
33.126   Organization
   
33.127   Purposes
   
33.128   Duties and responsibilities
Commission on Human Rights and Relations
   
33.135   Establishment
   
33.136   Purpose
   
33.137   Limitations
Tree Commission
   
33.140   Establishment
   
33.141   Duties and responsibilities
   
33.142   Tree Fund
   
33.143   Rules and regulations
Flood and Erosion Control Board
   
33.150   Establishment
   
33.151   Composition; appointment, terms compensation of members; vacancies
   
33.152   Powers and duties
Energy Use and Climate Change Commission
   
33.160   Establishment
   
33.161   Organization
   
33.162   Powers and duties
   
33.163   Limitations
 
   
33.999   Penalty
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Community Development Advisory Commission shall consist of nine electors
who shall be residents of the town and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve
without compensation. Membership shall include:
   (A)   No more than five members from one political party.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine electors, appointed by the Mayor
and subject to the approval of the Legislative Council, each to serve a term of
three years. The Commission shall consist of the nine current members of the
Community Development Advisory Commission. Upon the expiration of the terms of
the current members, three members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
the approval of the Legislative Council to serve a one-year term; three members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council,
shall serve two-year terms; and three members appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council shall serve three-year terms.
Thereafter all members appointed shall be appointed for three-year terms. A
vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion of the
term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause,
which shall include failure to attend three meetings of the Commission, without
reasonable excuse, within a calendar year.
(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00; Am. Ord. 497, passed 2- 2-04)
§ 33.02 ORGANIZATION.
   The Commission shall annually select a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and
such other officers as it deems necessary from its membership. The Commission
may adopt such rules or bylaws to govern its operation as it considers
necessary to effectuate its purpose. A majority of all members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall continue all the duties and responsibilities of the
Community Development Advisory Council. Specifically, the Commission shall make
recommendations to and advise the Economic and Community Development Director
with regard to the operation and funding of the Community Development Block
Grant program.
(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.04 LIMITATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
   Nothing in §
33.03 shall be construed as conferring any administrative authority over the
staff or operations of the Economic and Community Development Department. The
Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without the prior
approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)
PARKING DIVISION
§ 33.10 CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is created a parking division of the police commission for the purpose
of creating and establishing off-street parking facilities pursuant to Conn.
Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as amended. The members of the parking division shall be
the members of the police commission.
(‘66 Code, § 45-1; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
§ 33.11 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for the parking division will be concurrent with those
of the police commission as provided by the town charter, §
10-3.
(‘66 Code, § 45-2; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
§ 33.12 AUTHORIZATION; POWERS OF DIVISION.
   Sections
33.10 through
33.15 are adopted under the authority of Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as amended,
and the parking division shall have all powers as are vested in municipal
parking authorities under the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as
amended.
(‘66 Code, § 45-3; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
§ 33.13 POWER TO ADOPT PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The parking division may adopt regulations governing use of any parking
facility which it may operate, which regulations may include a system of
notices of violation permitting payments in lieu of prosecution, and may
include provisions for removal of vehicles parked in violation of any
regulations in accordance with state statutes.
(‘66 Code, § 45-5; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
§ 33.14 PUBLICATION OF REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   Any regulation adopted by the parking division shall be published one time
in a newspaper having a circulation within the town and a copy filed with the
town clerk and with the chief of police. Any regulation adopted by the parking
division shall be enforced by the police department.
(‘66 Code, § 45-6; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
§ 33.15 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any regulation adopted by the
parking division. Any violation shall be deemed an infraction as provided by
state statutes.
(‘66 Code, § 45-7; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)
Penalty, see §
33.999(A)
NATURAL RESOURCES AND OPEN SPACE COMMISSION
§ 33.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   This Commission is established pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-131a which
permits the establishment of a Conservation Commission.
   (A)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor, Legislative Council and the Planning and Zoning
Commission and other appropriate authorities, and perform all other duties as
may be assigned or requested by the Mayor and/or the Legislative Council in
connection with the development, conservation, supervision and regulation of
natural resources, including water resources.
   (B)   Its powers shall be derived from or granted by state statutes and
local ordinances and regulations as the same may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The Commission shall be subject to all restrictions relating to
appropriations and expenditures as specified in the Town Charter.
   (D)   The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately-owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the
purpose of obtaining information on the proper use of such areas.
   (E)   The Commission may recommend to the Mayor, Legislative Council and the
Planning and Zoning Commission and other appropriate authorities plans and
programs for the development and use of open areas.
   (F)   The Commission may propose a greenways plan for inclusion in the
conservation and development plan of the town, pursuant to state statutes.
   (G)   The Commission may inventory natural resources and formulate watershed
management and drought management plans consistent with water supply management
plans prepared pursuant to state statutes.
   (H)   The Commission may make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Inland Wetland Commission, and other town agencies on proposed land
use changes.
   (I)   It may, with the approval of the Legislative Council, acquire land and
easements in the name of the town and promulgate rules and regulations,
including but not limited to the establishment of reasonable charges for the
use of land and easements, for any of its purposes set out in this section.
   (J)   It may supervise and manage town-owned open space or park property
upon delegation of such authority by the entity which has supervisory or
management responsi-bilities for such space or property.
   (K)   The Commission may receive gifts in the name of the town for any of
its purposes, and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to the
terms of the gift.
   (L)   The Commission may exchange information with the Department of
Environmental Protection, and said department may, on request, assign technical
personnel to the Commission for assistance in planning its overall program and
for coordinating state and local conservation activities.
(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.26 [RESERVED].
§ 33.27 MEMBERSHIP: COMPENSATION: VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of no more than 11 members, all electors
of the town to be appointed by the Mayor. At least two members shall be
qualified in the field of conservation or environmental protection. At least
three members shall be qualified in the area of land use or land management.
The remaining six members shall form a diversified representation of the people
of the town. The Mayor, Town Planner and a member of the Legislative Council
shall be ex officio members of the Commission, without a vote. Not more than
six voting members of the Commission shall be of the same political party.
   (B)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   Vacancies may be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of the
vacating member and in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (D)   The Commission shall have no fiscal authority, unless specifically
authorized by the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.28 TERMS OF OFFICE: REMOVAL.
   The members of the Commission shall serve for terms of three years.
Initially, four members shall be appointed for one year, three members shall be
appointed for two years, and four members shall be appointed for three years.
The terms shall commence February 1, 2000. The Mayor may remove any member for
cause, which shall include failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three
meetings during any calendar year.
(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.29 ORGANIZATION: RECORDS AND ANNUAL REPORT.
   The members of the Commission shall choose a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
Secretary from its members, shall keep records of its meetings and activities,
and shall submit an annual report to the Mayor and Legislative Council. A
majority of all the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.30 SUBCOMMITTEES.
   The Commission may establish subcommittees made up of electors of the town
to study and report on any areas within the Commission's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 33.35 CREATED.
   There is created an Economic Development Commission for the promotion and
development of the economic resources of the town, consisting of 11 electors of
the town, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative
Council, no more than seven of whom shall be of one political party. The Mayor
may remove any member for cause, which shall include failure to attend, without
reasonable excuse, three meetings during any calendar year, and the Mayor may
fill any vacancy resulting from such removal.
('66 Code, § 19-1; Am. Ord. passed 3-2-70; Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.36 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Those members first appointed shall be designated to serve for 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 years respectively from February 1, 1965, and thereafter a member shall
be appointed annually to serve for 5 years, except that any vacancies shall be
filled by the chief executive authority for the unexpired portion of the term.
('66 Code, § 19-2)
§ 33.37 ADDITIONAL MEMBERS.
   Upon the effective date of this section, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to
the approval of the Legislative Council, one additional Commissioner for a
period of one year, one additional Commissioner for a period of two years, one
additional Commissioner for a period of three years, and one additional
Commissioner for a period of four years, in addition to the terms of the
Commissioners presently serving. In the event of a vacancy in the Commissioners
membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the
vacating member.
('66 Code, § 19-3, added 1-6-67) (Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.38 STATUTORY AUTHORITY; POWERS OF COMMISSION.
   Sections
33.35 through
33.39 are adopted under the authority of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-136, and the
economic development commission shall have the powers as are provided by Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 7-136, as amended.
('66 Code, § 19-4)
§ 33.39 AMENDED POWERS.
   Powers provided to Commissioners pursuant to this section shall remain in
effect in accordance with provision of state statutes.
('66 Code, § 19-5, added 6-5-67) (Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)
§ 33.40 ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   On or before the first day of July each year, the members of the
Commission shall meet and elect from its members a Chair and a Vice-Chair and
such other officers as it shall from time to time determine. Each officer's
term shall be one year. The agendas for the Commission meetings shall be
approved by the Chair.
   (B)   Meeting Schedule. Regular meeting schedules shall be established
annually and filed in accordance with the General Statutes.
   (C)   The keeping of records and postings of agendas shall be as required by
the General Statutes. Provisions for public participation (including but not be
limited to public speaking) shall be determined by the Commission as well as
any other rules for the transaction of business, which shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of the General Statutes, the Town Charter or
this code.
(Ord. 712, passed 6-10-19)
YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD
§ 33.45 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Youth Advisory Board consisting of 12
members appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative Council.
Board members shall serve without compensation. Board members may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred. Membership on the Board shall include:
      (1)   At least one representative under the age of 21 years of age;
      (2)   At least one representative from the Hamden Public Schools;
      (3)   At least one representative from the Hamden Department of Police
Services;
      (4)   At least one representative of a private youth serving agency; and
      (5)   At least one representative from a Town Department not listed
above.
   (B)   Of the 12 members appointed, at least one-third of the total
membership on the Board shall qualify as service consumers.
   (C)   Of the 12 members first appointed, four Board members shall be
appointed for a term of three years; four Board members shall be appointed for
a term of two years, and four Board members shall be appointed for a term of
one year. Thereafter, Board members shall serve a three year term. In the event
of a vacancy in the Board's membership, the successor shall be appointed to
serve the unexpired term of the vacating member.
   (D)   In addition to the 12 appointed members, the Youth Services
Coordinator shall be an ex-officio member of the Board, without vote.
(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)
§ 33.46 BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its
membership. The Board may also organize itself in whatever other manner it
deems appropriate. The Board may adopt such rules and regulations as it
considers necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the Board's business.
(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)
§ 33.47 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Youth Advisory Board shall be to advise and make
recommendations to the Youth Services Coordinator regarding planning,
development and implementation of youth programs.
(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)
§ 33.48 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Board shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate the purpose
of the article; and
   (B)   The Board shall have no financial powers and duties other than to make
recommendations to the Youth Services Coordinator concerning expenditures.
(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)
PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 33.55 ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES .
   There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission to exercise the powers and
duties set forth in the general statutes.
(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)
§ 33.56 APPOINTMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.
   In accordance with § 7-2:F(2) of the Charter, the Planning and Zoning
Commission ("the Commission") shall consist of nine members and three alternate
members, all electors of the town appointed as set forth in § 7-l:B of the
charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other officers as it may
desire.
   (A)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for term of three years, for a
term commencing on the first day of February of the year of the appointment,
which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the original
appointments.
   (B)   Term of alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint alternate members
for a term of three years on the first day of February of the year of the
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the start of the
original appointments.
   (C)   Assignment of the alternate members. When a regular member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is absent, the chair of the Commission shall
designate an alternate, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act
as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not
available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting.
(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)
§ 33.57 RESERVED.
§ 33.58 DIVISION OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   Division of Commission. In accordance with §
7-2:F(3) of the Charter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may be divided into
a zoning section and a planning section, each to consist of four members and
the chair.
   (B)   Each section shall be subject to the provisions of §
7-1:F of the charter. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission is
divided, the powers and duties of the separate sections shall be in accordance
with the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. In
the event the Planning and Zoning Commission is divided, the chair shall select
four members to serve on the zoning section and four other members to serve on
the planning section.
   (C)   Three members of the planning section and three members of the zoning
section shall constitute a quorum for each section.
(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)
§ 33.59 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON ZONING REGULATIONS.
   Public hearings on zoning regulations shall be held in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)
§ 33.60 RESERVED.
§ 33.61 DISQUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall appear for or
represent any person, firm or corporation or other entity in any manner pending
before the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals or agency
exercising the powers of any such Commission or board in the same municipality,
whether or not he is a member of the Commission hearing such matter.
   (B)   No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall participate in
the hearing or decision of the Commission of which he or she is a member on any
matter in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or
financial sense.
   (C)   In the event of the disqualification of any member of the Commission,
such fact shall be entered on the records of the Commission and, unless
otherwise provided by law, such replacement shall be made from alternate
members pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 8-19a, as maybe
amended from time to time, of an alternate to act as a member of such
Commission in the hearing and determination of the particular matter or matters
in which the disqualification arose.
(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)
§ 33.62 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals to exercise
the following powers and duties as more explicitly set forth in the general
statutes:
      (1)   To hear and decide zoning appeals;
      (2)   To hear and decide all land use matters as may be permitted by law;
and
      (3)   To determine and vary the application of the zoning bylaws,
ordinances or regulations in cases of exceptional difficulty or unusual
hardship. The ability to hear cases shall be limited as set forth in the
general statutes. The validity and effect of variances shall be governed by the
General Statutes.
   (B)   Appointment and membership. The Board (comprised of five regular
members and three members of a "panel of alternates") shall consist of eight
electors of the Town of Hamden appointed as set forth in §
7-1:B of the charter. The Board shall choose a chair and such other officers as
it may desire. The Board shall follow the requirements of the general statutes
pertaining to the call of public meetings, the administration of oaths,
compelling of attendance of witnesses, preparation of meeting minutes and the
filing of rules, regulations and requirements (and the amendment or repeal
thereof) and decisions as public records.
      (1)   (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for term of five years,
for a term commencing on the first day of February of the year of the
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments.
         (B)   Terms of the panel of alternates. The Mayor shall appoint
members to the panel of alternates for a term of five years, for a term
commencing on the first day of February of the year of the appointment, which
terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the original
appointments.
      (2)   Assignment of the panel of alternates. Members of the panel of
alternates shall be designated to act in the place of a member as set forth in
the general statutes.
      (3)   Restrictions. The regular members and panel of alternates shall not
be members of the body acting as the zoning commission.
      (4)   Vacancy. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
7-1:C of the charter, any vacancy in the regular members of the Board or panel
of alternates shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the
Mayor.
(Ord. 622, adopted 8-6-12)
§ 33.63 PRIOR ACTS VALIDATED.
   All acts of the town plan and zoning commission, the town zoning commission,
the town planning commission and the town zoning board of appeals taken prior
to the effective date of this act shall remain in full force and effect subject
to change as provided herein.
('66 Code, § 90-9)
§ 33.64 ADOPTION OF STREET MAPS OR PLANS VALIDATED.
   The approval and adoption of any and all maps or plans of any highway,
street, sidewalk or parkway by the town plan commission or by the town plan and
zoning commission, the layout thereof, and the assessment of benefits accruing
to and damages sustained by any person owning land included in the maps or
plans, is validated, notwithstanding that the maps or plans were filed in the
engineering department of the town instead of the town clerk's office, and
notwithstanding that public notice of hearings which were held by the town plan
commission or the town plan and zoning commission stated that the maps were on
file in the town engineer's office.
('66 Code, § 90-10)
§ 33.65 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The Legislative Council of the town has established the following fee
schedule to be charged by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the town:
I. (A) Administrative Internal Fees
I. (A) Administrative Internal Fees
Certified copies
First page                                                                     $ 1.00
Each additional page                                                           .50
Photocopies, each page                                                         .50
                                                                               Paid to
Over-sized plans                                                               Engineering
                                                                               Dept.
                                                                               Paid to
                                                                               Engineering
                                                                               Dept. (also
Zoning map                                                                     available
   8-1/2 x 11 color copy                                                    free
   Full size color                                                          online)
                                                                               30.00
                                                                               Paid to
                                                                               Engineering
                                                                               Dept.
                                                                                 
Inland wetland map                                                             30.00
   8-1/2 x 11 color copy                                                    Paid to
   Full size color                                                          Engineering
                                                                               Dept.
                                                                               30.00 (also
Inland wetland regulations                                                     available
                                                                               free
                                                                               online)
                                                                               125.00
                                                                               (also
Subdivision regulations                                                        available
                                                                               free
                                                                               online)
                                                                               21.00 (also
Aquifer protection regulations                                                 available
                                                                               free online
                                                                               Available
Map of town aquifers                                                           free online
   8-1/2 x 11 color copy                                                    30.00
   Full size color                                                          Paid to
                                                                               Engineering
                                                                               Dept.
                                                                               100.00/year
Agenda mailing                                                                 (also
                                                                               emailed at
                                                                               no charge)
                                                                               250.00/year
Minutes mailing                                                                (also
                                                                               emailed at
                                                                               no charge)
                                                                               200.00/year
Specific project mailing                                                       (also
                                                                               emailed at
                                                                               no charge)
Fax
Local, per sheet                                                               .50
203 area, per sheet                                                            2.00
Long distance, per sheet                                                       2.00
                                                                               70.00 (also
Town Plan of Conservation & Development                                        available
                                                                               free
                                                                               online)
Postponement fee upon applicant’s request to postpone after project has been 175.00
advertised
West Rock Ridge application                                                    40.00
Plot plan and aerial 8-1/2 x 11                                                No charge
 
 
I. (B) Land Use Recording Fees
(payable to Hamden Town Clerk)
Subdivision/resubdivision         Paid to Town Clerk
(including subdivision agreement)
Lot line revision                 Paid to Town Clerk
Simple split                      Paid to Town Clerk
Special permit                    Paid to Town Clerk
 
II. (A) Planning and Zoning Applications
(Including $60 required for the State)
II. (A) Planning and Zoning Applications
(Including $60 required for the State)
Special permit application                $310.00
Site plan application                     260.00
Zone change/regulation amendment          460.00
Coastal area management application (CAM) 155.00
Subdivision/resubdivision application     275.00 + 130.00 per lot; $725 minimum
Motor vehicle location approval           250.00
Lot line revision                         200.00
Simple split                              200.00
Combined special permit and/or site plan
when cut and/or fill is equal to or in    500.00
excess of 1,000 cubic yards
 
 
II. (B) Revisions
Minor amendment to approved site plan      $160.00
Major amendment to approved site plan      210.00
Minor amendment to approved special permit 160.00
Major amendment to approved special permit 310.00
Map or text amendment                      460.00
 
III. (A) Zoning Permits
(Including $60 for the State)
III. (A) Zoning Permits
(Including $60 for the State)
Fee double as penalty for all zoning permits requested after construction or
use begins
Residential:
One-family dwelling (new construction)  300.00
Two-family dwelling (new construction)  350.00
Three-family dwelling (new              400.00
construction)
Accessory structures and other new      100.00 - structures under 250 sf.;
construction                            200.00 - structures over 250 sf.
Additions                               150.00 - structures under 250 sf.;
                                        250.00 - structures over 250 sf.
Commercial Zoning Permits
(including $60.00 for the State)
Continuation of use                     100.00
Change of use                           160.00
Commercial (new construction)           100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet
Mixed use (office, residential, lodging 50.00 plus 5.00 per dwelling unit plus
and/or retail)(new construction)        15.00 per 1,000 square feet
Manufacturing (new construction)        100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet
Multi-family dwellings (new             100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet
construction)
                                        160.00 per 0.25 acres plus 2.00 per
Parking lots                            parking space for impervious area;
                                        100.00 per 0.25 acres plus 2.00 per
                                        parking space for pervious area
 
 
III. (B) Signage
Signs
   4 sq. ft. or less            $180.00
   Between 4 sq. ft and 16 sq. f240.00
   Over 16 sq.ft.               310.00
   Refacing existing sign       ½ of cost for new sign
   Residential signs            130.00
 
 
IV. Certificates of Zoning Compliance
(Including $60 required for the State)
Residential (1-3) family dwelling       $90.00 plus
units - 1st inspection for CZC and bond 10.00 per unit
release/reduction
Multi-family dwellings (4 or more       200.00 plus 5.00 per impervious parking
dwelling units ) - 1st inspection for   space plus 2.00 per pervious parking
CZC and bond release/reduction          space
Non-residential - 1st inspection for    200.00 plus 5.00 per impervious parking
CZC and bond release/reduction          space plus
                                        2.00 per pervious parking space
                                        200.00 plus 10.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
Mixed-use - 1st inspection for CZC and  gross leasable space plus 5.00 per
bond release/reduction                  impervious parking space plus 2.00 per
                                        pervious parking space
 
 
V. Bond Reduction/Release Requests and Other Inspections
First inspection for bond reduction/ No additional charge if done at the same
release                              time as the inspection for CZC (otherwise
                                     $100.00)
First inspection                     100.00
Second request                       150.00
Each additional inspection           200.00 per inspection
 
 
VI. Road Acceptance Requests
First request           $100.00
Each additional request 500.00
 
 
VII. Inspections
Inspections for certificate of zoning compliance for refinancing &/or $150.00
purchase
CZC as of approval date - administrative                              250.00
Letter of zoning review                                               100.00
 
 
VIII. Student Housing
Single family dwelling $300.00
Two+ family dwelling   500.00 
Annual renewal         150.00 per dwelling unit
 
 
IX. Other
                                $100.00 for each sign not returned; zoning
Signs for public hearing notice permit will not be issued until payment is made
                                or sign is returned
 
(Ord. 261a, passed 5-4-87; Am. Ord. 308, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 331, passed 5-
3-93; Am. Ord. 467, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 541, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 582,
passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 615, passed 4-2-12))
§ 33.66 FEES FOR PROCESSING APPLICATIONS BY ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The following fees, including $60.00 for the State, are hereby created for
the processing of applications by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
 
Services                                                                        Fees
Residential (1 - 3 family dwelling)                                             $160.00
Commercial/industrial/multi-family                                              300.00
Appeal of ZEO decision                                                          250.00
Readvertising fee upon applicant’s request for postponement after project has ½ of the original application
been advertised, unless there are fewer than five members of the Board presen   fee
 
(Ord. 464, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 539, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 582, passed 11-
24-09; Am. Ord. 603, passed 3-7-11; Am. Ord. 615, passed 4-2-12)
§ 33.66A FEES FOR INLAND-WETLANDS COMMISSION.
   The following fee schedule is to be charged by the Inland Wetland Commission
of the town:
 
Applications (including $60 required by the State)
Residential subdivisions             $100.00 per lot proposed for entire
                                     subdivision with a minimum of $400.00
Residential (1-3 family)             310.00
Commercial/industrial/multi- family/ 310.00 plus 50.00/acre or part thereof
other
Map or text amendment                460.00
Medallions                           3.00 each
 
(Ord. 464, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 539, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 582, passed 11-
24-09)
§ 33.67 DESIGNATING COMMISSION AS AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY.
   (A)   Designation and membership.
      (1)   In accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-354 et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby
designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter APA) of the town. The
staff of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as the staff of the
APA.
      (2)   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve
coexisting terms on the APA. The membership requirements of the APA shall be
the same as those of the Planning and Zoning Commission including, but not
limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection and removal, and
filling vacancies.
      (3)   At least one member of the APA or staff shall complete the course
in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection of the state, pursuant to Section 22a-354v of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
   (B)   Regulations to be adopted.
      (1)   The APA shall adopt regulations in accordance with Section 22a-354p
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
      (2)   Those regulations shall provide for:
         (a)   The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall
be established and amended or changed.
         (b)   Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
         (c)   The form for an application to conduct regulated activities
within the area.
         (d)   Notice and publication requirements.
         (e)   Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
         (f)   Administration and enforcement.
(Ord. 324, passed 9-8-92)
§ 33.67A FEE SCHEDULE FOR AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA REGISTRATION OF ACTIVITIES,
PERMITS AND VARIOUS TYPES OF REVIEW.
FACILITY SIZE
 Small (< acre) Medium (1 - 5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
FACILITY SIZE
                          Small (< acre) Medium (1 - 5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
REGISTRATIONS
Industrial                $250           $400                 $600
Commercial                $250           $400                 $600
Other                     $250           $400                 $500
PERMITS
Industrial                $500           $750                 $1,000
Commercial                $500           $750                 $1,000
Other                     $500           $750                 $1,000
Materials Management Plan $150
Reviews
Stormwater Management     $150
Plan Reviews
 
 
FACILITY SIZE
                               Small (< acre)
Public hearing                 $250
Facility inspection/monitoring $150
Regulation petition            $750
Transfer Fee                   $50
Copy of regulations            $.50/page
 
(Ord. 564, passed 9-2-2008)
FAIR RENT COMMISSION
§ 33.70 CREATION; PURPOSE.
   The Town of Hamden (“Town”) establishes a Fair Rent Commission for the
purpose of controlling and eliminating excessive rental charges on residential
property within the town. This subchapter is enacted in recognition of the
compelling need to control and eliminate excessive rental charges in the town.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “CONSOLIDATED COMPLAINT.” A complaint filed, as of right, by tenants of two
or more different rental units in the same building, complex or mobile home
park units with the same landlord that (1) relate to the same action,
occurrence or event; (2) involve the same parties; and (3) raise a common
question of law or fact.
   “COMMISSION.” The Fair Rent Commission of the town established in accordance
with the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f, § 47a-20 and § 47a-23c.
   “DAYS.” Shall have the meaning set forth in the Charter of the Town of
Hamden.
   "HOUSING ACCOMMODATION." Any building or structure containing living
quarters occupied, or intended for occupancy as a place of residence, including
any land or building appurtenant thereto, and mobile homes and mobile home park
lots, except the following.
      (1)   A hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public institution, college
or school dormitory, or any institution operated exclusively for charitable or
educational purposes.
      (2)   Any housing accommodations owned and operated by the United States,
the State of Connecticut, the Town of Hamden, the Housing Authority of the Town
of Hamden, or by any agency or political subdivision of the above.
      (3)   Accommodations rented on a seasonal basis.
   "LANDLORD." The owner, lessor, or sub-lessor of any housing accommodation,
including a person who manages a housing accommodation owned by someone else
and including any person leasing or subleasing any housing accommodation under
any order of a state or federal court.
   “PARTY.” Any landlord or tenant engaged in the complaint process as a
respondent or complainant.
   “PERSON.” Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other
business entity, or other association or group.
   “RENTAL AGREEMENT.” All agreements, whether written or oral or both,
embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a
housing accommodation.
   “RENTAL CHARGES.” Any consideration, monetary or otherwise, including any
bonus, benefit, or gratuity, demanded or received, for the use or occupancy of
any housing accommodation, including any fee or charge in addition to rent that
is imposed or sought to be imposed upon a tenant by a landlord, including but
not limited to late fees, pet fees, parking fees, and utilities.
   "SEASONAL BASIS." Housing accommoda-tions rented for a period or periods
aggregating not more than 120 days in any one calendar year.
   “TENANT.” An individual who leases or rents or in any other legal way
occupies any housing accommodation as a residence for himself or herself or his
or her immediate family.
   “TENANTS UNION.” For purposes of this subchapter, a “Tenants Union” shall be
defined as two or more tenants of rental properties located in the Town of
Hamden, engaged in concerted activities for their mutual aid or protection
regarding the terms and conditions of their rental housing.
   “TENANTS’ UNION REPRESENTATIVE.” The person designated by the members of a
tenants’ union to represent it in connection with any studies, investigations,
and hearings involving that union or its members. Such person is not required
to be a tenant or resident of the housing accommodation.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.72 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
electors of the town, and shall be composed of two landlord members, two tenant
members, and three members who are electors of the town but are neither
landlords nor tenants. The members shall be appointed as set forth in Charter §
7-1.C and the composition of the Commission shall be subject to the provision
of Charter §
7-1.B(7).
   (B)   In addition, the mayor shall appoint three electors to serve as
alternates, who shall be one landlord, one tenant, and one person other than a
landlord or tenant, subject to approval of the legislative council. Any
alternates shall act in the place of a regular member who is either absent from
a meeting or disqualified from serving or when otherwise required by the
Commission in the exercise of its duties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at no
time shall more than two landlord or tenant representatives be present on a
panel.
   (C)   Any regular or alternate member of the Commission who fails to
maintain the status (either landlord, tenant, or elector) that he or she had
upon appointment shall cease to be a member of the Commission effective
immediately, subject to removal. The mayor, subject to the approval of the
legislative council, may remove any regular or alternate member of the
Commission for good cause, including the failure to attend three consecutive
meetings of the Commission.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.73 TERMS OF OFFICE.
    Members of the Commission shall be appointed for staggered terms of three
years. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled, within a reasonable time,
in the manner of original appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
Any member of the Commission may be reappointed in the manner of the original
appointment. The term of office of the alternates shall be for a period of
three years, or until their successors have been chosen and qualified. Not more
than one of the alternate members shall be registered members of the same
political party.
   (A)   Transition provisions for §
33.72 and §
33.73:
      (1)   One of the members for a new position shall be appointed to a
partial term that concludes on June 30, 2024 and, if reappointed thereafter, to
a term of three years commencing on July 1, 2024.
      (2)   One of the members for a new position shall be appointed to a
partial term that concludes on June 30, 2025 and, if reappointed thereafter, to
a term of three years commencing on July 1, 2025.
      (3)   One of the alternates for a new position shall be appointed to a
partial term that concludes on June 30, 2023, and, if reappointed thereafter,
to a term of three years commencing on July 1, 2023.
      (4)   Another alternate to fill a current vacancy shall be appointed to a
partial term that concludes on June 30, 2023 and, if reappointed thereafter, to
a partial term of one year commencing on July 1, 2023; and thereafter to a term
of three years commencing on July 1, 2024.
      (5)   Another alternate to fill a current vacancy shall be appointed to a
partial term that concludes on June 30, 2023 and, if reappointed thereafter, to
a partial term of two years commencing on July 1, 2023; and thereafter to a
term of three years commencing on July 1, 2025.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.74 POWERS.
   The Commission shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To make such studies and investigations and to conduct hearings into
rental charges on housing accommodations within the town as it deems
appropriate in order to carry out the duties and responsibilities delegated
under law, and subject to the terms, limitations, and conditions set forth
therein.
   (B)   To receive complaints, inquiries, and other communications relative to
rental charges on housing accommodations, including, but not limited to,
alleged excessive rental charges and the statutory considerations and criteria
for rendering such determinations as set forth in C.G.S. §§ 7-148b to 7-148f,
inclusive, C.G.S. § 47a-20, C.G.S. § 21-80a and C.G.S. § 47a-23c in housing
accommodations, except those accommodations rented on a seasonal basis, within
its jurisdiction, which jurisdiction shall include mobile manufactured homes
and mobile manufactured home park lots within the town.
   (C)   To conduct hearings on complaints or requests for investigations
submitted to it by any person or persons, subject to the terms, limitations,
and conditions as set forth herein.
   (D)   To compel the attendance of persons at hearings, issue subpoenas and
administer oaths, issue orders and continue, review, amend, terminate or
suspend any of its orders and decisions.
   (E)   To determine, after a hearing as set forth herein, whether or not the
rental charges for any housing accommodation is so excessive as to be harsh and
unconscionable.
   (F)   To determine, after a hearing as set forth herein, whether the housing
accommodation in question fails to comply with any municipal ordinance or state
statute or regulation relating to health and safety.
   (G)   To determine, after a hearing as set forth herein, whether a landlord
has engaged in retaliation in violation of §
33.83 below and make such orders as are authorized herein.
   (H)   To request an inspection of accommodations that are subject of a
complaint or investigation to be administered by the appropriate municipal
agency.
   (I)   To order a reduction of any excessive rental charge (including any
excessive fee or charge) to an amount which is fair and equitable.
   (J)   To enact such by-laws and promulgate regulations as are necessary for
the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, the manner and
place for the filing and handling of complaints and the procedure to be
followed at hearings; provided no by-law or regulation shall be in conflict
with any provision of this subchapter as set forth herein. Provided further,
however, no by-laws or regulations shall become effective unless published in
advance.
   (K)   To make such other orders authorized by law and as otherwise set forth
in this subchapter.
   (L)   To order the suspension or reduction of further payment of rental
charges by the tenant until such time as the landlord makes the necessary
changes, repair or installations so as to bring such housing accommodation into
compliance with any municipal ordinance or state statute or regulation relating
to health and safety.
   (M)   To assess fines against any person or persons who violate or refuse to
obey an order of the Commission pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148f.
   (N)   Carry out all other provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-148b to 7-148f,
inclusive, C.G.S. § 47a-20, C.G.S. § 21-80a and C.G.S. § 47a-23c as now
existing and as hereinafter amended, as they apply to fair rent commissions.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.75 ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Commission shall, annually, elect from its own membership,
officers as it deems appropriate. In any event, it shall elect a chairperson,
who shall preside over its meetings and a vice-chairperson who shall preside in
the absence of the chairperson.
   (B)   A quorum for any meeting shall consist of at least four members of the
Commission or their alternates. The Commission shall not order any rent
reduction or make any determination that a rent is too excessive as to be harsh
and unconscionable, except on the concurring vote of a majority of the members
present at the hearing.
   (C)   The Commission shall conduct regular meetings, open to the public, to
transact whatever business is properly before the Commission. The Commission
shall determine the time, dates, and places of the meetings, and shall announce
the same in advance of the meetings.
   (D)   In accordance with provisions of the general fund and operating
budget, the Commission may be assigned staff as deemed necessary to the
administration of this subchapter, to keep its records, to handle its
correspondence, to supervise and direct the administration of this subchapter,
and generally to perform such other functions as may be assigned by the
Commission.
   (E)   Upon request by the Commission, for inspection services and assistance
from other municipal agencies shall be reasonably available to the Commission.
   (F)   The Commission shall report monthly to the Mayor and the legislative
council on the number of new complaints, the status of complaints, inspections,
correction plans, and remediation plan.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.76 SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR CONSOLIDATED COMPLAINTS.
   Two or more tenants may file a Consolidated Complaint, as of right, for the
purpose of initiating an investigation and hearing, unless the complaint is
severed as set forth below. The Commission shall hear consolidated complaints
in the same manner that separate complaints can be consolidated under §
33.77. The Commission shall establish procedures to administer consolidated
complaints in accordance with this subchapter. The Commission shall provide
forms that facilitate and simplify the filing of such complaints.
   (A)   The Commission shall prepare and make available a complaint form for
use by Persons desiring to file consolidated complaints. The form for the
consolidated complaint shall provide for the following information:
      (1)   The name and contact information for each individual tenant who
wishes to be a party to the complaint.
      (2)   The name and contact information for any person(s) authorized to
act as a representative of the complainants.
      (3)   An explanation of the facts and law common to the parties to the
complaint.
      (4)   Addenda to explain the facts and law pertaining to individual
parties.
   (B)   Upon the filing of a consolidated complaint, the Commission shall
assign separate case numbers to each party and set a date for a consolidated
hearing. Each party and authorized representative shall be permitted to testify
in accordance with procedures determined by the Commission.
   (C)   Following an investigation or hearing for a consolidated complaint,
the Commission and/or the Commission's designated staff, on its own motion or
the motion of any party, shall have the discretion to sever a party from the
consolidated complaint for the purpose of issuing orders based on the
particular circumstances of individual parties.
(Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.77 HEARINGS ON A COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint that a rent is so excessive as to be harsh
and unconscionable, the Commission shall review the complaint and determine
whether the complaint presents a matter within its jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Commission may, on its own motion or the motion of any party,
consolidate multiple complaints for the purposes of investigation and hearing,
in the event the complaints (1) relate to the same action, occurrence or event;
(2) involve the same parties; and, (3) raise a common question of law or fact.
   (C)   The Commission may refer any complaint to the appropriate town, state,
or federal agency. However, if the complaint is within the jurisdiction of the
Commission, the Commission shall concurrently exercise its powers under this
subchapter. The Commission shall notice the complainant and the respondent of
referrals made and the referral agency shall notify the complainant and
respondent upon receipt of the referral.
   (D)   Upon the filing of a complaint, the Commission shall promptly notify
all parties in writing of the receipt of the complaint. Such notice shall be in
plain language and include:
      (1)   Information that informs all parties that the landlord is
prohibited from retaliating against the party or parties due to the filing of
the complaint;
      (2)   Notice if the complaint is within the jurisdiction of the
Commission;
      (3)   If the complaint has been referred to another town, state, or
federal agency, notice of the referral and contact information of the agency to
which the complaint was referred;
      (4)   Notice to the parties that, until a decision on the complaint is
made by the Commission, the liability of the party or parties shall be for the
amount of the last rent prior to the increase complained of or, if there is no
such increase, the last agreed-upon rent;
      (5)   Notice to the party or parties that no eviction can be initiated or
prosecuted against such party or parties during the pendency of the fair rent
commission proceeding except for a ground based upon good cause. An eviction
based upon non-payment of rent cannot be initiated or maintained against each
party who continues to pay the last prior or last agreed-upon rent during the
pendency of the Fair Rent Commission proceeding;
      (6)   Notice of the informal conciliation period;
      (7)   Notice of the day, time and location of the hearing if it has been
scheduled;
      (8)   Phone number of who to contact for additional information; and
      (9)   Information on legal services, rental assistance, and other
resources.
   (E)   If a complaint alleges, or the Commission determines, housing
conditions that violate a housing, health, building or other code or statute,
the Commission shall notify the appropriate state or municipal office or
appropriate enforcement agency, which may then concurrently exercise its own
powers. In addition, the Commission may request that the appropriate municipal
official or agency promptly investigate and provide a report to the Commission.
In those instances, such referral shall not prevent the Commission from
exercising its legal authority regarding such non- compliance.
   (F)   The Commission or municipal staff may, to the extent practicable,
encourage the parties to the complaint to reach a mutually satisfactory
resolution through informal conciliation. Municipal staff may serve as informal
conciliators. Any agreement to resolve the complaint shall be in writing and
signed by the parties.
   (G)   A hearing on the complaint shall be scheduled; subject to delay upon
written agreement of the parties to seek conciliation of the complaint. Written
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be given by mailing a
notice thereof, by certified return-receipt-requested mail, postage prepaid,
and by regular first-class mail and, if practicable, by electronic mail, to the
respective complaining and respondent parties, at least seven days prior to the
hearing. The persons entitled to receive the notice as set forth herein are
hereinafter designated as the party or parties to the complaint.
   (H)   All hearings will be accessible to people with disabilities in
accordance to the requirements of the General Statutes, the Charter and
Ordinances. The town, on behalf of the Commission, will provide sign language
services for persons who are deaf or hard-of-hearing, interpretation and
translation services for people speaking languages other than English. When
necessary, documents can also be provided in braille or large print upon
request.
   (I)   At the hearing, each party shall have the right to offer such
testimony, exhibits, and witnesses as the party deems necessary or appropriate.
   (J)   The testimony of all persons shall be under oath, and any member of
the Commission is hereby authorized to administer the oath to a witness.
   (K)   The Commission shall have the power to subpoena any person to appear
before the Commission, and shall have the power to compel the production of any
books or documents relating to any matter before the Commission.
   (L)   Any party shall have the right to be represented by any person duly
authorized by the party at any hearing. In addition, any party shall have the
right, either himself or herself, or through his or her representative, to
cross examine any witnesses produced at the hearing and to examine all
documents offered in evidence.
   (M)   The Commission recognizes the right of tenants to organize Tenants
Unions consistent with this chapter and the Commission's rules, regulations,
and procedures. The Commission shall accept complaints collected and submitted
via the appropriate forms from a Tenants Union Representative. At the written
request of a Tenants Union Representative, the Commission may study and
investigate the housing market, housing accommodations and other housing
related factors of the tenants represented by that Tenants Union consistent
with the standards pertaining to rental charges in § 33.79. The Commission may
rely on such findings when reaching a decision on complaints filed. The
Commission may also refer those findings to other town departments or
Commissions responsible for regulating housing accommodations within the town.
   (N)   The Commission shall have the right to request the assistance of any
department of the town government, including any available records,
information, or expert witnesses which the department may have in its employ.
   (O)   The Commission is empowered to hire or retain any expert real estate
appraisers or other competent experts to advise it.
   (P)   In the event that there is insufficient time to complete a hearing,
the Commission shall have the power to adjourn the hearing to another time and
date. The Commission may impose costs upon any party found to have caused an
adjournment without good cause.
   (Q)   No sale, assignment, transfer of the housing accommodation in question
or attempt to evict any party or parties shall be cause for discontinuing any
pending proceeding nor shall it affect the rights, duties and obligations of
the Commission or the parties.
   (R)   After the completion of the public hearing and the receipt of all
evidence, testimony and exhibits to be submitted by the parties to it, the
Commission shall make such orders as are authorized herein.
   (S)   Hearings shall be recorded, and recordings shall be made available to
the parties upon request. Upon request by any party, the Commission may cause
the recording to be transcribed at the expanse of the requesting party but an
exception to transcription cost will be allowed for indigent parties. In the
event of an appeal to the superior court, the Commission shall cause the
recording to be transcribed and shall certify the transcript to the court as
part of the record.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.78 ORDERS OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Commission shall render its decision at the same meeting at which
the hearing on the complaint is completed or within 30 days following such
date, unless impracticable. In accordance with the state Freedom of Information
Act, both the hearing itself and the deliberation by the Commission shall be
open to observation by the public. Until a decision on the complaint is made by
the Commission, the liability of a party or parties shall be for the amount of
the last rental charge prior to the increase complained of or, if there is no
such increase, the last agreed-upon rental charge.
   (B)   Subsequent to the hearing the Commission shall have the power to do
the following:
      (1)   If the Commission determines after a hearing that the rental charge
or proposed increase in the rental charge for any housing accommodation is so
excessive, based on the standards and criteria set forth in §
33.79 as to be harsh and unconscionable, it may order that the rent be limited
to such an amount as it determines to be fair and equitable, effective the
month in which the party or parties filed the complaint or, in the discretion
of the Commission and consistent with the evidence presented at the hearing, to
a date prior to the filing of the complaint. A Commission's orders may include,
but are not limited to:
         (a)   A reduction in a rental charge or proposed rent increase;
         (b)   A delay in an increased rental charge until specified
conditions, such as compliance with municipal code enforcement orders, have
been satisfied; or
         (c)   A phase-in of an increase in a rental charge, not to exceed a
fair and equitable rent, in stages over a period of time.
      (2)   Any order of the Commission shall remain in effect for one year
unless the Commission orders a different timeframe. Upon its own motion or the
request of any party, the Commission may grant a further hearing and modify the
timeframe of such order due to noncompliance or change in circumstances.
      (3)   If the Commission determines after a hearing that a housing
accommodation fails to comply with any municipal ordinance or state statute or
regulation relating to health and safety, the Commission may order the
suspension or reduction of further payment of rent by the party or parties
until such time as the landlord makes the necessary changes, repairs or
installations so as to bring the housing accommodation into compliance with
such laws, statutes, or regulations. The Commission may order that the rent
during such period shall be paid to the Commission to be held in escrow subject
to such ordinances or provisions as may be adopted by the town. Upon the
landlord's full compliance with such ordinance, statute or regulation for which
payments were made into such escrow, the Commission shall, in its sole
discretion, determine after hearing such distribution of the escrowed funds.
      (4)   Refer the matter to the appropriate town agency or the law
enforcement authorities for enforcement of the appropriate municipal ordinance,
Connecticut General Statute or state regulation, if the Commission determines
that the housing accommodation in question fails to comply with any municipal
ordinance or Connecticut General Statute or state regulation relating to health
and safety.
      (5)   Dismiss the complaint.
      (6)   Continue, review, terminate, or suspend all of its orders and
decisions.
      (7)   Continue the complaint for final disposition if it finds that the
complaint involves a matter which can be corrected or adjusted between the
parties and it finds that such a continuance would be appropriate under the
circumstances.
      (8)   Order payments of the rent in escrow to the Commission with the
option to order temporary reduction or suspension of the rent until the
landlord has corrected the situation.
      (9)   Order the posting of a sufficient performance bond by the landlord
until such time as the landlord has corrected any health and safety violations
which the appropriate authorities have investigated and have certified to the
Commission as existing code violations relating to health and safety.
      (10)   Enter cease and desist orders to carry out the provisions of §
47a-20 and subsection (b) of § 47a-23c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
      (11)   At the conclusion of a hearing or investigation into a
consolidated complaint, the Commission may:
         (a)   Issue orders addressing the collective grievances common to the
party or parties included in the complaint, and
         (b)   Issue individual orders tailored to the particular circumstances
of individual parties of a consolidated complaint.
      (12)   At the conclusion of the hearing or investigation, the Commission
will notify each complainant in writing of the decision of the Commission. Any
order and notice of the Commission shall include an advisement to the parties
of their right to appeal to the Superior Court.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am Ord. 320, passed 10-
7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23) Penalty, see §
33.999(B)
§ 33.79 EXCESSIVE CHARGE STANDARDS.
   In determining whether a rental charge is so excessive, with due regard to
all the circumstances, as to be harsh and unconscionable, the Commission shall
consider any of the following circumstances as are applicable to the type of
accommodation.
   (A)   The rents charged for the same number of rooms in other housing
accommodations in the same and in other comparable areas of the municipality.
   (B)   The sanitary conditions existing in the housing accommodations in
question.
   (C)   The number of bathtubs or showers, flush water closets, kitchen sinks,
and lavatory basins available to the occupants thereof.
   (D)   Services, furniture, furnishings, and equipment supplied therein.
   (E)   The size and number of bedrooms contained therein.
   (F)   Repairs necessary to make such accommodations reasonably livable for
the occupants accommodated therein.
   (G)   The amount of taxes and overhead expenses thereof.
   (H)   Whether the accommodations are in compliance with the ordinances of
the municipality and the General Statutes relating to health and safety.
   (I)   The income of the complainant and the availability of accommodations.
   (J)   The availability of utilities.
   (K)   Damages done to the premises by the tenant, caused by other than
ordinary wear and tear.
   (L)   The amount and frequency of increases in rental charges.
   (M)   Whether, and to the extent to which, the income from an increase in
rental charges has been or will be reinvested in improvements to the
accommodations.
   In addition, the Commission may consider the following factors:
   (N)   Increases or decreases in the services provided or in the amount of
dwelling space.
   (O)   Substantial deterioration of the housing accommodations.
   (P)   The length of time that violations of municipal ordinances or state
laws have been permitted to exist and the responsiveness of the landlord to
complaints by enforcement agencies.
   (Q)   Increases or decreases in operating costs and the amortized cost of
capital improvements.
   (R)   The rate of return of the landlord's investment.
   (S)   Retaliation by the landlord against the tenant for complaining to the
landlord, the Commission, or to any other governmental agency.
   (T)   Damages caused by individuals on the premises with the tenant's
permission.
   (U)   An increase in the number of occupants of the premises.
   (V)   Such other factors as the Commission believes are relevant to a
determination as to whether a rental charge is so excessive, with due regard to
all the circumstances, as to be harsh and unconscionable.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.80 AMOUNT OF RENT DUE DURING PENDENCY OF COMPLAINT.
   Pending a determination by the Commission, the party or parties shall
continue to pay the amount of the last rent prior to the increase complained of
or, if there is no such increase, the last agreed-upon rent to the landlord
unless, pursuant to this subchapter, the Commission orders that the amount of
the rent be paid into escrow. If a late fee is authorized by Connecticut law,
no late fee may be charged in the event the tenant is paying the last agreed-
upon rent.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23) Penalty, see §
33.999(B)
§ 33.81 ESCROW ACCOUNT.
   The Commission shall establish an escrow savings account with a local bank
or financial institution into which it shall deposit all rents or other funds
paid to it within five business days of receipt. The funds shall be held in the
escrow savings account until such time as the order of the Commission is
complied with; or until the Commission acts on the complaint, or makes other
appropriate orders; or until a further order is made by a court of competent
jurisdiction. However, the Commission may provide for the payment of the
landlord’s mortgage, taxes, and insurance and the cost of heat, water,
electricity, and other essential utilities when the expenses become due and
payable.
   In addition, at its discretion, the Commission may order payment of the full
balance to the landlord in cases of unusual hardship. Any interest earned may
be used as above provided and, upon payment of the balance to the landlord, the
interest shall be remitted to the landlord. Any funds or interest unclaimed by
the landlord for more than 90 days after their release by the Commission may be
returned to the party or parties. If unclaimed by a party for more than 90 days
after notice is given, the funds shall become the property of the town.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.82 COMMISSION'S DECISION.
   The Commission shall render its decision on any complaint filed with it by a
party or parties no later than 60 days after the date of the filing of the
complaint. However, the time limit for deciding any complaint may be extended
by the Commission in any case involving unusual hardship or administrative
difficulties.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.83 COMPLAINTS REGARDING RETALIATORY EVICTIONS.
   The Commission is authorized to carry out the provisions of the General
Statutes (§ 47a-20) pertaining to prohibited retaliatory actions by landlords.
This section prohibits retaliation for a tenant making a good faith (1) effort
to bring the dwelling in compliance with state and local laws and regulations,
including filing a complaint; (2) request for reasonable repairs; and (3)
effort to require the landlord to meet his legal responsibilities. Retaliation
is also prohibited following the notice of a municipal health or safety
violation or if the tenant organizes or joins a tenants union.
   (A)   No landlord shall engage in retaliatory actions.
   (B)   In the initial notice scheduling a hearing or conciliation on a
complaint, and in its notice of decision, the Commission shall include notice,
in plain language, to all complainant and respondent parties that retaliatory
actions against tenants are prohibited.
   (C)   Retaliatory actions by a landlord include but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Engaging in any action prohibited by C.G.S. § 47a-20 or § 21-80a
within six months after any event listed in such statutes, including but not
limited to within six months after a party or parties has or have filed a
complaint with the Commission.
      (2)   Refusing to renew the lease or other rental agreement of any party
or parties, bringing an action or proceeding against any party or parties to
recover possession of the dwelling unit, demanding an increase in rent from the
party or parties, decreasing the services to which the party or parties has or
have previously been entitled, verbally, physically or sexually harassing the
party or parties because of the fielding of a complaint with the Commission or
engaging in other protected activity as set forth in § 47a-20 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
      (3)   Engaging in any other action determined by the Commission, after a
hearing, to constitute landlord retaliation as set forth in C.G.S. § 7-148d(b).
   (D)   Any party or parties who claims that his or her landlord has engaged
in retaliatory action may file a notice of said claim with the Commission.
   (E)   It shall be an affirmative defense against a claim of retaliatory
action when the landlord seeks to recover possession of the dwelling unit if:
      (1)   The party is using the dwelling for an illegal purpose.
      (2)   There is non-payment of rent by the party. Failure to pay a
disputed rent increase is not a non-payment of rent.
      (3)   The landlord in good faith seeks to recover the dwelling unit for
immediate use as his or her own abode.
      (4)   The conditions complained of were caused by the willful actions of
the party or another person in the party's household or a person on the
premises with the party's consent.
      (5)   The landlord seeks to recover possession of the dwelling unit on
the basis of a notice to terminate a periodic tenancy previous to the tenant's
complaint.
   (F)   It shall be an affirmative defense against a claim of retaliatory
action when the landlord seeks an increase in rent if:
      (1)   The conditions complained of were caused by the lack of due care by
the tenant or another person of his or her household or a person on the
premises with his or her consent; or
      (2)   The landlord has become liable for a substantial increase in
property taxes, or a substantial increase in other maintenance or operating
costs not associated with his or her compliance with the complaint, not less
than four months prior to the demand for an increase in rent, and the increase
in rent does not exceed the prorated portion of the net increase in taxes or
costs.
   (G)   Upon receipt of notice of a claim of retaliatory action, the
Commission shall inform the landlord and shall investigate the claim. Within 15
days, the Commission shall convene a hearing after due notice to the tenant and
the landlord for the purpose of determining whether the landlord has engaged in
retaliatory action.
   (H)   Pending determination by the Commission, the Commission may order that
the landlord maintain no action or proceeding against the party to recover
possession of the dwelling unit, the landlord restore those services decreased
by him or her to which the party was entitled, or the party continue to pay the
rent required prior to the retaliatory action complained of.
   (I)   If, after a hearing, the Commission finds that the landlord has
engaged in retaliatory action, it shall order the landlord to cease and desist
from such actions. This cease-and-desist order may include, but is not limited
to, the following provisions:
      (1)   That the landlord maintain no action against the party to recover
possession of the dwelling unit or withdraw any action pending.
      (2)   That the landlord not increase the rent.
      (3)   That the rent be decreased or that it be increased in an amount the
Commission determines fair and equitable.
      (4)   That the landlord restore the services to which the party was
entitled.
      (5)   That the landlord cease and desist all verbal, physical or sexual
harassment of the party.
(Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23)
§ 33.84 CONTINUATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   All proceedings shall continue regardless of the fact that a party may quit
the housing accommodation in question. However, the Commission may consider the
complaint abandoned if the tenant, after receiving notice of a hearing, fails
without good cause to appear at the hearing. No sale, assignment, or transfer
of the housing accommodation in question shall be cause for discontinuing any
pending proceeding, nor shall it affect the rights, duties, and obligations of
the Commission or the parties thereto.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.85 NOTICE.
   All notices with regard to any complaint shall be served by certified mail,
return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and by regular first class mail, and
if practicable, by electronic mail, upon the landlord and the tenant as
complainant and respondent parties. If all notices to a party are returned
without having been delivered, the Commission may arrange for service by a
deputy sheriff, constable of the town, or indifferent person in the same manner
as is provided in the Connecticut General Statutes for service of process in an
ordinary civil action.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.86 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who violates any order of rent reduction or rent suspension
by demanding, accepting or receiving an amount in excess thereof while such
order remains in effect, and no appeal pursuant to § 7-148e is pending, or who
violates any other provision of this chapter or C.G.S. § 47a-20 or 21-80a or
who refuses to obey any subpoena, order or decision of the Commission pursuant
thereto shall be fined the maximum amount permitted by the General Statutes for
such offense. If such offense continues for more than five days, it shall
constitute a new offense for each day it continues to exist thereafter.
   (B)   The Commission may request the Town Attorney to institute and the Town
Attorney may then institute, an action to any court of competent jurisdiction
to enforce any order of the Commission made pursuant to this subchapter,
including enforcement of compliance; or, to enjoin a violation or threatened
violation of any order of the Commission; or, to seek damages incurred as a
result of the violation of any order of the Commission made pursuant to this
subchapter. Such direction to the Town Attorney shall be written by the
chairperson of the Commission or by his or her designee.
   (C)   The Commission shall develop a standard mechanism for notifying the
Housing Division of the Superior Court of Fair Rent Commission orders that
prohibit the landlord from filing or maintaining a summary process action and
an agreement as to how such orders will be implemented.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 734, passed 1-17-23) Penalty, see §
33.999(B)
§ 33.87 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any order of the Commission may appeal to the
Housing Session of the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven,
within 30 days after the issuance of written notice of the order of the
Commission as provided herein. As provided by the Connecticut General Statutes,
the appeal shall be considered as a privileged matter with respect to
assignment for trial.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
§ 33.88 OTHER REMEDIES.
   Except as provided in §
33.84 above, the provisions of this subchapter shall not affect or limit the
right of the landlord to institute a summary process action as provided by the
Connecticut General Statutes, nor shall this subchapter affect the right of the
landlord, tenant, mortgagee, or encumbrancer of record to institute any action
authorized by law.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 734, passed
1-17-23)
ARTS COMMISSION
§ 33.90 CREATION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is established a town commission to be known as the arts
commission. The arts commission shall consist of 15 commissioners.
   (B)   The purpose of the arts commission shall be to stimulate, facilitate,
coordinate, and cooperate with existing organizations for the development of
the arts. It shall serve as an information center and focal point in the
community for activities in the arts.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
§ 33.91 APPOINTMENT; TERMS AND VACANCIES.
   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council,
15 Commissioners who have a broad interest, understanding, and appreciation of
artistic and cultural activities. The term of office of each Commissioner shall
be three years, with the terms of five Commissioners expiring each year. A
vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion
of the term of the vacating Commissioner. Any Commissioner may be removed by
the Mayor for cause, which shall include failure to attend three meetings of
the Commission, without reasonable excuse, within a calendar year.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 414, passed 7-5-00)
§ 33.92 ORGANIZATION.
   The commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary/
treasurer. The chairman shall be the chief executive of the arts commission.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
§ 33.93 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The arts commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities.
   (A)   To make an initial survey of the cultural and artistic resources of
the town, including, but not limited to a survey of the arts by each subject
deemed to be of significance by the arts commission in carrying out its duties.
   (B)   To make such additional surveys as may be deemed advisable from time
to time, of private and public institutions engaged within the town in artistic
and cultural activities.
   (C)   To stimulate and encourage both private and public study and
presentation of the performing and fine arts and public interest, support, and
participation.
   (D)   To encourage and assist freedom of artistic expression essential to
the arts.
   (E)   To stimulate cooperative and coordinated effort among cultural
organiz-ations actively engaged in a single art form.
   (F)   To advise and make recommendations to the mayor and the legislative
council on matters of cultural significance to the town at least on an annual
basis.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
§ 33.94 FINANCIAL AND CONTRACTUAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The arts commission shall have the following financial powers and duties.
   (A)   To submit a proposed budget to the mayor.
   (B)   To enter into contracts within the limit of funds available, with
individuals, organizations, and institutions for services which will further
the objectives of the arts commission.
   (C)   To enter into contracts within the limits of funds available with
local, regional, state, or federal associations for cooperative endeavors.
   (D)   All contracts and agreements must have the prior approval of the
legislative council.
   (E)   To accept gifts, contributions, and bequests of funds from
individuals, foundations, corporations, and other organizations for the purpose
of furthering the objectives of the arts commission.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
§ 33.95 EXPENDITURES AND EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS.
   The Arts Commission shall do the following:
   (A)   Make expenditures in accordance with the annual budget passed by the
town.
   (B)   Place all monies received in the manner referred to in §
33.94(E) in a separate gift account subject to an annual audit. Those monies
may be expended subject to the majority approval of the arts commission.
   (C)   Employ experts and others as may be needed, subject to personnel
regulations and limits of the annual town budget.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
§ 33.96 ARTS AUXILIARY.
   (A)   The arts commission is hereby authorized to appoint town residents who
are known for their competency, understanding, and devotion to cultural
pursuits, to the arts auxiliary.
   (B)   The arts commission will define the function and duties of the arts
auxiliary significant to the purpose of the commission.
   (C)   The purpose of the arts auxiliary is to assist the commissioners in
the execution of their duties.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 33.97 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Establishment of the Commission.
      (1)   The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be
residents of the town, and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. Membership shall include:
         (a)   No more than five members from one political party.
         (b)   Seven members who are currently members of the Commission for
the remainder of their unexpired terms of three years each.
         (c)   One member for a one-year term.
         (d)   One member for a two-year term.
      (2)   The terms for new members of the Commission shall commence on March
1, 2000, and each year thereafter, members shall be appointed for a three-year
term. However, in the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a
succeeding member shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion of the term. Any member may be
removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall include failure to attend three
meetings of the Commission, without reasonable cause, within a calendar year.
   (B)   Commission's organization.
      (1)   The Commission shall annually select a Chair-person and Vice-
Chairperson from the membership. The Commission may adopt such rules or bylaws
to govern its operations as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose.
      (2)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall advise and formulate
recommendations to the Human Services Director, including the Elderly Services,
Community Services, and Youth Services Divisions or Departments, the Mayor, and
the Legislative Council, in the following respects:
      (1)   The Commission shall seek to identify the human services needs of
the town.
      (2)   The Commission shall develop a recommended comprehensive plan for
the delivery of human services within the town.
      (3)   The Commission shall develop recommended policies for the operation
of the town's Human Services Department and programs.
      (4)   The Commission shall establish recommended yearly goals and
objectives for the town's Human Services Department and programs and shall
conduct and submit to the Mayor and the Legislative Council an annual
evaluation of such Department and programs.
      (5)   The Commission, whenever feasible, shall review and assist in the
preparation of grant applications pertaining to the Human Services Department
prior to their submission to the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
   (D)   Limitations of the Commission.
      (1)   Nothing in division (C) shall be construed as conferring any
administrative authority over the staff or operations of the Human Services
Department or its programs.
      (2)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses
without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 363, passed 4-3-96; Am. Ord. 409, passed 5-1-00)
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COMMISSION
§ 33.100 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents
of the town and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
Membership on the Commission shall include:
      (1)   No more than four members from any one political party;
      (2)   Two (2) members appointed for a one-year term;
      (3)   Two members appointed for a two-year term; and
      (4)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.
   (B)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year terms. The
terms shall commence on July 1, 1999. In the event of a vacancy in the
Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to approval by the Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the
vacating member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall
include failure to attend three meetings of the Commission without reasonable
excuse within a calendar year.
   (C)   The Public Works Director and Recycling Coordinator shall serve as an
ex officio member of the Commission without power to vote.
(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99; amend Ord. 413, passed 6-5-00)
§ 33.101 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any other
officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.
   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.
   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)
§ 33.102 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Public
Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the Mayor and the Legislative
Council in the following respects:
   (A)   The Commission shall formulate recommendations concerning the solid
waste management and recycling needs of the town.
   (B)   The Commission shall develop a recommended comprehensive plan for
solid waste management and recycling for the town.
   (C)   The Commission shall develop recommended policies and procedures with
regard to solid waste management and recycling operations of the town's Public
Works Department.
   (D)   In conjunction with the Public Works Director and Recycling
Coordinator, the Commission shall establish recommended yearly goals and
objective for the town's solid waste management and recycling programs, and the
Commission shall annually submit an evaluation of the town's performance with
respect to such goals and objectives to the Public Works Director, Recycling
Coordinator, Mayor and the Legislative Council.
   (E)   The Commission shall seek out sources of grant money available to the
town and report such opportunities to the Public Works Director, the Recycling
Coordinator and the Mayor.
   (F)   The Commission shall review any grant applications pertaining to solid
waste management and recycling, and shall advise and make recommendations to
the Public Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator and the Mayor with respect
to such grant applications.
   (G)   The Commission shall formulate a recommended plan for and promote the
education of citizens, students, businesses and municipal employees on solid
waste management and recycling issues in conjunction with the Public Works
Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the Mayor's office and the Education
Department.
   (H)   The Commission shall review and recommend ordinances and resolutions
related to solid waste management and recycling to the Mayor's office and the
Legislative Council.
   (I)   The Commission shall participate in the evaluation of the town's solid
waste removal contract and report recommendations to the Legislative Council
for selection.
   (J)   The Commission shall prepare a comprehensive program of recycling for
town and Board of Education buildings, to be recommended to the Legislative
Council for approval by resolution.
(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)
§ 33.103 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring upon the
Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operations of the
Public Works Department.
   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and recommendations to
the Public Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the Mayor, the
Legislative Council and the Education Department.
   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without
the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission
shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission
shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who shall be paid
as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional and technical
services line item account.
(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)
TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
§ 33.107 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be residents
of the town and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
      (1)   Members on the Commission shall include:
         (a)   No more than six members from any one political party;
         (b)   Three members appointed for a one-year term;
         (c)   Three members appointed for a two-year term; and
         (d)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.
      (2)   Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms.
The terms shall commence on July 1, 2000. In the event of a vacancy in the
Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the
vacating member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall
include failure to attend three meetings of the Commission without reasonable
cause within a calendar year.
   (B)   The Technology Director shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Commission without power to vote.
(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)
§ 33.108 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any other
officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.
   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose.
   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)
§ 33.109 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Mayor, the
Legislative Council, and the Technology Director in the following respects:
   (A)   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations concerning
computerization, data processing, internet access, and telecommunications needs
of the town.
   (B)   The Commission shall seek out sources of grant money available to the
town and report such opportunities to the Technology Director and the Mayor.
   (C)   The Commission shall review any grant applications pertaining to
technology matters and shall advise and make recommendations to the Technology
Director and the Mayor with respect to such grant application.
(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)
§ 33.110 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring upon the
Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operation of the
Technology Director.
   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and recommendations to
the Technology Director, the Mayor, and the Legislative Council.
   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without
the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission
shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission
shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who shall be paid
as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's Professional and Technical
Services line item account.
(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)
CLEAN AND GREEN COMMISSION
§ 33.115 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents
of the town, and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
      (1)   Of the seven members first appointed, membership on the Commission
shall include:
         (a)   No more than four members from any one political party;
         (b)   Two members appointed for a one-year term;
         (c)   Two members appointed for a two-year term;
         (d)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.
      (2)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year terms. The
terms shall commence in November 2000. The Mayor may remove any member for
cause, which shall include failure to attend, without reasonable cause, three
meetings during any calendar year. In the event of a vacancy in the
Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to approval by the Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the
vacating member.
      (3)   The Public Works Director and the Town Planner shall serve as ex
officio members of the Commission, without power to vote.
   (B)   Effective February 28, 2002, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the Legislative Commission, four additional members to the
Commission, for a total of 11 Commissioners, nor more than seven of whom shall
be from any one political party. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which shall include
failure to attend, without reasonable cause, three meetings during any calendar
year.
      (1)   Of the four new members appointed, membership on the Commission
shall include:
         (a)   Two members for a one-year term;
         (b)   One member for a two-year term; and
         (c)   One member for a three-year term.
      (2)   Thereafter all members shall serve three-year terms. In the event
of a vacancy in the Commissions membership, the successor shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to serve the
unexpired term of the vacating member.
(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 453, passed 2-4-02)
§ 33.116 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any other
officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.
   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.
   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)
§ 33.117 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Public
Works Director, the Town Planner, the Mayor, and the Legislative Council in the
following respects:
   (A)   To promote and encourage actions and strategies designed to improve
the physical appearance of the town, including beautification, tree planting,
landscaping, and prevention of litter, blight, and improper property
maintenance, and the enforcement of ordinances pertaining to these matters;
   (B)   To study conditions affecting the physical appearance of the town,
such as the need for tree planting, landscaping, and enforcement mechanism to
eradicate litter, blight, and improper property maintenance;
   (C)   To encourage improvements in the physical appearance of the town and
to involve local businesses, neighborhoods, community, civic groups, churches,
and individual volunteer citizens in planning and carrying out such
improvements;
   (D)   To make such recommendations to the Mayor and Legislative Council on
the methods of maintaining and improving the physical appearance and aesthetic
image of the town as it deems appropriate;
   (E)   To recommend the establishment of short and long-term goals and
objectives for the beautification needs of the town;
   (F)   To develop and recommend a strategic action plan for accomplishing
town beautification goals and objectives;
   (G)   To identify and seek, through the town's Grants Manager, grants from
public and private sources to be used in achieving any of its purposes;
   (H)   To collect, compile, and disseminate information relative to
maintaining and improving the town's physical appearance;
   (I)   To make a full written report of all activities undertaken by it, the
status of existing town beautification programs and its short and long-term
recommendations to the Mayor and Legislative Council once a year. The report
shall be delivered on or before November 1 of each year and shall detail
activities carried out by the Commission during the preceding 12-month period;
   (J)   To preview site plans as they come before the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and if it chooses to do so, make written recommendations to the
Planning and Zoning Commission on issues of beautification. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall at no time be required to postpone its business, should
the Commission not provide such written recommendations regarding site plans.
(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)
§ 33.118 LIMITATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring upon the
Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operations of any
department.
   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and recommendations to
the Public Works Director, the Town Planner, the Mayor, and the Legislative
Council.
   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without
the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission
shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission
shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who shall be paid
as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional and technical
services line item account.
(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)
VETERANS COMMISSION
§ 33.125 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Veterans Commission shall consist of 11 members, all electors of
the town to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Legislative Council. Not more than seven members to the Commission shall be of
the same political party. Not less than eight members of the Commission shall
be veterans of the armed forces of the United States of America. Commission
members shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   Of the nine members first appointed, three Commissioners shall be
appointed for a term of three years; three Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of two years; and three Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of
one year. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three
years. In the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, the succeeding
member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member.
The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which shall include failure to
attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings during any calendar year.
   (C)   Effective April 3, 2006, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the Council, one additional Commissioner, who shall be a veteran,
for a period of three years and one additional Commissioner, who shall be a
veteran, for a period of two years. Thereafter, the Commissioners shall serve
three-year terms. In the event of a vacancy in the Commissioners' membership,
the successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating
member.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 533, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 580, passed 9-
8-09)
§ 33.126 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and a
Secretary from its membership. The Commission may also organize itself in
whatever other manner it deems appropriate. The Commission may adopt such rules
and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the purpose of this
subchapter.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)
§ 33.127 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The Commission shall advise the Mayor and town departments regarding
the service needs of veterans, public educational programs, and events
regarding the history and commemoration of veterans, as well as the
preservation of veteran's monuments and memorials.
   (B)   The Commission shall serve as the Local Veterans' Advisory Committee
and shall have the responsibilities of carrying out locally the duties and
purposes of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-135, including those of a veteran's service
contact person, who shall be designated as such by the chairperson of the
Commission.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 696, passed 2-5-18)
§ 33.128 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate the
purposes of the Commission and any other duties and responsibilities authorized
by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-135 as may be amended.
   (B)   The Commission shall receive, in writing, correspondence from
residents with concerns or specific needs.
   (C)   The Commission shall act as the coordinating agency in all matters
concerning veterans and their dependents, coordinating the activities of public
and private facilities concerned with veterans' reemployment education,
rehabilitation and adjustment to peacetime living.
   (D)   The Commission shall cooperate with all national, state and local
governmental and private agencies in securing services and benefits to which a
veteran or his/her dependents may be entitled.
   (E)   The Commission shall use the services and facilities of the veterans'
organizations so far as possible to carry out the purposes of this section.
   (F)   The Commission shall encourage and coordinate vocational training
services for veterans.
   (G)   The Town of Hamden shall appropriate the necessary funds so that the
Commission can carry out its duties and responsibilities. Any such expenditures
shall comply with the rules, regulations, charter and ordinances of the town.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 696, passed 2-5-18)
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND RELATIONS
§ 33.135 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Commission on Human Rights and Relations shall consist of nine
members, all electors of the town, to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Not more than six members of the
Commission shall be of the same political party. Commission members shall serve
without compensation.
   (B)   Of the nine Commissioners first appointed, three Commissioners shall
be appointed for a term of three years; three Commissioners shall be appointed
for a term of two years; and three Commissioners shall be appointed for a term
of one year. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of
three years. In the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, the
succeeding member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the
vacating member. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which shall include
failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings during any
calendar year.
(Ord. 433, passed 3-12-01)
§ 33.136 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of the Commission shall be as follows:
   (A)   To foster mutual understanding and respect among all members of the
community;
   (B)   To encourage equality of treatment and respect among all members of
the community;
   (C)   To work with governmental and non-governmental organizations charged
with promoting an integrated and diverse community;
   (D)   To work with federal, state, and town departments, boards and
commissions, as well as with private, civic, religious, business, industrial,
labor, and other organizations, groups and persons to recommend to and advise
the Mayor regarding participation in programs, events, and projects which
reflect the diversity of the community and help all members of the community
enjoy equality of opportunity in all phases of community life;
   (E)   Working with town departments, boards and commissions to provide
outreach to and greater participation in all aspects of town government and
civic life for all members of the community;
   (F)   Promoting educational activities and programs that further the
Commission's purposes, specifically those that further intergroup understanding
and acceptance;
   (G)   Promoting interracial dialogue and cultural diversity in programs,
events, and projects sponsored by the town and others;
   (H)   To perform independent research and investigation for the purpose of
making reports and recommendations to the Mayor with respect to new or proposed
programs or issues involving human and group rights and relations.
   (I)   To advise and assist the town in eliminating all discrimination
against any individual or individuals because of race, color, gender, age,
religious creed, economic status; national origin or ancestry.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)
§ 33.137 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring upon the
Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operations of any
dept of the town.
   (B)   The Commission shall have no fiscal authority. The Commission shall
have no authority to incur any expenses without the prior approval of the Mayor
and the Legislative Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission
shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who shall be paid
as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional and technical
services line item account.
(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)
TREE COMMISSION
§ 33.140 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There shall be established a Tree Commission to consist of five
members recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative
Council, who shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall be a non-
voting ex officio member of the Commission.
   (B)   The initial terms of office shall be three years for two members; two
years for two members; and one year for one member. Thereafter, at the
expiration of the initial term of each member, a successor shall be appointed
for a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy, a successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative Council to serve
the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed from the
Commission as set forth in § 7-1:H of the Charter.
(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)
§ 33.141 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The responsibility of the Tree Commission shall pertain to trees
located on public property and in the public rights-of-way and not on private
property.
   (B)   The Tree Commission is charged with:
      (1)   Developing and from time to time updating an Urban Forest Master
Plan;
      (2)   Developing and maintaining a town tree inventory;
      (3)   Developing community educational programs regarding trees and the
understanding of the benefits of appropriate tree planting and care;
      (4)   Developing polices, giving recommen-dations, and providing advice
to all concerned town departments and agencies as to species selection,
planting, spacing, fertilization, bracing, pruning, transplanting, maintenance,
preservation, protection or removal of trees on all public lands and public
rights-of-way; and
      (5)   Acting in an advisory capacity to the Planning and Zoning
Commission with respect to landscape design, and principles, locally suitable
botanic species and protection of natural resources.
(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)
§ 33.142 TREE FUND.
   There shall be established within the Finance Department a “Commemorative
Tree Fund,” comprised of contributions from interested persons and other
entities, for the purpose of maintaining the wooded character of the streets
and lands within the town. The Tree Commission may recommend expenditures from
the Commemorative Tree Fund to the Administration but shall have no other
fiscal authority.
(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)
§ 33.143 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Commission shall have the right to establish the rules and regulations
pertaining thereto with the consent and advice of the Mayor. It is the
responsibility of the Tree Warden and/or the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee to enforce the regulations of the Commission.
(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)
FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD
§ 33.150 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 25-84 through 25.98, as amended, the town
hereby establishes a Flood and Erosion Control Board for the town to be known
as the Hamden Flood and Erosion Control Board.
(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)
§ 33.151 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be composed of seven
resident electors of the town appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Legislative Council.
   (B)   Members of the Board first appointed shall be designated to serve for
the following terms: two members for one year, three members for two years and
two members for three years. Thereafter, such members shall be appointed
annually to serve for three years.
   (C)   The Mayor may remove a member for cause, which shall include the
failure to attend three meetings in any calendar year.
   (D)   Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner of
the original appointment.
   (E)   Members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)
§ 33.152 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be vested with all the powers and
duties specified in Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 25-84 through 25-98.
(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)
ENERGY USE AND CLIMATE CHANGE COMMISSION
§ 33.160 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established an Energy Use and Climate Change
Commission consisting of nine members, who shall be residents of the town and
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative Council.
Commission members shall serve without compensation. Members of the Commission
shall include:
      (1)   Not more than five members from any one political party;
      (2)   Three members appointed for a one-year term;
      (3)   Three members appointed for a two-year term; and
      (4)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.
   Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms. In the
event of a vacancy in the Commission’s membership, the successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council to serve
the unexpired portion of the vacating member. Any member may be removed by the
Mayor for cause, which shall include failure to attend three meetings of the
Commission without reasonable cause within a calendar year.
(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)
§ 33.161 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any other
officers, as it shall deem necessary from its membership.
   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operations, as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose.
   (C)   A majority of all voting members shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the Commission’s business.
(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)
§ 33.162 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A) The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council and advocate publicly
for the implementation of the greenhouse gas reduction measures recommended in
the local action plan by developing specific goals and plans for achieving
measurable, cost-effective reductions on a realistic timeline that will provide
energy efficiency, sustainability, improved health and a more livable
community.
   (B)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council and advocate publicly
for implementation of measure contained in the local action plan in the areas
of energy use, purchasing, energy efficiency and conservation, transportation,
building design and other related areas as may be assigned or required by the
Mayor.
   (C)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports and make
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council covering any
refinements or additions to the local action plan.
   (D)   The Commission will work in conjunction with and cooperation with the
Natural Resources and Open Space Commission, the Recycling and Solid Waste
Commission, the Clean and Green Commission and any other boards and commissions
on any common issues that may arise, when appropriate.
(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)
§ 33.163 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring on the
Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operations of any
town department(s) or any portion of town government.
   (B)   The Commission’s authority is limited to advice and recommendations to
the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without
the approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission shall
have no fiscal authority.
(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §
33.15 shall be fined not more than $100.
(‘66 Code, § 45-7)
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any order of rent reduction or rent
suspension by demanding, accepting, or receiving an amount in excess thereof
while the order remains in effect, and no appeal is pending, or violates any
cease and desist order of the Fair Rent Commission, or violates any other
provision of §§
33.70 through
33.88 or any person who shall refuse to obey any subpoena, order, or decision
of the Fair Rent Commission pursuant thereto, shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100 for each such offense. If the offense continues for more
than five days, it shall constitute a new offense for each day it continues to
exist thereafter. No action shall be taken on any such violation by the
prosecuting authorities of the town except upon written complaint of the
chairperson of the Commission or his or her designee.
(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)
CHAPTER 34: CIVIL PREPAREDNESS
Section
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Mayor's authority
   
34.04   Orders, rules and regulations
   
34.05   Responsibility of director of civil preparedness
   
34.06   Duties of director
   
34.07    Mayor's duties
   
34.08   When state of civil preparedness ceases to exist
   
34.09   Violation prohibited
 
   
34.99    Penalty
§ 34.01 Purpose.
   The legislative council declares that the preparation of a plan and the
means for its implementation, for the protection of lives and property in the
town from enemy attack, natural disaster or any other cause, is immediately
essential. The legislative council further finds that in times of emergencies
which may imperil the safety of the inhabitants of the town, or their property,
it becomes necessary to effectuate and place into operation the plans and
preparations with a minimum of delay. The legislative council finds, therefore,
that preparation and adoption, of such plans, to be fully publicized, are now
imperative.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.02 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively.
   (A)   "Civil emergency." Civil emergency and civil preparedness shall be
synonymous with the term "civil defense emergency" as used in any ordinance,
statute or law.
   (B)   "Civil preparedness." Shall be synonymous with the term "civil
defense" as used in any ordinance, statute or law.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.03 Mayor's authority.
   The mayor is directed, authorized and empowered to do any and all things
necessary to cooperate with the governor of the state, the state civil
preparedness director or his agents, the mayors, first selectmen, chief
executive officers or civil preparedness directors of other communities within
the state and with the government of the United States and of this state in
carrying out any and all orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated by
the government of the United States or this state pursuant to the provisions of
federal or state civil preparedness acts.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.04 Orders, rules and regulations.
   (A)   The mayor, or his duly authorized representative or representatives,
are authorized to promulgate orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry out the purposes of this chapter in the furtherance of the civil
preparedness plan and program and to protect life and property. All orders,
rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall be available for public
inspection at the place and during the hours specified by the mayor.
   (B)   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supercede
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.05 Responsibility of director of civil preparedness.
   The director of civil preparedness shall be responsible for the
organization, administration and operation of the civil preparedness
organization within the town, subject to the direction and control of the
mayor. The director shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor, and may be
removed by the state director of civil preparedness for cause.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.06 Duties of director.
   The director of civil preparedness shall have the following duties,
responsibilities and powers:
   (A)   He may, with the consent of the mayor, represent the town on any
regional or state organization for civil preparedness.
   (B)   He may make studies and surveys of the manpower, industries,
resources, and facilities of the town to ascertain the capabilities of the town
for civil preparedness and to plan for their most efficient use in time of
emergency.
   (C)   He shall prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the civil
preparedness of the town and shall present the plan and program to the mayor
for his approval. When the mayor shall approve the plan, it shall be the duty
of all municipal agencies and all civil preparedness forces in the town to
carry out the duties and functions assigned by the plan and program as
approved. The plan and program may, from time to time, be modified in like
manner.
   (D)   In accordance with the civil preparedness plan and program, the
director shall institute the training programs and public information programs
and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full
mobilization of civil preparedness forces in advance of actual disaster, as may
be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the town civil
preparedness plan in time of emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct
practice (air-raid) alerts or other civil preparedness exercises as he may deem
necessary.
   (E)   The director may organize and recruit personnel and services as are
needed in carrying out the civil preparedness plans and programs of the city,
the state, and the United States, except where the responsibility for
recruiting and organizing specific personnel or services is lodged by law in
some other official or body.
   (F)   The director shall do all other acts not inconsistent with law which
may be required of him for the furtherance of civil preparedness activities.
   (G)   The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations that
may from time to time be issued by the state director of civil preparedness,
the federal government, or any of its agencies.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.07 Mayor's duties.
   The mayor shall have the following duties, responsibilities and powers:
   (A)   He may remove or suspend the director of civil preparedness or any
officer, member, employee or agent of the office of civil preparedness, or of
any emergency or volunteer service organized by the office, subject to any
applicable civil service laws or regulations.
   (B)   In the event of a major disaster caused by, among other things, enemy
attack, sabotage or other hostile action, storm, riot, fire, flood or other
causes or in the event of the imminence thereof, the mayor may declare that a
state of civil preparedness emergency exists, in which he may personally, or
through his duly authorized representative or representatives, take direct
operational control of any or all parts of the civil preparedness forces and
functions in the town.
   (C)   Upon the declaration, the provisions of this paragraph (C) shall
immediately become effective and shall continue in effect until the end of the
civil preparedness emergency has been declared:
      (1)   The mayor may order into action all or any part of the civil
preparedness forces of the town.
      (2)   The mayor may designate the vehicles and persons as shall be
permitted to move and the routes which they shall follow, or routes which shall
be closed to movement.
      (3)   The mayor shall take appropriate measures for the protection of the
health and safety of any and all persons including inmates of any institutions
within the town and children in the schools.
      (4)   The mayor may order the evacuation of all or part of the population
of stricken or threatened areas and may take these steps as are necessary for
the receipt and care of the evacuees and as are necessary to protect life and
property in or related to any stricken or threatened areas.
      (5)   The mayor may take other steps as are reasonably necessary in the
light of the emergency to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people
of the town, and to minimize the effects of actual or imminent disasters, due
to hostile action or natural causes.
   (D)   Upon declaration of a civil preparedness emergency, the mayor is
authorized to expend such monies as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. The mayor shall submit to the legislative council,
as soon as practical, a detailed report of amounts so expended.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.08 When state of civil preparedness ceases to exist.
   A state of civil preparedness emergency shall cease to exist upon
declaration by the mayor to that effect, or by vote of a 2/3 majority of the
entire legislative council, at a regular or special meeting of that body.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
§ 34.09 Violation prohibited.
   No person shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any order, rule or
regulation issued pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of §
34.09 shall be fined not more than $100.
(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)
CHAPTER 35: OTHER OFFICIALS
Section
Policemen: Liability of Town
   
35.01   When town liable for acts of policemen
   
35.02   When action may be instituted
   
35.03   Time limitation on instituting; notice required
Sealer of Weights and Measures
   
35.05   Appointed and duties
Justices of the Peace
   
35.10   Number allowed
Constables
   
35.15   Election; term of offices
Town Attorney
   
35.20   Limitations on authority to compromise and settle claims against the
town
POLICEMEN: LIABILITY OF TOWN
§ 35.01 WHEN TOWN LIABLE FOR ACTS OF POLICEMAN.
   The town, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, general,
special or local, shall, upon the adoption of §§
35.01 to
35.03, inclusive, pay on behalf of any duly appointed policeman of the town all
sums which the duly appointed policeman shall become obligated to pay by reason
of the liability imposed upon the duly appointed policeman by law for damages
to person or property, provided the duly appointed policeman, at the time of
the occurrence, accident, injury or damage complained of, was acting in the
performance of his duties and within the scope of his employment in the
discharge of a duty imposed by law upon the duly appointed policeman of the
town, and provided the occurrence, accident, injury or damage was not the
result of any willful or wanton act of the duly appointed policeman in the
discharge of his duty.
('66 Code, § 50-1)
Cross-reference:
   See Charter,
Ch. X
§ 35.02 WHEN ACTION MAY BE INSTITUTED.
   No action or proceeding instituted pursuant to the provision of §
35.01 hereof shall be prosecuted or maintained against the town or duly
appointed policeman unless at least 30 days have elapsed since the demand,
claim or claim upon which the action or special proceedings is founded were
presented to the clerk of the legislative council.
('66 Code, § 50-2)
§ 35.03 TIME LIMITATION ON INSTITUTING; NOTICE REQUIRED.
   No action for personal injuries or damages to real or personal property
shall be maintained against the town or any duly appointed policeman thereof,
unless:
   (A)   The action is commenced within one year after the cause of action
therefor has arisen; or
   (B)   Notice of the intention to commence the action and of the time when
and the place where the damages were incurred or sustained has been filed with
the clerk of the legislative council and with the policeman concerned within
six months after the cause of action has accrued.
('66 Code, § 50-3)
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 35.05 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   There shall be appointed in the town a sealer of weights and measures whose
duty it shall be to conduct the affairs of his office in accordance with the
statutes in the case made and provided.
('66 Code, § 54-1)
Statutory-reference:
   Municipal sealer of weights and measures, Conn. Gen. Stat. Ch. 750 § 43-6
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
§ 35.10 NUMBER ALLOWED.
   Until further action by the legislative authority of this town, the number
of justices of the peace for this town shall be and the same is fixed at 81.
('66 Code, § 34-1) (Am. Ord. 365, passed 5-6-96; Am. Ord. 502, passed 4-7-04)
CONSTABLES
§ 35.15 ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.
   The mayor shall appoint, and may remove, all constables for the town. The
appointments shall consist of 7 resident electors of the town, no more than 4
of whom shall be from the same political party. The appointments shall be made
after the town election of 1979, and biennially thereafter. The terms of the
appointed constables shall expire at 12 noon on the last Sunday of November,
1981, and biennially thereafter.
(Ord. 173, passed 8-7-78)
TOWN ATTORNEY
§ 35.20 LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY TO COMPROMISE AND SETTLE CLAIMS AGAINST THE
TOWN.
   (A)   The Town Attorney shall have authority to compromise and settle any
claim against the town only to the extent that such settlement involves money
damages under $2,000.
   (B)   The Town Attorney shall not have any authority to compromise and
settle any claims against the town for an amount in excess of $2,000 without
such settlement first being submitted to and approved by a Settlement Committee
of the Legislative Council.
   (C)   The Settlement Committee of the Legislative Council shall be comprised
of five Councilmembers selected by the President of the Council, no more than
three of which may be of the same political party.
   (D)   The Town Attorney shall not have authority to compromise and settle
any claim by the town against any party for any amount of money damages without
such settlement first being submitted to and approved by a Settlement Committee
of the Legislative Council.
   (E)   The Town Attorney shall not have authority to compromise and settle
any claim by or against the town, which settlement involves any action and/or
commitment on the part of the town, other than the payment or acceptance of
money damages without such settlement first being submitted to and approved by
a Settlement Committee of the Legislative Council, and if so approved, then
without such settlement also being submitted to and approved by the full
Legislative Council. It is the intention of this section to specifically
preclude the Town Attorney from entering into any settlements which include,
within their provisions, the promotion of town employees, the awarding of
contracts with the town, any apologies to the other party, or the commitment by
the town to take any action other than paying or receiving money damages as
limited above, without prior Legislative Council approval.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude the Settlement Committee or
the full Legislative Council from considering in executive session any matter
within the purview of this subchapter, whenever such executive session is
appropriate under the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.
   (G)   The term "SETTLEMENT" as used in this subchapter shall include the
Town Attorney's agreement to a stipulated judgment, to be submitted to the
court or the Town Attorney's confession of judgment or failure to contest any
matter which allows for the entry of judgment against the town.
(Ord. 388, passed 4-5-99)
Cross-reference:
   Town Attorney, see Charter,
Chapter VI
CHAPTER 36: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
Bonds
   
36.01   [Reserved]
   
36.02   [Reserved]
   
36.03   Approval by Legislative Council required
Purchasing Procedures
   
36.10   Purchase of supplies, materials, etc.
   
36.11   Requisition to bear written approval
   
36.12   Expenditures
   
36.13   Exemptions
   
36.14   Competitive bidding may be waived
   
36.15   Record to be kept
   
36.16   Emergency purchases by purchasing agent
   
36.17   Emergency purchases by other than purchasing agent
   
36.18   Definitions
   
36.19   Cooperative purchasing plans
   
36.20   Control of warehouse or stockroom
   
36.21   Issuance of rules and regulations
Greater New Haven Transit District
   
36.25   Intent; legislative authority
   
36.26   Powers
   
36.27   Board of directors
   
36.28   Period of effectiveness; withdrawal from district
   
36.29   Obligations or commitments by town
Probate Court
   
36.35   Established
Lost Property
   
36.40   Statutory provisions relative to lost property adopted
Exemptions from Property Tax
   
36.45   Exemption for totally disabled persons
   
36.46   Exemption for motor vehicles specially equipped for disabled veterans
   
36.47   Exemption for blind persons
   
36.48   Exemption for veterans and spouses
   
36.49   Exemption for certain ambulance-type motor vehicles and property owned
by a nonprofit ambulance company
   
36.50   Exemption of property acquired by religious organizations
   
36.51     Exemption for properties using alternative sources of energy
   
36.52     Waiver of property tax under five
Commission on Disabilities
   
36.60   Title
   
36.61   Definitions
   
36.62   Findings
   
36.63   Establishment of Commission
   
36.64   Commission's organization
   
36.65   Powers and duties
   
36.66   Personnel and services authorized by Commission
Schedule of Fees
   
36.80   Fees for engineering services
BONDS
§ 36.01 [RESERVED].
§ 36.02 [RESERVED].
§ 36.03 APPROVAL BY LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL REQUIRED.
   The bonds of the town shall not be issued unless approved by ordinance of
the Legislative Council.
('66 Code, § 77-3) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 10-7-02)
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 36.10 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, ETC.
   The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies, material, equipment, goods
and contractual services required by any department, office or agency of the
town government, except that he/she will not purchase books, publications,
subscriptions for periodical literature or non-print materials in the library
collections of the board of education or the library board. All purchases for
equipment and materials used for classroom, instructional, or library
collections use, other than books, publications or subscriptions for periodical
literature, are to be purchased in accordance with the specifications furnished
by the superintendent of schools or his/her duly appointed agent, or the town
librarian or his/her duly appointed agent.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.11 REQUISITION TO BEAR WRITTEN APPROVAL.
   No request or requisition for any purchase forwarded to the purchasing agent
for action shall be valid unless it bears the written or electronic approval of
the head of the department, office, or agency, or his/her previously designated
agent.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.12 EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Transactions from $0.01 to $2,500.00 shall be awarded prudently on the
basis of the best value, using known and reliable sources of supply. Requests
for expenditures under this section along with the justification shall be
forwarded by the department head or his/her designee to the purchasing agent
for review and approval.
   (B)   Transactions from $2,500.01 to $25,000.00 shall be awarded to the most
“qualified” vendor, based on results of three or more electronic or written
quotations. Requests for expenditures under this section along with the
justification shall be forwarded by the department head or his/her designee to
the purchasing agent for review and approval.
   (C)   Transactions of $25,000.01 or more shall be awarded on the results of
formal bid procedures, except as provided herein. The purchasing agent shall
invite sealed bids or requests for proposals through the town’s website and
other notification tools, which may include the State of Connecticut or other
procurement websites, giving at least ten days’ notice thereof from the posting
or advertising date, and shall contain a statement reserving the right to
reject all bids or proposals. The purchasing agent shall award the contract or
make the purchase from the lowest qualified bidder for a bid; for proposals, to
the bidder deemed to be in the best interest of the town; or may reject all
bids or proposals subject to the best interests of the town. If there are two
or more responsible bids or proposals which are equal in price and
specifications, the award is to be made on the basis of the following criteria:
      (1)   Past performance.
      (2)   Priority to town vendors.
      (3)   When divisions (C)(1) and (2) have not resolved the equality, or
when application of one or more than one town vendor is involved, the
purchasing agent shall award the contract or make the purchase by drawing of
lots in public, to which drawing the vendors shall be invited.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.13 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Local suppliers. Where practicable and beneficial to the operations of
the town, the purchasing agent may assign up to $10,000 annually, contracts for
goods (only) required for the day-to-day maintenance and repair of the town
(and school facilities) to suppliers located within or near the town’s
geographical area. The purchasing agent will annually request and keep on file
price/discount structures from critical suppliers and will work with operations
personnel to ensure all goods are procured on the basis of a best value
proposition.
   (B)   Sole source. Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing agent may
purchase on the basis of best value, without publicly bidding, goods and
services from suppliers who are the sole source of copyrighted, patented and/or
specialized equipment or services; library/ educational/curriculum materials
and/or textbooks; and utilities. In each case, the purchasing agent may waive
the requirement to obtain competitive quotes or bids upon receipt and review of
sole source documents which shall be kept on file for examination and audit,
confirming the exclusivity of the goods and an explanation/calculation of the
best value proposition. For purposes of this chapter, “SOLE SOURCE” shall mean
one source of supply deemed acceptable or capable of meeting the specifications
for a product or service and shall be qualified with a sole source
justification document to the purchasing agent.
   (C)   Consortiums. Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing agent may
purchase goods and services through any and all state or federal purchasing
strategies or produce confirmation the supplier holds a contract awarded by the
U.S. Government Services Administration (GSA) to document the federal
government has conducted a public bidding process, or purchase from contracts
publicly bid by a consortium. In each case, the purchasing agent may waive the
requirement to obtain competitive bids or quotes upon receipt and review of
documents, which shall be kept on file for examination and audit, confirming
the explanation/calculation of the best-value proposition.
   (D)   State bids. Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing agent may
purchase goods and services from the State Bid List.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)
§ 36.14 COMPETITIVE BIDDING MAY BE WAIVED.
   (A)   Competitive bidding may be waived by the purchasing agent, upon the
written approval of the Director of Finance and the Mayor, and negotiations may
be utilized in the following circumstances.
      (1)   Emergency requirements as per §§ 36.16 to 36.18, inclusive.
      (2)   Management or consulting services, and those services requiring
special or unique skills.
      (3)   Service, repair or maintenance of equipment normally handled by the
manufacturer and/or his/her authorized dealer of the equipment.
      (4)   In those circumstances where uniformity or consistency with goods
or equipment already owned by the town is deemed to be of substantial
importance.
      (5)   When purchasing goods or services which are not generally
competitive as to price or because of lack of availability.
   (B)   Copies of all quote waivers between the sum of $2,500.01 and
$25,000.00 shall be sent to the Legislative Council upon receipt by the
Director of Finance on a semi-annual basis.
   (C)   Notwithstanding provisions (A)(1) through (A)(5), above, any bid
waiver over the sum of $25,000.00 must receive the approval of the majority
vote of the Legislative Council, present and voting.
   (D)   All waivers of bid shall contain a statement of the reasons therefor
and shall be kept on file in the office of the purchasing agent.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.15 RECORD TO BE KEPT.
   The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open-market orders and the
bids submitted in competition thereon, and the records shall be open for public
inspection.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.16 EMERGENCY PURCHASES BY PURCHASING AGENT.
   In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate acquisition of
supplies or contractual services, the Mayor may authorize the purchasing agent
to secure, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual
services. A written report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall
be filed with the Mayor and the Legislative Council by the purchasing agent and
shall be open for public inspection.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.17 EMERGENCY PURCHASES BY OTHER THAN PURCHASING AGENT.
   In case of actual emergency, the head of any using department, office or
agency may purchase directly any supplies or contractual service whose
immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using
agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens.
The department head shall file with the purchasing, not later than the next
business day, a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a
written report of the circumstances of the emergency, and shall file a copy of
the report with the Mayor and the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.18 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BEST VALUE.” A function/service comparison performed with cost, quality and
availability variables among others; obtaining the best possible products/
services at the lowest possible cost.
   “BEST VALUE PROPOSITION.” A function/service comparison performed with cost,
quality and availability variables among other criteria; obtaining the best
possible products/services, considering any intangible or other benefits that
may not necessarily represent the lowest possible cost, but overall better
value perceived.
   “FORMAL BID PROCEDURE.”
      (1)   “INTENT TO BID.” The offer of a supplier (bidder) to provide
specific goods and/or services in accordance with all specifications and
conditions indicated in a solicitation. The purchasing agent shall award the
contract or make the purchase from the lowest qualified bidder.
      (2)   “REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP).” A document used to solicit proposals
to accomplish a specified scope of work. Negotiations may be conducted after
evaluation of all offers. The purchasing agent shall award the contract or make
the purchase deemed to be in the best interest of the town.
   “GSA.” General Services Administration, which is the acquisition and
procurement agency for the government of the United States; it contracts for
all goods, services and real property required by the operation of the civilian
federal government.
   “GSA.” General Services Administration, which is the acquisition and
procurement agency for the government of the United States; it contracts for
all goods, services and real property required by the operation of the civilian
federal government.
   “LOWEST QUALIFIED BIDDER.” A supplier who has the capacity and capability to
provide goods/services in conformance with the specifications at the lowest
cost.
   "MRO." Maintenance, repair and operation.
   “SOLE SOURCE.” One, and only one, source of supply deemed acceptable or
capable of meeting the specification for a product/service qualified with a
sole source justification document to the purchasing agent.
Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.19 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PLANS.
   The purchasing agent may join with other towns or other units of government
in cooperative purchasing plans and consortiums on an equitable basis in large
bulk purchasing, in the best interests of the town.
Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.20 CONTROL OF WAREHOUSE OR STOCKROOM.
   Should any central warehouse or stockroom be established for the use of the
agencies, departments or offices of the town, the facility shall be under the
control of the purchasing agent, and he/she shall be empowered to promulgate
rules and regulations for its proper functioning. For purposes of this section,
the Board of Education shall be deemed an agency of the town.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
§ 36.21 ISSUANCE OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The purchasing agent is empowered to issue rules and regulations to assure
the proper and efficient implementation of §§
36.10 to
36.21, inclusive. All such regulations shall be subject to the approval of the
Mayor and the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 742, passed 5-20-24)
GREATER NEW HAVEN TRANSIT DISTRICT
§ 36.25 INTENT; LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The town desires to join a transit district known as the Greater New Haven
Transit District established by ordinance of the City of New Haven pursuant to
the authority provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 103a, for the formation of such
districts.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)
§ 36.26 POWERS.
   Except as otherwise limited by §§
36.25 to
36.29, inclusive, the Greater New Haven Transit District shall have all the
powers provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 103a, for transit districts
established thereunder.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)
§ 36.27 BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   The affairs of the district shall be managed by a board of directors chosen
from among the electors of the constituent municipalities, the membership of
the board of directors to be constituted as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch.
103a, or such other general or special act regarding representation on the
board of directors of a transit district. The persons to serve as Hamden's
representatives on the board of directors of the district shall be appointed by
the mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the legislative council.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)
§ 36.28 PERIOD OF EFFECTIVENESS; WITHDRAWAL FROM DISTRICT.
   Sections
36.25 to
36.29, inclusive, shall continue in force for a period of 24 months from
passage, but may be continued thereafter by further affirmative vote of the
legislative council; provided, however, that the legislative council may vote
the withdrawal prior to the termination of the 24 months. The legislative
council specifically reserves the right to withdraw from the transit district
whenever, by curtailment of service or otherwise, the transit district, in the
opinion of a majority of the legislative council then voting, ceases to
adequately provide public bus service within the town.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)
§ 36.29 OBLIGATIONS OR COMMITMENTS BY TOWN.
   Relying upon the representations of the governor of this state, the town
does not assume and shall not be bound to any obligation or commitment of any
nature by reason of the creation or operation of the transit district, without
prior action by the legislative council in accordance with the appropriation
provisions of the town charter.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)
PROBATE COURT
§ 36.35 ESTABLISHED.
   The town shall, on and after the Wednesday following the first Monday of
January 1947, constitute a probate district by the name of the probate district
of Hamden. In 1946, and qua drennially thereafter, a judge of probate for the
district shall be elected, at the time and in the manner provided by law for
the election of judges of probate. From and after the Wednesday following the
first Monday of January 1947, the probate court for the district of Hamden
shall have jurisdiction of all probate business arising in the town, but all
business previously entered or begun in the probate court for the district of
New Haven shall be completed in the same manner as if this section had not been
passed.
('66 Code, § 85-1)
LOST PROPERTY
§ 36.40 STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO LOST PROPERTY ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 50-9, the town adopts the
provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 50-10 to 50-14, inclusive.
('68 Code, § 38-1)
EXEMPTIONS FROM PROPERTY TAX
§ 36.45 EXEMPTION FOR TOTALLY DISABLED PERSONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an additional
exemption for persons totally disabled and eligible for exemption under Conn.
Gen. Stat. § 12-81i subject to the income requirements as stated herein.
   (B)   Exemption. Any person entitled to the exemption from property tax
applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $1,000, as
provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(55), shall be entitled to an additional
exemption from such tax in an amount up to $1,000 of such assessed value,
provided such person's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum
amount as provided under section Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81l.
   (C)   Application for exemption. Any person submitting a claim for the
additional exemption as provided under division (B) of this section, shall be
required to file an application on a form prepared for such purpose by the
Assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect to which
such additional exemption is claimed, provided when an applicant has filed for
such exemption and received approval for the first time, such applicant shall
be required to file for such exemption biannually thereafter. Each application
shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the
event a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required
by the Assessor, for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to
the assessment date with respect to with such additional exemption is claimed.
(Ord. 287, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 632, passed 6-3-13)
§ 36.46 EXEMPTION FOR MOTOR VEHICLES SPECIALLY EQUIPPED FOR DISABLED VETERANS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an exemption
applicable to the assessed value of a motor vehicle specifically equipped for
disabled veterans eligible for exemption.
   (B)   Exemption. There shall be an exemption from property tax of 100% of
assessed value of any one motor vehicle owned by such veteran with a condition
of a disability enabling such veteran to qualify for the exemption from
property tax currently allowed under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(20) and (21),
provided such motor vehicle must be specially equipped for purposes of adapting
its use to the disability of such veteran.
   (C)   Applications for such exemptions shall be filed with the Chief
Assessor in such a manner and requiring such information as required by the
Chief Assessor, not later than November 1 following the assessment date with
respect to which such exemption is claimed, or for vehicles purchased on or
after September 1 and on or before July 31 of the assessment year for which
such assessment is requested, not later than 60 days after such purchase.
Reapplication for the same vehicle shall not be required.
   (D)   Medical documentation. The Chief Assessor may require medical
documentation verifying that the modifications to the vehicle are directly
related to the medical incapacity or the physical disability of the individual
seeking such exemption. Exemptions shall expire when the vehicle is sold.
(Ord. 288, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 633, passed 6-3-13)
§ 36.47 EXEMPTION FOR BLIND PERSONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an additional
exemption for blind persons eligible for exemption under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-
81j, subject to certain income requirements.
   (B)   Exemption. Any person entitled to an exemption from property tax
applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $3,000, as
provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(17) and (18), shall be entitled to an
additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to $2,000 of such assessed
value, provided such person's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable
maximum amount as provided under section 12-81l.
   (C)   Application procedure. Any person submitting a claim for the
additional exemption as provided for above, shall be required to submit an
application on a form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not later than
the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption
is claimed, provided when an applicant has filed for such exemption and
received approval for the first time, such applicant shall be required to file
for such exemption biannually thereafter. Each such application shall include a
copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the event a return is
not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the Assessor
for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the approval of a
claim for such additional exemption.
(Ord. 289, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 634, passed 6-3-13)
§ 36.48 EXEMPTION FOR VETERANS AND SPOUSES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an additional
exemption for veterans and veteran's surviving spouses entitled to an exemption
from property taxes in accordance with Public Act 16-191, subject to the income
requirements contained herein. Any veteran or any veteran's surviving spouse
shall be entitled to receive one additional exemption §
36.48 for any applicable grand list year.
   (B)   Exemption for veteran.
      (1)   Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(19) and whose qualifying income does
not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-81l, as may be amended from time to time, by more than $25,000, shall be
entitled to an additional exemption of $15,000. The exemption provided under
this subsection shall be applied to the assessed value of an eligible veteran's
property.
      (2)   Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(20) and whose qualifying income does
not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-81l, as may be amended from time to time, by more than $25,000 shall be
entitled to an additional exemption of $15,000. The exemption provided under
this subsection shall be applied to the assessed value of an eligible veteran's
property.
   (C)   Exemption for veteran's surviving spouse. Any veteran's surviving
spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81(22) and whose qualifying income does not exceed the applicable
maximum amount applicable to an unmarried person as provided under Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81l, as may be amended from time to time, by more than $25,000
shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $15,000. The exemption provided
under this subsection shall be applied to the assessed value of an eligible
surviving spouse's property.
   (D)   Application procedure.
      (1)   Any such veteran or veteran's surviving spouse submitting an
application for such additional exemption on the grant list of October 1, 2017,
shall make application on a form prepared by the assessor in the office of the
Assessor on or before October 1, 2017. New applications in succeeding years
shall be made in the office of the assessor, on or before October 1 of such tax
year.
      (2)   An applicant, who has filed for such exemption and received
approval for the first time, shall be required to file for such exemption
biennially thereafter, subject to the provision of division (D)(1) of this
section.
      (3)   Each such application shall include a copy of such veteran's or
veteran's surviving spouse's federal income tax return, or in the event such a
return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the
Assessor, for the tax year of such veteran or veteran's surviving spouse ending
immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to which such additional
exemption is claimed.
      (4)   Any person who has submitted an application and been approved in
any year for the additional exemption under division (B) or (C) of this section
shall, in the year immediately following approval, be presumed to be qualified
for such exemption. During the year immediately following such approval, the
assessor shall notify, in writing, each person presumed to be qualified
pursuant to this section. If any such person has a qualifying income in excess
of the maximum allowed under either division (B) or (C), such person shall
notify the assessor on or before the next filing date for such exemption and
shall be denied such exemption for the assessment year immediately following
and for any subsequent year until such person has reapplied and again qualified
for such exemption. Any person who fails to notify the assessor of such
disqualification shall make payment to the town in the amount of the property
tax loss related to the exemption improperly taken.
(Ord. 290, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 560, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 689, passed 9-
18-17)
§ 36.49 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN AMBULANCE-TYPE MOTOR VEHICLES AND PROPERTY OWNED
BY A NONPROFIT AMBULANCE COMPANY.
   (A)   Definitions.
      "AMBULANCE." A vehicle for transporting the sick and injured which is
equipped and staffed to provide medical care during transit, and which is
operating as an ambulance under the authority and in compliance with
promulgated regulations of the State of Connecticut, and registered as such by
the Department of Motor Vehicles.
      "AMBULANCE-TYPE VEHICLE" or "MOTOR VEHICLE OWNED BY A PERSON WITH A
DISABILITY." Any motor vehicle specifically equipped or modified in a
significant way for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated or
disabled individuals, including but not limited to, the inclusion of lifts or
hand brakes, the equipping with stretchers, beds or other special seating and
equipment such as oxygen.
      "USED EXCLUSIVELY." The vehicle is used and devoted to the transporting
of medically incapacitated individuals.
   (B)   Exemption. There is hereby created, pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-
81c, an exemption from personal property taxation for (1) any ambulance-type
vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically
incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any
individual for profit; (2) any property owned by a non-profit ambulance
company, and (3) any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or
owned by a parent or guardian of such person, which vehicle is equipped for
purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person.
   (C)    Application procedure. Applications for such exemption shall be filed
with the Assessor of the Town, in such manner and requiring such information as
required by the Assessor. Applications shall be filed no later than the date of
the assessment list with respect to which such exemption is claimed, or for
vehicles purchased after October 1 and on or before July 31 of the assessment
year for which such exemption is requested, not later than 60 days after such
purchase. Reapplication for the same vehicle shall not be required.
(Ord. 376, passed 5-4-98; Am. Ord. 451, passed 11-5-01; Am. Ord. 635, passed 6-
3-13)
§ 36.50 EXEMPTION OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)    Exemption. Any religious organization entitled to an exemption from
property tax, as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(14) and (15) shall be
entitled to have its exemption effective as of the date of the acquisition of
the property to which the exemption applies. Said organization shall be
entitled to a reimbursement of any tax paid by it for a period subsequent to
said date and for any tax paid by the prior owner for a period subsequent to
said date for which such organization reimbursed such owner on the transfer of
title to such property.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Applications for exemptions shall be filed with the Assessor on a
form prepared for that purpose by the town's Assessor. Each application shall
include a copy of the organization's letter of determination of exemption by
the Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax. The Assessor may require
further documentation verifying that the property has been used exclusively for
its exempt tax purposes.
      (2)   The tax exemptions shall expire when the property is sold or no
longer used exclusively for tax-exempt purposes.
      (3)   Any religious organization submitting a claim for the reimbursement
of any tax paid by it or for any tax paid by the prior owner for which the
organization reimbursed the owner on the transfer of title to the property,
shall file an application, on a form prepared for that purpose by the town's
Tax Collector.
   (C)   This section shall be applicable with respect to the assessment year
which commenced on October 1, 2001.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 449, passed 11-5-01)
§ 36.51 EXEMPTION FOR PROPERTIES USING ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF ENERGY.
   (A)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from taxation
in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(56):
      (1)   Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after
October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 2006, which is equipped with an active
solar energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which a solar energy
heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976, and before
October 1, 2006, to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of
such real property equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds
the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional
portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such
system related to solar energy, provided this exemption shall only apply to the
first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or addition
of any such system to a building;
      (2)   As used in this division, “active solar energy heating or cooling
system” means equipment which (1) provides for the collection, transfer,
storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or
cooling which absent such solar energy system would require a conventional
energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity; (2)
employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer energy; and (3)
meets standards established by regulation, in accordance with the provisions of
Conn. Gen. Stat., Chapter 54, by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management;
      (3)   Any person claiming the exemption provided in this division for any
assessment year shall, on or before the first day of November in such
assessment year, file with the Assessor in which such real property is located
written application claiming such exemption. Failure to file such application
in the manner and form as provided by such Assessor within the time limit
prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for such
assessment year. Such application shall not be required for any assessment year
following that for which the initial application is filed, provided if such
solar energy heating or cooling system is altered in a manner which would
require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of the
right to such exemption until a new application, applicable with respect to
such altered system, is filed and the right to such exemption is established as
required initially;
   (B)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from taxation
in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(57):
      (1)   Any Class I renewable energy source, as defined in Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 16-1, or any hydropower facility described in division (27) of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, installed for the generation of electricity for
private residential use, provided such installation occurs on or after October
1, 1977, and further provided such installation is for a single family dwelling
or multifamily dwelling consisting of two to four units.
      (2)   Any person claiming the exemption provided in this division for any
assessment year shall, on or before the first day of November in such
assessment year, file with the Assessor in the town in which such Class I
renewable energy source is located, written application claiming such
exemption. Failure to file such application in the manner and form as provided
by such assessor or board within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a
waiver of the right to such exemption for such assessment year. Such
application shall not be required for any assessment year following that for
which the initial application is filed, provided if such Class I renewable
energy source is altered in a manner which would require a building permit,
such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such exemption until a
new application, applicable with respect to such altered source, is filed and
the right to such exemption is established as required initially.
      (3)   For assessment years commencing on or after October 1, 2013, 100%
of the real property tax for the Class I renewable energy source as defined in
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, hydropower facility described in division
(27)(a) of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, or solar thermal or geothermal
renewable energy source, installed for generation or displacement of energy
located at 100 Overlook Drive, Hamden, CT 06514 and owned by SJBSKB, LLC shall
be abated, provided (1) such installation occurs on or before December 31,
2013; (2) such installation is for commercial or industrial purposes; and (3)
the nameplate capacity of such source or facility does not exceed the load for
the location where such generation or displacement is located.
   (C)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from taxation
in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(63):
      (1)   The cogeneration system, owned by UTC Power and used by the Hamden
Board of Education, which shall be installed at Hamden High School, 2040
Dixwell Avenue, Hamden, CT as more particularly described in Appendix A,
attached hereto and made a part of this section. Such system shall be exempt
from taxation for 15 assessment years following the installation of a system.
      (2)   As used in this division, “cogeneration system” means equipment
which is designed, operated and installed as a system which produces, in the
same process, electricity and exhaust steam, waste steam, heat or other
resultant thermal energy which is used for space or water heating or cooling,
industrial, commercial, manufacturing or other useful purposes and which meets
standards established by regulation, in accordance with the provisions of Conn.
Gen. Stat., Chapter 54, by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management.
      (3)   The applicant requesting this exemption shall, on or before the
first day of November in such assessment year, file with the Assessor in the
town in which such the system is located written application claiming the
exemption. Failure to file the application in the manner and form as provided
by such Assessor within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of
the right to the exemption for such assessment year. Such application shall not
be required for any assessment year following that for which the initial
application is filed, provided if such solar energy electricity generating
system or cogeneration system is altered in a manner which would require a
building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such
exemption until a new application, applicable with respect to such altered
system, is filed and the right to such exemption is established as required
initially.
(Am. Ord. 532, passed 10-31-05; Am. Ord. 608, passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. 641,
passed 10-7-13)
§ 36.52 WAIVER OF PROPERTY TAX UNDER FIVE DOLLARS.
   Any property tax due to the Town of Hamden in an amount less than $5.00
shall be waived as provided by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-144c.
(Ord. 616, passed 5-7-12)
COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES
§ 36.60 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Commission on Disabilities.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
§ 36.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "COMMISSION." The Commission on Disabilities of the town.
   "DISABILITY." Any condition or characteristic that renders a person a
"PERSON WITH DISABILITIES" as defined below.
   "PERSON WITH DISABILITIES." Any person who has a physical or mental
impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a
record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. As
used herein:
      (a)   Physical or mental impairment means any physiological disorder or
condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of
the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense
organs; respiratory; including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive;
digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or any
mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain
syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. This
term includes, but is not limited to, however, such diseases and conditions as
orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy,
muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental
retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction and alcoholism.
      (b)   Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's
self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning, and working.
      (c)   Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has
been misclassified as having a mental or physical impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities.
      (d)   Is regarded as having an impairment means has a physical or mental
impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities, but that is
treated by the commission as constituting such a limitation; or has a physical
or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a
result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
§ 36.62 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Persons with disabilities have for some time been subjected to varying
levels of societal indifference and neglect. These conditions have resulted in
limiting the rights and participation of persons with disabilities or have
otherwise restricted their opportunities for employment, education, and
community services. Government at all levels is finally recognizing the needs
of persons with disabilities. These needs have begun to be addressed by
legislation, programs, and various forms of assistance. The responsibility of
local government as well as various community institutions and organizations is
responding to the needs of persons with disabilities is broad and encompassing.
   (B)   Therefore, it is essential that official local action be taken to
promote the effective marshaling of resources and to constructively respond to
the needs of persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
§ 36.63 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Commission on Disability Rights and
Opportunities, consisting of nine members appointed by the Mayor, subject to
the approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation and shall reside in the town. Commission members may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred. Membership on the Commission shall include:
      (1)   Three person with disabilities who are town residents.
      (2)   Two town residents who are either relatives of a person with
disabilities or citizens active in the disabled community.
      (3)   Two representatives of disabled service agencies, who are town
residents.
      (4)   Two additional representatives from the community at large.
   (B)   Of the nine members first appointed, three Commissioners shall be
appointed for a term of three years, three Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of two years, three Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of one
year, and thereafter, Commissioners shall serve three-year terms. However, in
the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, the successor shall be
appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member.
   (C)   Upon the effective date of the amended ordinance, the current members
of the Commission shall continue to serve the remainder of their unexpired
terms. The new Commissioners shall thereafter be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval of the Legislative Council, for terms commencing October 1,
2000.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 420, passed 10-2-00)
§ 36.64 COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
secretary from their membership. The Commission may also organize itself in
whatever other manner it deems appropriate. The Commission may adopt such rules
and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
subchapter.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission constitute a quorum for
conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
§ 36.65 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate this
subchapter, including the following:
   (A)   To seek to reduce both physical and attitudinal barriers confronting
persons with disabilities.
   (B)   To establish and maintain cooperative working relationships with
public and private agencies serving town people with disabilities.
   (C)   To study and investigate individual or community problems which limit
the rights of persons with disabilities or otherwise restrict their
opportunities in employment, housing, economic status, recreation, education,
health, transportation and similar pursuits.
   (D)   To issue reports and publications on its studies, research and
investigations to promote public awareness and understanding of disabled
problems and needs.
   (E)   To receive complaints and grievances of persons or groups with
disabilities. The Commission may review, investigate, conciliate and/or refer
such complaints or grievances to appropriate town, state and federal agencies
or take other appropriate action within the scope of its powers.
   (F)   To work with federal, state, and local agencies as well as private,
civic, religious, business, industrial, labor and other organizations, groups
and persons to foster the development of programs and services that address the
needs of persons with disabilities and increase opportunities and to enable
persons with disabilities to live with maximum independence and enhance to
quality of life of persons with disabilities.
   (G)   To promote cooperative program planning and development among service
providers in order to improve and expand the delivery of services to the town's
disabled.
   (H)   To conduct public forums to ascertain the views of the disabled in
developing program objectives and setting service priorities to address the
needs of the disabled and to raise the public awareness of the concerns of the
disabled.
   (I)   To encourage the commitment of public and private resources to meet
the needs of persons with disabilities.
   (J)   To increase advocacy for the disabled.
   (K)   To monitor, assess, and conduct periodic evaluations of programs and
services funded through the town for their particular effect on persons with
disabilities.
   (L)   To establish policy and procedures for the department of services for
persons with disabilities.
   (M)   To offer policy recommendations to the mayor and Legislative Council
and advise on matters which may strengthen the town's ability to respond to the
varied needs of persons with disabilities.
   (N)   The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the
Mayor and the Legislative Council during the month of March.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
§ 36.66 PERSONNEL AND SERVICES AUTHORIZED BY COMMISSION.
   Subject to the approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council, the
Commission may employ personnel and may contract for services in exercising the
power and duties enumerated in §
36.65. The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without the
prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission shall
have no fiscal authority.
(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)
SCHEDULE OF FEES
§ 36.80 FEES FOR ENGINEERING SERVICES.
   The fee structure for services provided by the Engineering Department as
described below shall be as follows:
Services Fees
Services                                                       Fees
Photocopy                                                      $ .50 per page
Map copy                                                       20.00
Street excavation permit (§                                      
97.01(B))
Up to 200 square feet                                          195.00
Over 200 square feet to 500 square feet                        250.00
Each additional block or part of an additional block           150.00
Sidewalk license (§                                           350.00
96.05(B))
Sidewalk permit (§                                            100.00
96.01(B))
GIS plot                                                        
8" x 5"                                                        2.00
11" x 17"                                                      5.00
24" x 36" or larger                                            40.00
GIS shapefile, geodatabase, or other digital data (town- wide) 40.00
 
(Ord. 339, passed 9-7-93; Am. Ord. 459, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 592, passed 6-
9-10; Am. Ord. 707, passed 1-22-19; Am. Ord. 735, passed 3-6-23)
CHAPTER 37: OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
37.01   Establishment of Department of Arts and Culture
   
37.02   Establishment of Department of Recreation
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF ARTS AND CULTURE.
   The Department of Arts and Culture. The Department shall be responsible for
community arts and heritage programs and events in Hamden and such other powers
and duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter, the Code of
Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.
   (A)   The Director of Arts and Culture. The Department Head shall be the
Director of Arts and Culture, who shall exercise the powers and duties of the
Department under the direction of the Mayor. The Director shall be responsible
for the supervision of members of the Department, and such other powers and
duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter, the Code of
Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.
   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Arts and Culture
as set forth in § 8-2.A of the Charter. The Director shall serve a term
coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§
3-10.A(2) and 8-2.B of the Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and
shall have qualified.
   (C)   Qualifications. The Director of Arts and Culture shall be chosen on
the basis of executive and administrative qualifications or experience. Said
qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable filed as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of the Charter.
   (D)   Appointment and removal of employees. Subject to the Merit System,
except as provided therein, the Director shall appoint and may remove all other
employees of the Department.
   (E)   Additional duties and responsibilities. The Director shall:
      (1)   Perform such other duties as the Mayor shall direct;
      (2)   Consult with any board or commission established to address arts
and culture;
      (3)   Prepare regulations for arts, culture and town events; and
      (4)   Prepare budget for review and approval by any board or commission
established to address arts and culture; and
      (5)   Make recommendations for the fees to be charged for events related
to arts and culture.
(Ord. 685, passed 1-17-17)
§ 37.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
   The Department of Recreation. The Department shall be responsible for
recreational programing, camps and special events and such other powers and
duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter, the Code of
Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.
   (A)   The Director of Recreation. The Department Head shall be the Director
of Recreation, who shall exercise the powers and duties of the Department under
the direction of the Mayor. The Director shall be responsible for the
supervision of members of the Department. The Director shall be responsible for
administrative oversight and management of recreational programing, camps and
special events.
   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Recreation as set
forth in § 8-2.A of the Charter. The Director shall serve a term coterminous
with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§ 3-10.A(2)
and 8-2.B of the Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall
have qualified.
   (C)   Qualifications. The Director of Recreation shall be chosen on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications or experience. Said
qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable filed as developed pursuant to §
8-2.F of the Charter.
   (D)   Appointment and removal of employees. Subject to the Merit System,
except as provided therein, the Director shall appoint and may remove all other
employees of the Department.
   (E)   Additional duties and responsibilities. The Director shall:
      (1)   Perform such other duties as the Mayor shall direct;
      (2)   Consult with any board or commission established to address
recreation;
      (3)   Prepare regulations for recreation; and
      (4)   Make recommendations for the fees to be charged for events related
to recreation.
(Ord. 685, passed 1-17-17)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
         
51.   SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS
         
52.   LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM
         
53. TREES
CHAPTER 50: SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Approval of new construction; permit
   
50.03   Approval of additions; permit
   
50.04   Permits for septic tanks and cesspools
   
50.05   Applications for permits; fees
   
50.06   Final inspections
   
50.07   Additional rules and regulations
   
50.08   Violation prohibited
Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   
50.10   House sewers
   
50.11   Separating distances
   
50.12   Septic tanks
   
50.13   Distribution boxes
   
50.14   Septic tank effluent
   
50.15   Classification of soils
   
50.16   Leaching area required
   
50.17   Commercial buildings
   
50.18   Privies
   
50.19   Other discharges
   
50.20   Nuisances
   
50.21   Permits
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Sanitary sewerage system regulations, see
Chapter 51
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, and the rules and regulations of the
director of health, the words and phrases defined in
Chapter 10 of this code shall be applicable.
('66 Code, § 57-1)
§ 50.02 APPROVAL OF NEW CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed
or commence the construction of any building which is not to be connected with
the sanitary sewerage system provided and maintained by this town, unless and
until plans for a sewage disposal system for the building shall first have been
approved by the director of health or an inspector duly appointed by him, and a
written permit issued by the director of health or his duly appointed inspector
for the construction of an individual sanitary sewage disposal system for the
building.
('66 Code, § 57-2) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 APPROVAL OF ADDITIONS; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or commence the
construction of any additional building or an addition to any existing building
on any lot which cannot be served by the sanitary sewerage system provided and
maintained by this town, unless and until plans for the location of the
addition are approved by the director of health or an inspector duly appointed
by him, and a written permit issued by the director of health or his duly
appointed inspector for the construction, certifying that the proposed
construction will:
   (A)   Not render the existing individual sanitary sewage disposal system
inadequate;
   (B)   Not interfere with the functioning, service or maintenance of the
existing individual sanitary sewage disposal system; and
   (C)   Not occupy an area which must necessarily be reserved for the
expansion of the present individual sanitary disposal system in order to assure
proper functioning of the system in the future.
('66 Code, § 57-3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 PERMITS FOR SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS.
   Any person constructing, altering or repairing or causing to be constructed,
altered or repaired any septic tank or cesspool, or laying any pipes connected
with either, or causing the pipes to be laid, within the limits of the town,
shall first obtain a written permit from the director of health or an inspector
duly appointed by him.
('66 Code, § 57-4) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS; FEES.
   (A)   All applications for a permit required by the foregoing sections shall
be in writing and shall be made in the name of the owner of the premises on
which the work will be done, or his agent. The application shall contain
information as may be required by the director of health on a form provided by
the director of health. The specifications, construction and materials used as
set forth in the application shall comply with all rules and regulations made
by the director of health before the permit shall be issued.
   (B)   The director of health may establish a permit fee in the sum of $10
for each permit. In addition, there shall be a soil test fee of $10 for each
soil test conducted in each lot of a subdivision.
('66 Code, § 57-5; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)
§ 50.06 FINAL INSPECTIONS.
   All individual sanitary sewage disposal systems constructed, altered, or
repaired pursuant to a duly issued permit shall be subject to a final
inspection by the director of health or his duly appointed inspector before the
systems are covered.
('66 Code, § 57-6)
§ 50.07 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director of health shall be authorized from time to time to make
additional or supplementary rules and regulations relating to the construction,
repair, or alteration of individual sanitary sewage disposal systems or septic
tanks, cesspools, and their connections as it may deem necessary.
('66 Code, § 57-7)
§ 50.08 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall violate any of the terms or conditions of §§
50.01 through
50.08, nor shall any person violate or fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with
any regulation prescribed or order made by the director of health.
('66 Code, § 57-9) Penalty, see §
50.99
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 50.10 HOUSE SEWERS.
   House sewers shall not be less than 4 inches in diameter. The grade shall be
at least 1/4 inch per foot for 4-inch sewers and shall not be less than 1/
8 inch per foot for larger sizes. House sewers shall be laid with tight joints
to a septic tank in a straight line and on a uniform grade except where
accessible manholes or surface cleanouts are provided at changes of direction
or grade. Pipe for the house sewers shall be of cast iron, with leaded or equal
joints, to a point at least 15 feet beyond the foundation wall of any cellar or
basement. Portions of house sewers within 74 feet of a well shall be of cast
iron with leaded or equal joints, but no portion of the sewer, however
constructed, shall be within 25 feet of a well. Greater separating distance may
be required for wells with higher rates of pumpage than for residential use. No
sewer shall be located within 25 feet of a cellar drain or ground or surface
water drain unless the pipe is of cast iron with leaded or equal joints.
('66 Code, § 57-11)
§ 50.11 SEPARATING DISTANCES.
   Minimum separating distances between any part of the sewage disposal system
and items listed below should be provided as follows:
   (A)   Well or spring. Greater separating distance may be required for wells
with higher rates of pumpage than for residential use - 75 feet
   (B)   Human habitation other than building served - 50 feet
   (C)   Building served - 15 feet
   (D)   Tributary to a water supply or ground or surface water drain tributary
to water supply reservoir - 50 feet
   (E)   Any other stream, pond, lake or tidal water; storm drain, cellar
drain, subsoil drain which discharges into a stream, culvert, lake tidal water
or onto the surface of the ground unless such drain is cast iron pipe with
leaded joints, swimming pool - 25 feet
   (F)   Top of embankment - 15 feet
   (G)   Property line - 10 feet
   (H)   Water pressure line - 10 feet
('66 Code, § 57-12)
§ 50.12 SEPTIC TANKS.
   (A)   A septic tank shall be provided for water-carriage sewage disposal
where no public sewer is available. The septic tank shall be constructed with
watertight walls and bottom, with inlet baffled or submerged for a depth of 12
to 18 inches and outlet baffled or submerged to a depth of at least 18 inches
below the surface of liquid in the tank but not more than half the liquid
depth. Baffles shall extend 6 inches above the liquid level. The outlet invert
shall be 3 inches lower than the inlet invert. With a 2 compartment tank there
shall be adequate connections at mid-depth, and 2/3 or more of the required
capacity shall be in the first compartment. A septic tank shall have a
removable cover, or manhole, so as to provide access to the tank for purposes
of inspection and cleaning. At least 2 manholes shall be provided for a tank
more than 10 feet long and at least one manhole per compartment. If a manhole
is not located over the inlet, an inspection opening shall be provided at that
point. No septic tank shall have a liquid capacity of less than 750 gallons
below the outlet invert. The minimum liquid depth of septic tanks shall be 36
inches, measured from the bottom of the invert to the outlet. There shall be a
minimum of 8 inches between the liquid level and the underside of the tank
cover.
   (B)   The minimum liquid capacities are as follows:
      (1)   Two bedrooms, 750 gallons;
      (2)   Three bedrooms, 900 gallons;
      (3)   Four bedrooms, 1,200 gallons;
      (4)   Larger sizes, add 250 gallons per bedroom.
      (5)   Where additional capacity is needed, 2 tanks may be used in series
for one installation. No more than 2 tanks shall be installed in series but
larger tanks shall be used to make up the required capacity.
   (C)   If a garbage disposal system is used in connection with a septic tank,
50% more liquid volume shall be required for the septic tank.
   (D)   Sink drainage or laundry water systems, where no water-flush toilet
fixtures are connected, shall be constructed with a septic tank and seepage
system at least 1/2 the capacity specified for usual house sewerage systems.
('66 Code, § 57-13)
§ 50.13 Distribution boxes.
   Distribution box of sufficient size to accommodate the necessary field
lateral lines shall be constructed at the head of each disposal field:
   (A)   Each field lateral line shall be connected separately to the
distribution box and shall not be subdivided.
   (B)   The invert of all outlets shall be level, and the inlet invert shall
be at least one inch above the outlets.
   (C)   If the level of the outlet inverts is less than 4 inches above the
floor of the box, distribution baffles shall be provided. Note: If the level of
the outlet inverts is from 4 to 6 inches above the floor of the box, permitting
water retention to act in lieu of a baffle, the baffles will not be required.
The level of the outlet inverts should not be more than 6 inches above the
floor of the distribution box.
('66 Code, § 57-14)
§ 50.14 Septic tank effluent.
   (A)   Disposal of septic tank effluent may be by means of tile or other
accepted distributing pipe laid in screened gravel or broken stone, or by means
of leaching cesspools. Seepage systems shall not be located in fill placed over
impervious soil.
   (B)   Leaching cesspools may be preferable where the amount of area is
limited or where porous soil is at a greater depth than can be secured by tile
fields. They are not recommended where ground water may interfere with their
operation, or where soil of better seepage quality is found at shallow depth.
Leaching cesspools shall not extend to rock.
('66 Code, § 57-15)
§ 50.15 Classification of soils.
   The classification of soil, at the proposed location of a seepage system,
shall be determined by soil tests made as follows:
   (A)   For cesspools, a hole 4 inches to 12 inches in diameter shall be dug,
extending to the depth of the proposed cesspool. For tile field, a hole 4
inches to 12 inches in diameter shall be dug, extending to the depth of the
proposed trenches.
   (B)   Before observations are made, the pit shall be thoroughly wet down by
filling it to a depth of at least 12 inches. The pit shall then be refilled
with water to a depth of 12 inches or more and the rate of drop of water
measured at intervals for a period of 30 to 60 minutes under normal conditions.
The minimum or slowest uniform rate of drop shall be used in calculating
seepage areas. When tests are made, consideration shall be given to the
finished grade of building sites so that results will correspond to the
absorptive value of the soil in which the leaching systems will be constructed.
In investigating soil conditions for a large area, one test pit per acre or
even one per lot may be required. Also, in investigating soil conditions, deep
test pits may be required to check for ground water, ledge rock, or available
good seepage soil below normal depths.
('66 Code, § 57-16)
§ 50.16 Leaching area required.
   (A)   The following leaching areas are required for the seepage rates
indicated:
 
Minimum uniform seepage rate time Square feet of effective seepage area
to drop one inch                  required per bedroom
                                  1   2   3   4
(1)   5 minutes or less        125 250 375 500
(2)   6 to 10 minutes          165 330 495 660
(3)   11 to 20 minutes         225 450 675 900
(4)   21 to 30 minutes         250 500 750 1000
                                  Special consideration needed to avoid
(5)   More than 30 minutes     nuisance conditions. In some soils it may be
                                  impracticable or impossible to use subsurface
                                  disposal.
 
      (6)   Where a seepage rate slower than one inch in 30 minutes or high
ground water is found, no sewage disposal system shall be built. In impervious
soil, swamp or rock it may not be feasible to provide subsurface sewage
disposal.
   (B)   All trenches shall follow contours with the bottoms of the individual
trenches level. Depth of trenches should normally be not more than 30 to 36
inches, but depths up to 48 inches or greater may be used if warranted by
conditions of topography or more favorable absorption capacity of soil at that
depth. The width of the trench shall not exceed 36 inches and the spacing
between adjacent sides of trenches shall be at least 3 times the width of the
trench. The length of individual trenches shall not exceed 75 feet except that
in installations where dosing apparatus is used, a maximum length of 100 feet
may be used. Distributing pipe shall be laid near the top of a layer of one
inch screened gravel or one inch broken stone placed to a depth of at least 18
inches in the trenches. The depth of stone under the pipe invert shall be at
least 12 inches. Distributing pipes may be unglazed drain tile, at least 4
inches in diameter, laid with open joints. Pipe of vitrified tile or other
acceptable material with suitable perforations or adequate spacing may also be
used. The upper portions of joint openings shall be protected by strips of tar
paper or other suitable material. Tile lines shall be laid on a grade not
exceeding 2 to 4 inches per 100 feet. A layer of salt hay or tar paper shall be
placed over the gravel before backfilling the trenches.
   (C)   Construction shall be such as to provide for proper distribution of
settled sewage to trenches. Better distribution, particularly for large systems
with several trenches, is secured in tile fields by using siphon dosing
apparatus to apply the septic tank effluent. Diverting boxes with several
outlets of the same elevation to individual trenches may be used to distribute
the sewage. Where trenches are at different levels, serial distribution may be
used with high-level overflows from upper to lower trenches.
   (D)   In seepage beds where space between trenches is also excavated and
.backfilled with one inch stone or one inch screened gravel, only 1/3 of the
total bottom area shall be considered effective. Distributing pipe shall be
laid 6 feet to 8 feet on centers. Installation of stone and distributing pipe
shall be the same as that required for leaching trenches. The bottom of the
entire bed shall be at the same elevation.
   (E)   Leaching cesspools shall be spaced 3 times the diameter between sides
of adjacent cesspools. Cesspool walls shall be constructed with masonry laid
with open joints below the maximum liquid level. The walls shall be surrounded
by 12 inches of screened gravel or broken stone.
('66 Code, § 57-17)
§ 50.17 Commercial buildings.
   No discharges from systems of sewage disposal for commercial building into
watercourses shall be made unless provided with treatment as approved by the
state department of health and the state water resources commission. No sewage
disposal system shall, after the effective date of the regulation, be
constructed or rebuilt for any commercial buildings without compliance with the
following subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the director of health.
Connections shall be made to public sewers if available.
   (A)   The location of the disposal system shall comply with the same
requirements as those listed above, except that in the case of discharges from
laundromats or other commercial or industrial establishments discharging
substantial quantities of detergents, the disposal system shall not be
permitted, unless special plans are prepared and carried out in accordance with
requirements of the local director of health with due regard to the seepage
quality of the soil and location of wells. Disposal systems receiving
substantial quantities of detergents shall be located at least 200 feet away
from any well used as a source of drinking water.
   (B)   The septic tank shall comply with §
50.12 with regard to construction details and shall have a minimum liquid
capacity of 2 cubic feet per employee or equal to the average 24 hour flow,
whichever is greater. In no case shall a septic tank be installed with a liquid
capacity less than 100 cubic feet. For very large commercial buildings, special
arrangements may be required by the director of health. In the case of
restaurants, laundromats, toilets for public use, or other types of
establishments where water use and sewage flows will depend on the extent of
public use or employment of water uses especially pertinent to the type of
establishment in question, special allowances for capacities of disposal units
and area for future expansion shall be provided as approved by the director of
health.
   (C)   Seepage systems for commercial buildings other than restaurants* and
laundries* shall be designed in accordance with the following table:
                                        Sewage application in gallons to one
                                        square foot of effective seepage area;
Minimum uniform seepage rate minutes to bottom area of trenches, bottom area
drop one inch                           plus side area of leaching wells below
                                        inlet, or 1/3 of gross bottom area of
                                        seepage bed
3                                       3.0
5                                       2.5
10                                      1.75
15                                      1.4
20                                      1.1
25                                      .9
30                                      .8
                                        Special consideration needed to avoid
More than 30                            nuisance conditions. In some soils it
                                        may be impracticable or impossible to
                                        use subsurface disposal.
 
   (D)   Sewage disposal facilities such as privies and other than of the
water-carriage type shall be installed only with the permission of the director
of health and in accordance with his requirements.
   (E)   No ground water drainage or drainage from roofs, roads, cellars or
yards, or flow of industrial wastes or other liquids that will adversely affect
the operation of a system for domestic sewage disposal or cause an overload on
the system, shall be discharged into or near a sewage disposal system for a
commercial building. The drainage or liquid shall be disposed of separately
subject to any requirements considered necessary by the director of health.
('66 Code, § 57-18)
*Editor's Note:
   Additional seepage area shall be provided due to clogging characteristics of
waste.
§ 50.18 Privies.
   Privies shall be constructed with adequate storage space for excreta, with
self-closing seat covers and flytight vaults, and with screened vent from the
vault to the atmosphere. Privies shall be constructed so as to permit ready
cleaning. Separate distances, shall comply with § 19-13-B8, state public health
code.
('66 Code, § 57-19)
§ 50.19 Other discharges.
   No ground water drainage or drainage from roofs, cellars or yards shall
discharge into or near any portion of a sewage disposal system. Separate
facilities shall be provided for the drainage.
('66 Code, § 57-20)
§ 50.20 Nuisances.
   Nothing in this regulation shall be construed to permit the creation or
maintenance of any sewage overflow or nuisance, the abatement of which shall be
subject to the provisions of § 19-13-B2 of state public health code.
('66 Code, § 57-21)
§ 50.21 Permits.
   (A)   The application and permit issued for the installation of an
individual sewage disposal system expires 6 months from the date of issue if
construction of the building has not begun.
   (B)   A permit for the installation of an individual sewage disposal system
is not transferable to a new owner.
('66 Code, § 57-22)
§ 50.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
50.02 to
50.04, inclusive, or
50.08 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both.
('66 Code, § 57-9)
CHAPTER 51: SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Creation; purpose
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Scope
   
51.04   Interpretation
   
51.05   State statute amendments
   
51.06   Assessment of benefits
   
51.07   Tampering with public sewer equipment
Construction Requirements
   
51.15   Licenses and permits
   
51.16   Bonds and insurance
   
51.17   General conditions
   
51.18   Trench excavations
   
51.19   Pipe and pipe laying
   
51.20   Backfill
   
51.21   Pavement, curb, and sidewalk replacement
   
51.22   Responsibility for installation
Use of Public Sewer System
   
51.30   Storm water and unpolluted drainage
   
51.31   Prohibited discharges
   
51.32   Pretreatment requirements
   
51.33   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
   
51.34   Control manholes
   
51.35   Measurements, tests, and analyses
   
51.36   Heavy metal or toxic discharges
   
51.37   Accidental discharges
Enforcement
   
51.45   Right of entry and authority of inspectors
   
51.46   Noncompliance cause for permit revocation
   
51.47   Future permits
   
51.48   Violator liable for expense, loss, or damage
   
51.49   Written notice of violation
Rates and Charges
   
51.55   Rates established
   
51.56   Rates for property located outside town
   
51.57   No reduced rates or free service
   
51.58   Determination of charges, generally
   
51.59   Allowance for metered water not discharged into town's sewer system
   
51.60   Engineering study
   
51.61   Separate billing for multi-unit connections
   
51.62   Deductions for vacancies; removal of apartments from services
   
51.63   Billing
   
51.64   Collection procedures
   
51.65   Adjustment of bill
   
51.66   Use of sewer after refusal to pay
   
51.67   Implementation of chapter
   
51.68   Violations
   
51.69   Establishment of Sewer Fund
   
51.70   Annual audit
Water Pollution Control Authority
   
51.75   Establishment
   
51.76   Powers
   
51.77   Organization of sewer staff
   
51.78   Authority to incur debt
   
51.79   Flow of funds
   
51.80   Budgeting
   
51.81   Executive Committee
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 CREATION; PURPOSE.
   The construction, extension, maintenance and operation of sanitary sewer
system, sewers, sewage works, public sewer system, town sanitary sewer system,
sewage system and all facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating
and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste water shall be under the
control of, and subject to the regulation of the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the town, hereinafter referred to as WPCA, under the authority of
Conn. Gen. Stat., Chapter 103, § 7-246, revision 1958, revised 1979, as amended
and in accordance with the power granted the said WPCA by the Charter of the
town.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "B.O.D. (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)." The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l) as described in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published by the American
Public Health Association, as may be amended from time to time.
   "BUILDING DRAIN." That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   "BUILDING SEWER OR SEWER CONNECTION." The extension from the building drain
to the public sewer, storm sewer or other place of disposal.
   "CCF." The volume measure of 100 cubic feet.
   "CHECK VALVE." A one-way water/sewage valve which stops sewer backups from
entering buildings and structures.
   "CHLORINE DEMAND." The amount of chlorine which must be added to water or
wastewater to produce a residual chlorine content in such water or wastewater.
   "CITY." The City of New Haven.
   "COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)." The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in the most
current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, as such may be
amended from time to time.
   "COMBINED SEWERS." Any public sewer receiving both sewage and storm and
surface waters and drainage.
   "COMMERCIAL USER." Any business or establishment which does not meet the
definition of industrial producer as defined in this section, or the definition
of residential user herein.
   "COMPANY." Regional Water Authority, its successors and assigns.
   "CONTRACTOR." Any person, partnership, company, corporation, or other entity
doing business under this chapter and to whom the Water Pollution Control
Authority or its authorized agent shall have issued a permit, together with any
and all sub-contractors employed by said principal contractor, suppliers of
materials and their agents when on or near the site of work to install and
repair sewers and building sewers during the period when such permit is valid.
   "COOLING WATER." The water discharged from any system of condensation, air-
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other, but shall be free from odor or
oil. It shall contain no pollution substances which would produce B.O.D. or
suspended solids, each in excess of 10 parts per million by weight.
   "CUSTOMERS." Any and all contributors of wastewater to the sewer system.
   "DOMESTIC WASTEWATER." Residential-type wastewater which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
town's sanitary sewer system, excluding all manufacturing and industrial
wastewater.
   "DRY INDUSTRY." An industry discharging only domestic wastewater into the
town's sanitary sewer system, and having no process or manufacturing operation
that discharges liquid industrial wastewater of any characteristic into the
town's sanitary sewer system.
   "ESTABLISHMENT PLANT." Any establishment or plant producing liquid waste,
with or without bearing suspended solids, required to be discharged into the
town's sanitary sewer system.
   "GENERAL MANAGER." The WPCA's engineer and chief of operations and
maintenance, shall be the same as the Town Engineer according to the duties and
powers assigned to him by the town.
   "GROSS REVENUES." All revenues of the sewer fund regardless of source,
except for federal and state grants.
   "INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRODUCER." Any plant, establishment or industry which
discharges industrial waste water resulting from a process or manufacturing
operation, whether or not such wastewater is segregated from or combined with
domestic wastewater from the plant, establishment, or industry.
   "INDUSTRIAL WASTES." Any solid, liquid, or gas discharged, permitted to
flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or business
establishment or process, or from the development, recovery, or processing of
any natural resource.
   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER." Any liquid, free-flowing wastewater, including
contaminated cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing
process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources
with or without suspended solids, as distinct from domestic wastewater.
   "INSPECTOR." An employee of the town assigned by the Engineer to examine and
test material and work proposed to be furnished by the contractor, to observe
the construction of the project or any part thereof, to assist the contractor
in the interpretation of specifications and methods of construction, to make
measurements and keep records for the Engineer, and to report to the Engineer
on the performance of the contractor relative to the work, all as and only as
instructed by the Engineer. The inspector shall not act as assistant to or
foreman for the contractor. Inspectors have no power to waive these
specifications, rules, and regulations or to otherwise deviate from the
original covenants of the agreement or contract.
   "INSTITUTIONAL USER." That class of users not meeting the definition of
residential, commercial, or industrial users, and meeting the criteria for
nonprofit, tax-exempt status.
   "MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l)." The same as parts per million (ppm), and is a
weight-to-volume ratio; when the milligrams-per-liter value is multiplied by
the factor 750, an equivalent to units per hundred cubic feet (ccf) of water is
obtained.
   "NATURAL OUTLET." Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   "PERMITTEE, PERMIT HOLDER." Any person, firm, association, corporation or
trust which owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant
being operated under a valid industrial waste permit to discharge wastewater
into the town's sanitary sewer system.
   "PERSON or PERSONS." Individuals, firms partnerships, companies and
government entities, whether one or more, or a combination of one or more
thereof.
   "pH VALUE." The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration in grams per liter of solution, i.e. pH=1 log(H+). pH will be
determined according to the most current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.
   "PRODUCER." Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which owns,
operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or not a
permittee.
   "PUBLIC SEWER." Any sewer owned, constructed, maintained or controlled by
the town.
   "RESIDENTIAL USER."
      (1)   Single-family residence: A residential establishment serving a
single-family household. In those instances where there is no meter on the
water supply to the principal household, separate living quarters will be
considered as a separate residence and a separate user charge will be applied.
      (2)   Duplex residence: A single building equipped for occupancy by two
families.
      (3)   Multiple dwelling units: One or more buildings each equipped for
occupancy by three or more families.
   "ROAD." That portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel.
   "SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM, SEWERS, SEWAGE WORKS, SEWER, PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM,
TOWN SANITARY SYSTEM, TOWN SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM." All facilities for
collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastewater. For the purpose of this chapter, however, water-courses
and storm sewers shall not be included in this definition.
   "SEWAGE." A combination of the waterborne wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. Any substance, liquid or
solid, which may contaminate or pollute or affect the cleanliness or purity of
any water.
   "SEWER." Any portion of the accepted or approved sanitary sewer system of
the town.
   "SEWER FUND." The sewer fund of the town.
   "SLUG." Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   "STANDARD METHODS." The most current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, as it may be amended, a copy of which is on file in the office of
the General Manager, New Haven WPCA.
   "STORM SEWER." A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters,
drainage, groundwater or unpolluted water from any source, but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
   "STREET." The entire width of any dedicated public right-of-way used as a
highway.
   "TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS)." Solids measured in milligrams per liter (mg/
l) that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, wastewater,
or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration
device, as defined in the most current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, as amended, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   "TOWN." Town of Hamden, Connecticut.
   "TOWN ENGINEER." The Engineer of the town or his or her authorized deputy,
agent, representative, or such other person as may be designated by the Mayor
of the town, with the approval and the consent of the majority of the
Legislative Council.
   "TOWN'S SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM." All sanitary sewer systems and extensions or
enlargements thereof, owned by the town or in which the town has an equity
ownership, and there is specifically included all the systems constructed by
persons as that term is defined herein, and which have heretofore or may
hereafter be acquired by the town. Included in such definition but not limited
to, are the following: Sanitary sewer systems, sewers, sewage works, public
sewer, public sewer system, sewage system, sewerage system and all facilities
for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage
and industrial wastewater.
   "UNPOLLUTED WATER." Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and waste water treatment facilities provided.
   "USER CHARGE OR TAX." Charges or tax established under this chapter for
discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system.
   "WASTEWATER." See "sewage."
   "WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY (WPCA)." The Water Pollution Control
Authority of the town as provided by the Charter of the town and the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
   "WATERCOURSE." A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water
occurs either continuously or intermittently.
   "WPCA." The Water Pollution Control Authority of the town as designated by
the Town Charter.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 371, passed 2-3-97; Am. Ord. 397, passed
10-25-99)
§ 51.03 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall govern the construction and installation of all building
sewers connected to the public sewer system of the town, including all building
sewers constructed and installed pursuant to orders of the Water Pollution
Control Authority issued under the General Statutes of Connecticut, all
building sewers constructed and installed pursuant to orders issued by other
federal, state, or municipal authorities having jurisdiction in the premises,
and all building sewers constructed and installed pursuant to federal, state,
or municipal statutes, codes, rules, regulations, or ordinances.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.04 INTERPRETATION.
   In the event of any question as to the interpretation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the decision of the Water Pollution Control
Authority or its agent shall be final.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.05 STATE STATUTE AMENDMENTS.
   To the extent that any of the Connecticut State Statutes referred to herein
are amended, those amendments will be considered a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.06 ASSESSMENT OF BENEFITS.
   (A)   The assessable buildable unit method shall be adopted for direct
benefits. The area assessment method shall be adopted for overall area
benefits. These two methods will include all costs and assessments.
      (1)   The assessable buildable unit shall be defined as an existing
constructed single-family residence, constructed on an allowable sized lot
according to zoning, and which is benefitted by the improvement.
      (2)   The overall area benefit charge shall be based on the actual square
footage of area involved, or 30,000 square feet per buildable unit, whichever
is the smaller figure.
   (B)   Properties which are vacant, either of allowable size, according to
zoning, or potentially allowable size, and on which a use has not been
established, shall be considered as subject to deferred payment assessment
which will be properly documented in the land records to protect the town for
future assessments when property is put to use.
   (C)   Existing uses of properties other than single-family residence will be
converted to buildable units for assessment purposes in accordance with the
following rules.
      (1)   Multiple dwellings. One buildable unit for the first unit and
thence:
         0.25 unit for each additional one-bedroom unit;
         0.50 unit for each additional two-bedroom unit;
         0.75 unit for each additional three-bedroom unit.
      (2)   Commercial property. One buildable unit minimum for the first 1500
square feet or less of possible buildable area based on zoning requirements to
the maximum of 30% building to lot coverage of the buildable area of the lot,
thence 1/15 of a buildable unit for each 100 square feet of additional
buildable area.
      (3)   Manufacturing property. One buildable unit minimum for the first
10,000 square feet or less of possible buildable area based on zoning
requirements to the maximum of 50% building to lot coverage of the buildable
area of the lot, thence 1/10 of a buildable unit for each 1000 square feet of
additional buildable area.
   (D)   On all shapes and sizes of property, the foregoing rules shall govern
insofar as applicable. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall have the
discretionary power to apply a method of determining assessable units in all
questionable cases.
   (E)   Rates for assessable buildable units and for overall area benefit
charge shall be established by the Water Pollution Control Authority for each
assessment district.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.07 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC SEWER EQUIPMENT.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the public sewer.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.15 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   The contractor shall be duly licensed by the state to install and
repair building sewers.
   (B)   A permit for any connection to the sewers shall be obtained from the
Water Pollution Control Authority or its authorized agent. This permit shall
specify the location of the property involved, the location, where available,
of the sewer connection, and the name and address of the contractor to whom it
is issued. The fee for each permit shall be $25.
   (C)   A permit for excavation shall be obtained from the Town Engineer,
consistent with the requirements of §§
97.01 and
97.01b.
   (D)   A permit for the installation of a check valve shall be obtained from
the W.P.C.A. or its authorized agent. This permit shall specify the location,
where available, of the check valve, and the name and address of the Contractor
to whom it is issued.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 371, passed 2-
3-97; Am. Ord. 434, passed 3-12-00; Am. Ord. 460, passed 6-3-02) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.16 BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   The contractor shall be protected by and shall pay the premiums on
policies of insurance coverage both Employers' Liability under Connecticut Law
and Public Liability insuring him against liability to persons outside of his
employ, in the amounts of: liability - $500,000/ $500,000; property damage -
$100,000/ $100,000; said policies to be issued by an insurance company licensed
in the state. Special coverage for blasting shall be provided when needed. Said
policies shall include the town as the name insured. The insurance coverage
shall show proof of adequate insurance indemnifying the Water Pollution Control
Authority from any damage.
   (B)   The contractor shall provide the Water Pollution Control Authority
with a performance bond. This is required for the faithful performance of the
work contemplated. This shall be issued by an approved surety company licensed
in the state. It shall be for an amount of a minimum of $10,000 and may vary
upwards on larger projects in amount as required by the Engineer. This bond
will be in force from January 1 to December 31, and shall cover any project by
the contractor until the expiration of the maintenance period for that project.
   (C)   The maintenance period shall be for one year from completion of
connection.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The contractor or his agent shall under no circumstances start work on
a project until the provisions of §§
51.15 and
51.16 are fulfilled and the permit required therein is on the site of the work
where it shall remain until completion of the job. The contractor is not
allowed to commence any work until arrangements have been made for its
inspection.
   (B)   At least one-way traffic shall be maintained in the road at all times.
However, under unusual circumstances, the Police Department may permit the
temporary closing of a road. In such case, the contractor shall secure
permission from the Police Department and should notify the Fire Department of
such closing permission.
   (C)   Adequate barricades and, when necessary, lights and red flags shall be
erected and maintained in the street as long as the Police Department deems it
advisable.
   (D)   The contractor shall schedule his work so as not to allow open trench
conditions over the weekend or holidays, nor during the week in excess of 48
hours without special permission from the Engineer.
(Ord 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.18 TRENCH EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Work shall, in every case, proceed from the sewer toward the structure
involved. Any variation in this procedure shall be at the sole responsibility
of the contractor unless prior approval of the Engineer has been secured.
   (B)   Trenching shall proceed in accordance with latest manual on Safety in
Construction as published by the Occupational Safety and Health Act. The trench
shall be ample width at the bottom to accommodate the structure to be placed
and any work on the structure that conditions necessitate. Tunneling under
existing structures may be permitted when practical, but in no case shall any
one tunnel exceed ten feet in length.
   (C)   Sheeting requirements for excavation to insure the safety of
personnel, the public, property, or proper installation, shall be furnished and
placed by the contractor in accordance with good practice and at his own
expense. Requirements and specifications for sheeting shall satisfy the intent
of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
   (D)   Where water is encountered in a trench, sufficient sump shall be
constructed and adequate pumping equipment made available so that the
installation of any drain or appurtenances shall be done in the dry. Under no
conditions shall water be allowed to enter the sewer from the trench.
   (E)   If at any time during the excavation, in the Engineer's opinion, the
material being excavated is not suitable for backfill, such material shall
immediately be removed from the site by the contractor at his own expense.
Unsatisfactory materials shall include, but not be limited to, boulders, clay,
muck, frozen ground, and the like. Where unsatisfactory material is removed, it
shall be replaced by sand or gravel not containing pieces larger than three
inches in diameter. Furnishing and placing this material shall be at the
contractor's expense.
   (F)   Any unsuitable foundation material shall be removed and replaced with
crushed stone or selected sand. If excavation is deeper than desired depth, the
trench shall be filled with crushed stone or selected sand. In no case may
loose fill from excavation be used to bring the trench up to grade. Blocks or
rigid objects should never be used to support the pipe. Selected sand bedding
and tamped cover to twelve inches above the pipe will be required.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.19 PIPE AND PIPE LAYING.
   (A)   All building sewer pipe shall be cast iron pipe, ASTM A 74; or
plastic, type P.S.P. poly (vinyl chloride) PVC ASTM (D 3034).
   (B)   The minimum inside pipe diameter and minimum fall per foot of the
building sewer shall be in accordance with the following table of allowable
number of fixture units.
Maximum Number of Fixture Units*
Pipe Diameter in Inches Fall Per Foot
                        1/16" 1/8" 1/4" 1/2"
Maximum Number of Fixture Units*
Pipe Diameter in Inches Fall Per Foot
                        1/16" 1/8" 1/4" 1/2"
4                             180  216  250
5                             390  480  575
6                             700  840  1000
8                       1400  1600 1920 2300
10                      2500  2900 3500 4200
 
*The unit values for each plumbing fixture are as set forth in the current BOCA
Basic Plumbing Code manual.
   (C)   The building sewer in all cases shall be first connected to the sewer
and may then be extended to proceed toward the structure to be served. Pipe
laying shall proceed in accordance with the best accepted practices true to
line and grade.
   (D)   If a water service is to be laid in the same trench with the building
sewer, the rules and regulations of the South Central Regional Water Authority
shall be followed.
   (E)   Clean out, to approximate ground elevation, must be provided five to
ten feet from the structure served if clean out does not exist inside
foundation wall. On longer lines, clean out shall be provided at approved
intervals.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.20 BACKFILL.
   Backfill shall be in accordance with Regulations for Street and Highway
Excavation, Public Works Department, Hamden, latest edition, and as
supplemented hereto.
   (A)   Under no circumstances shall backfill be permitted around and over the
pipe until the pipe, joints, lines, elevations, and workmanship has been
inspected and approved by the Engineer.
   (B)   Wherein under §
51.18(E) the excavated material is deemed not suitable for backfill, such
material shall be replaced by sand or gravel, not containing pieces larger than
three inches in diameter. The furnishing and placing of satisfactory material
shall be at the contractor's expense.
   (C)   Backfilling of trenches on private property shall proceed in the
following manner: The installed pipe or structure shall be covered with
approved fine material to a depth of at least one foot compacted. Compaction
shall be by means of at least a 10-pound hand tamper or an approved hand
mechanical tamper. Succeeding layers shall not be more than two feet in depth
with each layer thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer before
placing the next layer.
   (D)   Backfilling of trenches within the street area from the back of the
area reserved for sidewalks to the trunk line of the sewer shall proceed in the
following manner: The installed pipe or structure shall be covered with
approved fine material to a depth of at least one foot compacted. Compaction
shall be by means of at least a 10-pound hand tamper or an approved hand
mechanical tamper. Succeeding layers of approved backfill material shall not be
more than six inches in depth after compaction, with each layer thoroughly
compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer before placing the next layer.
Material taken from the trench excavation shall not be used to backfill this
portion of the sanitary lateral without first receiving permission from the
Engineer. This permission will only be granted in the case of suitable gravel
or sand. Barring receipt of this permission, the contractor must at his own
expense furnish suitable gravel and place each as previously prescribed.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21 PAVEMENT, CURB, AND SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT.
   The contractor shall restore or replace all of the appurtenances of the
street, including, but not limited to, pavement, curb, and sidewalk. As soon as
the trench has been backfilled, a temporary cold patch surface shall be placed
and maintained for safe and comfortable public passage. The permanent surface
must have a minimum of eight inches gravel, four inches bounded, broken stone,
and two inches bituminous concrete, unless the pavement being replaced is of a
higher degree of construction. In such case, the replacement must equal
existing surface. Sidewalk and curb construction will be in accordance with the
latest specifications and standards governing such construction.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION.
   The contractor shall assume complete responsibility for the quality of the
building sewer installation, and it shall not rest with the Engineer or
inspector.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
USE OF PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM
§ 51.30 STORM WATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be
discharged any sewage into any storm sewer.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water
may be discharged on specific written approval of the Engineer and the State
Commissioner of Environmental Protection, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.31 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the public sewer or natural outlet any of the following.
   (A)   Any gasoline, kerosene, alcohol, formaldehyde, disinfectants, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or any flammable or explosive liquid solid or gas.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic, poisonous, or radioactive
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
Material, such as copper, zinc, chromium, and similar toxic substances, shall
not be allowed in soluble form or in suspended solid form in concentration
higher than those achieved in appropriate pretreatment facilities approved by
the Engineer and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
   (C)   Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.00, and having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the public
sewer or its personnel.
   (D)   Solid and viscous substances in quantities, or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, paint,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and so forth,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (E)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 120°F. (49°C.)
except by written approval of the Engineer. In such cases, the Engineer may
require installation, by the industry, of an approved temperature recorder in
the receiving sewer.
   (F)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils in excess of
50 mg/l for emulsified material and 15 mg/l for free floating material, or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F. and 150°F. (0° and 65°C.)
   (G)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Engineer.
   (H)   Any sewage containing suspended solids in excess of 350 parts per
million by weight or having a B.O.D. in excess of 300 parts per million by
weight.
   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Engineer as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   (J)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not
limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved
solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
      (2)   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
      (3)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in §
51.02.
      (5)   High hydrogen sulfide content.
   (K)   Any substance which is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment process employed, or is amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the wastewater treatment plant cannot meet the requirement of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters without
first pretreating to a concentration acceptable to the town.
   (L)   Any overflow or drainage from cesspools or other receptacles storing
or constructed to store organic wastes.
   (M)   Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas
or acidification in excess of one mg/l as CN in the wastes from any outlet into
the public sewers.
   (N)   Radioactive materials exceeding the existing standards of the State,
Department of Environmental Protection, or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (O)   Any wastewaters containing phenols or other taste producing substances
in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent as to affect
the taste and odor of the receiving waters.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.32 PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   If any liquid, substance, or gas is discharged or is proposed to be
discharged into the public sewer which contains the substances or possesses the
characteristics enumerated in §
51.31, and which, in the judgment of the Engineer, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Engineer may do the following.
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewer.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
   (B)   When a proposal is made for the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to review and approval by the Engineer, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
      (1)   Plans, specifications, expected performance data, and any other
pertinent information relating to holding tanks or to pretreatment facilities,
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and submitted for the
approval of the Water Pollution Control Authority, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing. The
Engineer shall approve the holding tanks, or pretreatment facilities provided
the same shall indicate that an effluent conforming to the provisions of this
chapter will be provided. If, after the installation of the facilities has been
completed and operation begun, the facilities do not produce the expected
performance, the Engineer shall have the right to order the owner to cease
operation until such time that modifications are made to enable the facilities
to perform properly.
      (2)   Prior to discharge or permission to discharge into the town public
sewers, the applicant must obtain written permission from the Water Pollution
Control Authority, in the form of a permit allowing the proposed discharge, and
must, if required by the town, install suitable pretreatment facilities and
operate and maintain such facilities in a manner which will insure a continuous
and satisfactory effluent.
   (C)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his own expense and shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Engineer and shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Engineer, provided they produce an effluent conforming to the provisions of
this chapter. The owner shall maintain operating records and shall submit to
the Engineer a monthly summary report of the character of the influent and
effluent as may be prescribed by the Engineer to show satisfactory performance
of the treatment facilities.
   (D)   For the purpose of measurement, the acceptability of pretreated
industrial waste will be measured at the point where the industrial waste
leaves a pretreatment facility, and before dilution with any other waste stream
or process water.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.33 GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Engineer and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.34 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the Engineer.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.35 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Waste Water", published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analysis are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from
periodic grab samples.
   (B)   Any new discharge from a single source of domestic wastewater in
excess of 5,000 gallons per day, or cooling waters, must be authorized by a
permit from the State Department of Environmental Protection, director of Water
Compliance and Hazardous Substances.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.36 HEAVY METAL OR TOXIC DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Except in quantities or concentrations as herein authorized, it shall
be unlawful for any individual or corporation to discharge waters or wastes to
the sanitary sewer containing metallic irons, and salts of the heavy metals, in
solution or suspension, in concentrations exceeding the following, the
analytical results to be expressed in terms of the element indicated:
Element mg/l
Element   mg/l
Arsenic   0.05
Barium    5.0
Boron     1.0
Cadmium   0.02
Chromium  5.0
Copper    1.0
Cyanide   1.0
Lead      0.10
Manganese 1.0
Mercury   0.0005
Nickel    1.00
Selenium  0.02
Silver    0.10
Zinc      5.0
 
   (B)   No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged to the
sewer system without an industrial waste permit which shall specify permitted
concentrations.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.37 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   Each user shall provide protection for accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other waste regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner or user's own cost and expense. The town may require the plans
showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and
approval prior to construction of the facilities.
   (A)   For countermeasures to be taken by the town to minimize damage to the
sanitary sewer program or degradation of the receiving waters, permittee shall
notify the town immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation
of this section. This notification shall be followed within three days of the
date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.
Such notification will not relieve permittee of liability for any expense,
loss, or damage to the sanitary sewer system, or for any fines imposed on the
town on account thereof or for any enforcement action pursuant to this
occurrence.
   (B)   In order that officers, agents, and employees of user will be informed
of the town's requirements, user shall make available to their employees copies
of this chapter together with such other wastewater information and notices
which may be furnished by the town from time to time for the purposes of
improving and making more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the permittee's bulletin board advising
officers, agents, and employees who to call in case of an accidental discharge.
   (C)   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous or prohibited
substance to the user's plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately
labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of such substances in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.45 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   While performing the necessary work in private properties, the
Engineer or duly authorized employee of the town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the town employees and the town shall indemnify
the user against loss or damage to its property by town employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe
conditions.
   (B)   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.46 NONCOMPLIANCE CAUSE FOR PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Failure of a contractor to comply with any part of this chapter shall be
cause for revocation by the Water Pollution Control Authority or its agent of
any permit issued by the Water Pollution Control Authority or its agent. If a
permit is revoked, the Water Pollution Control Authority may recommend that the
contractor's state license be revoked. When such action is taken by the Water
Pollution Control Authority and any building sewer work remains to be completed
by the contractor, the Water Pollution Control Authority or its agent shall be
empowered to complete the work or to employ any contractor deemed competent for
such completion. The cost of such completion may be claimed against the
contractor or his performance bond.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.47 FUTURE PERMITS.
   No person who has violated any provision of this chapter, or whose license
has been revoked as herein provided, or who has refused or neglected to make
good to the satisfaction of the Water Pollution Control Authority any defective
or imperfect work, or who has refused or neglected to pay any fees, fines, or
penalties imposed under the provisions of this chapter, shall receive any
future permits in the town.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.48 VIOLATOR LIABLE FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the
town for any expense, loss, or damage which may be caused to the public sewer
system by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)
§ 51.49 WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be given a written
notice by the Engineer stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, correct such violation.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84) Penalty, see §
51.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.55 RATES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Charges for sanitary sewer services furnished by the WPCA for
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users shall be as
established and revised from time to time by majority vote of the members of
the WPCA (to be approved by a majority vote of the Legislative Council).
   (B)   Such charges shall reflect a proportional distribution of costs among
all users pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-255, and Section 204(b) of the
Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1284(b).
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.56 RATES FOR PROPERTY LOCATED OUTSIDE TOWN.
   The charges to be made by the WPCA for sewer service to property located
outside the limits of the town shall be established on the basis of a formal
contract, the charges shown in said contract to be not less than actual costs
to the WPCA, and said contract to be approved by the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.57 NO REDUCED RATES OR FREE SERVICE.
   All persons owning, renting, leasing or having management or control of
property or premises that produce waste that is discharged into the sanitary
sewers of the town, including domestic waste, and subject to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be charged the rates established by the WPCA, and no
reduced rates or free sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to any such
person, property or premises. In all cases, the owner of property shall have
final responsibility for the payment of sewer charges.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.58 DETERMINATION OF CHARGES, GENERALLY.
   In those instances where water meters are provided on the sources of water
providing water to the facilities discharging into the sanitary sewer system of
the town, portable water usage will be determined from the water meter readings
for the purpose of determining the sewer service charge, except as may be
modified or amended by the WPCA with the approval of the Legislative Council
from time to time. As to such water sources that are not metered, estimates of
water usage will be made.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.59 ALLOWANCE FOR METERED WATER NOT DISCHARGED INTO TOWN'S SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEM.
   (A)   Any person owning or having control of property discharging waste into
the sanitary sewers of the town and on whose property there is located one or
more facilities requiring water from the source of supply that also furnishes
water to the sanitary sewer system, and such water provided to the town, may at
his or her own expense install a water meter of a type and design, and at a
location, approved by the General Manager, and the WPCA will accept readings
from such meter taken and provided to the WPCA by such person or his or her
duly authorized agent, such readings to be furnished on forms provided by the
General Manager and sworn to as correct by the person taking the reading.
Meters installed for this purpose shall be sealed by the WPCA, and the owners
shall ensure that said seal is not broken.
   (B)   The amount of water measured by the reading of such meter will be used
to adjust the water usage upon which the user charge established by this
chapter will be computed. In the event such property is not supplied water by
the company, such meter reading will be deducted from the total water usage
furnished to the property as estimated by the General Manager as provided for
in this chapter.
   (C)   No facility for which a meter is installed under the provisions of
this section shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the town
without the owner thereof having first notified in writing the General Manager
of such proposed connection.
   (D)   The sewer staff shall have the right, at any time during regular
business hours, to check the meter reading on such meter installed to measure
the amount of water provided to the facility not discharging waste into the
town's sanitary sewers, and to remove and test such meter at any time.
   (E)   Any person making a false affidavit as to the amount of water usage
registered by a meter installed under the provisions of this section, or any
person representing to the WPCA that the facility for which a meter is
installed under the provisions hereof does not discharge waste into the
sanitary sewer when, in fact, it does, or any person having facilities for
which such a meter is installed who subsequently connects such facility to the
town's sanitary sewer system without notifying the WPCA and the General Manager
shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every day that such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense punishable as set forth in §
51.99.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.60 ENGINEERING STUDY.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to those industrial,
commercial and institutional water users who have facilities connected to the
sanitary sewers of the town and who make application to the General Manager
under the provisions hereof.
   (B)   Any industrial, institutional and commercial water user owning or
having control of property discharging waste into the sanitary sewers of the
town, and on whose property there is located one or more facilities requiring
water from the source of supply that also furnishes water to the sanitary sewer
system, and all or part of such water provided to any such facility is not
discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, may make application to the
General Manager and the WPCA, on forms furnished by the WPCA, requesting that
an engineering study of the applicant's property and facilities be made for the
hereinafter stated purpose, and paying the fee established by the WPCA.
   (C)   Applications made under the provisions of this section shall be upon
forms promulgated and furnished by the General Manager with the approval of the
WPCA, and the applicant shall furnish all the information and other matters
requested therein to the WPCA. The fee for making the first application under
the provisions hereof shall be as established and revised from time to time by
the WPCA upon approval of the Legislative Council. No fee shall be required for
studies initiated by the General Manager subsequent to the first application.
The fee is to reimburse the WPCA for the expense of making the engineering
study and report. Each applicant shall agree, as a condition precedent to the
WPCA conducting the study and tests provided for herein, to indemnify and hold
harmless the WPCA of and from any and all such liability for any acts or
omissions by the WPCA, its agents and employees, committed while conducting the
engineering studies and tests provided for herein, causing or resulting in
damages to the property or person of the applicant, his or her agents,
employees and invitees.
   (D)   Upon receipt of an application and the fee required herein, the WPCA
will, as soon as possible, make an engineering study of the applicant's
property and facilities.
   In those instances where, in the opinion of the WPCA Manager based upon an
engineering study of the property and facilities of the applicant, it is
impractical or infeasible for the applicant to install one or more meters to
measure the amount of water passing through the water meter serving such
property and not being discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, the
WPCA is authorized to make an engineering study to determine the percentage of
the amount of water passing through such meter that is being discharged into
the sanitary sewer of the town. A report of such determination, showing the
basis thereof, shall be certified by the WPCA, and one copy shall be retained
by the WPCA and one copy shall be filed with the General Manager and one copy
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Such report, when so filed, shall
constitute the basis upon which the sewer service charge established by this
chapter shall be computed.
   (E)   The General Manager is authorized by the majority vote of the WPCA to
make such additional engineering studies from time to time of any such property
and facilities, to check the current accuracy of the filed report on any such
property, and if it is then determined that the filed reports annual estimated
sewage volume is now estimated to differ by more than 5%, a new report based
upon the latest studies shall be filed with the WPCA to replace the prior one.
A complete copy of each such report shall be retained by the WPCA, with a copy
sent to the General Manager. No change in the basis of computing the sewer
service charge for any property will be made until the first billing date after
the filing by the WPCA of the first or any subsequent report.
   (F)   In the event the General Manager, with the approval of the WPCA,
determines it is necessary that certain testing instruments be installed, or
the existing equipment of facilities located on the applicants property be
altered, adjusted, disconnected or temporarily moved in order to facilitate the
making of an engineering study or test under the provisions of this section,
all of the foregoing shall be done by and at the expense of the applicant.
   (G)   When the General Manager has, as a result of an engineering study made
under the provisions of this section, determined the percentage of metered
water passing through the water meters serving a property that is being
discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, or when the amount of metered
water passing through the water meter serving such property and which is not
being discharged into the town's sanitary sewers is determined from a water
meter installed to measure the amount of such water, billings by the WPCA for
sanitary sewer service to such property made prior to such determination shall
be reviewed for the purpose of making whatever adjustment is necessary in order
to charge such customer only for the amount of metered water that is or has
been discharged into the town's sanitary sewers. No adjustment shall be made in
excess of that determined to be proper from such engineering study or from the
metering of water that is not discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town.
Once the proper percentage of adjustment has been determined and certified to
the WPCA under the provisions of this section, all subsequent adjustment of
water usage for sanitary sewer service charge purposes shall be computed only
on the certified basis of adjustment currently on file with the WPCA.
   (H)   The WPCA may deny an application to conduct a study authorized by this
section, for reasons including a finding by other methods adopted by the
General Manager to reflect differences in the amounts of metered potable water
and estimated wastewater discharges for the purpose of assessing user charges.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.61 SEPARATE BILLING FOR MULTI-UNIT CONNECTIONS.
   Where the company does not supply the source of water for all multiple
living unit connections, the owner of the premises will be billed directly for
the sewer service charge, where individual water meters are not provided for
each living unit.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.62 DEDUCTIONS FOR VACANCIES; REMOVAL OF APARTMENTS FROM SERVICES.
   No deductions will be made for vacancies in the application of the minimum
sewer service charge to apartments or duplex residences in any classification.
An apartment unit or duplex unit removed from such services by remodeling or
abandonment will be relieved of payment of a sewer service charge, but
correction of the WPCA's record must be requested by the owner in writing or by
signing the proper forms provided by the WPCA.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.63 BILLING.
   (A)   Billing for sewer service charges shall be made to the sewer customers
of the WPCA by the town annually. Those persons without water meters or with a
source of water supply other than the Regional Water Authority will be billed
quarterly.
   (B)   All sewer user charges shall be due and payable on or before ten days
after the date of the mailing of the bill to the persons. Any sewer use charge
not paid within 30 days of due date shall be delinquent and shall bear interest
from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut for delinquent property taxes. There shall
be indicated on each bill the last date on which the same may be paid without
becoming subject to the interest charge, together with a statement to the
effect that if the bill is not paid within 30 days from the due date, it will
become subject to interest from the due date at the applicable rate. The town
shall exercise due diligence to collect the full amount due. The town may
consider accounts, in its discretion, uncollectible.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.64 COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any unpaid sewer user charges shall constitute a lien upon the real
estate against which such charge was levied from the date it became delinquent.
Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided
by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for continuing, recording
and releasing property tax liens and encumbrances except taxes, and may be
foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property taxes. The WPCA, with the
approval of the Legislative Council, shall designate a person as the collector
of the sewer use charges, and such collector may collect such charges in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes, aforesaid, for the
collection of property taxes. The town official will prepare a list of accounts
deemed uncollectible in whole or in part with recommendations as:
      (1)   Write off as uncollectible. Said list shall be submitted to the
WPCA for review and approval.
      (2)   Delinquent unpaid sewer user charges shall be increased to include
all fees and charges applicable to the unpaid sewer use charges.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.65 ADJUSTMENT OF BILL.
   (A)   In the event any adjustment in a water bill affects the basis on which
the town sewer charge is levied for the same period, an appropriate adjustment
in the sewer use charge shall be made by a credit or additional charge on the
next bill. In all cases, the General Manager shall certify to the WPCA the
validity of each adjustment.
   (B)   The WPCA may permit adjustments to a user's sewer bill for various
reasons under provisions of rules, regulations and guidelines that may be
adopted from time to time by the WPCA with the approval of the Legislative
Council.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.66 USE OF SEWER AFTER REFUSAL TO PAY.
   Any person failing or refusing to pay the charges provided for in this
chapter, or to deposit the proper sum in the event of a dispute as to the
amount of such charges in the time and manner provided, and who continues to
discharge wastewater from his property into the sanitary sewer systems of the
town, shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every day that such violation
continues shall constitute separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
The conviction of a person for such an offense shall not be a bar to the
institution by the WPCA of a suit for the collection of the delinquent charges
and for an injunction to enjoin such person from discharging waste into the
sanitary sewer system of the town without complying with the provisions of this
subchapter and paying the charges established hereby.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.67 IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER.
   All provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon their passage in
accordance with the Town Charter.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.68 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly
furnishing the WPCA with false or fraudulent information, or failing to comply
with the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.69 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER FUND.
   There shall be no separate sewer fund in the town outside of the normal
accounting methods used by the town's Finance Office. All notes, bonds and any
other funds for the purpose of the town's sewerage system shall be allocated in
the same manner as any other borrowing prescribed by the Town Charter with the
recommendation and approval of the town's fiscal authority, the Legislative
Council.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.70 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   Any and all funds connected with the collection of sewer use charges and/or
the maintenance of the town's sewer shall be part of the annual town audit.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
§ 51.75 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-246 through 7-269a, revision of 1958 as
amended, there is hereby created an authority to be designated and known as the
Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Hamden (hereinafter referred
to as the WPCA). The purpose for which the authority is hereby created is to
operate the sewerage system of the town, to use, equip, re-equip, repair,
maintain, supervise, manager, operate and perform any act pertinent to the
collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.76 POWERS.
   In furtherance of the purpose for which it is created, the WPCA may exercise
any and all of the powers not to exceed the powers granted to such an authority
by Conn. Gen. Stat., 7-246 through 7-289a, not to exceed those powers not
specifically granted to it by the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.77 ORGANIZATION OF SEWER STAFF.
   (A)   The sewer staff, under the Director of Public Works, shall be
responsible for the operations maintenance and administration of the sewerage
system.
   (B)   The personnel needs of the sewerage system shall be presented annually
in accordance with the procedures established in the budget of the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.78 AUTHORITY TO INCUR DEBT.
   The Finance Director may issue and sell tax anticipation notes from time to
time as necessary to meet the short-term liabilities of the sewer fund prior to
the receipt of revenues, provided such notes are authorized by the WPCA,
Legislative Council and the Finance Director determines that said notes are
payable from sewer fund revenues prior to the end of the fiscal year during
which said notes are issued. The Finance Director may issue and sell long-term
debts on behalf of the sewer fund, in the form of general obligation bonds or
other legal debt instruments, provided such issuance is authorized by the
Legislative Council and the Finance Director
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.79 FLOW OF FUNDS.
   Any and all flow of funds shall be in accordance with and with the consent
of the fiscal authority of the town, upon the recommendation of the Director of
Finance.
   (A)   The disposition of any excess revenues remaining at the end of the
fiscal year shall be the sole discretion of the fiscal authority of the town.
   (B)   Any deficit net of receivables remaining at the end of the fiscal year
shall be added to the cost of service for the following years and recovered
through rates and charges for sewer service.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.80 BUDGETING.
   An annual budget of the next fiscal year's projected revenue and
expenditures of the sewer fund and recommended sewer use charges shall be
submitted to the Water Pollution Control Authority and filed with the Town
Clerk by the town's Finance Director within 24 hours after the end of the
budget process, up to and including Mayoral approval or veto of the Council
Approved Budget for the next fiscal year and any time period thereafter, until
such process is complete.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.81 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
   The town shall have no fewer than two representatives on the New Haven WPCA.
The appointments of these representatives shall be recommended by the Mayor of
Hamden and approved by the Legislative Council. Their terms shall be
coterminous with the Mayor. Said terms shall begin December 31 of a mayoral
election year and expire December 31 of the next mayoral election year.
(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who continues to violate any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.49 after the time limit specified in any notice given in accordance with §
51.49 has expired, shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100 for
each offense. Each day that any violation of §§
51.01 through
51.49 continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense for the purpose of the
penalty provided in this section.
   (B)   Each violation of §§
51.55 through
51.81 shall be punishable by a fine of $100.
(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)
CHAPTER 52: LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM
Section
   
52.01   Mandatory leaf collection program
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Separation of leaves from rubbish and placement at the curb for removal
   
52.04   Leaves and yard waste collected by collectors
   
52.05   Regulations
   
52.06   Exemption
   
52.07   Enforcement
 
   
52.99   Penalties
§ 52.01 MANDATORY LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM.
   There is hereby established a chapter for the mandatory separation of leaves
from refuse, placement of the leaves into required bags by residents of the
town and the separate collection of these leaves curbside by the Department of
Public Works, or its agents.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "COLLECTOR." Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity or organization of any kind which engages in the business of collecting
and removing leaves and yard waste.
   "LEAF COLLECTION SYSTEM." The period of time for collection of leaves
determined by the Director of Public Works.
   "LEAVES." Depositions from deciduous and evergreen trees, excluding pine
cones.
   "PAPER BAG." A sack of up to 30 gallon capacity, two ply 50 pound wet-
strength with decomposing glue, environmentally safe inks and reinforced self-
supporting square bottom closure.
   "YARD WASTE." Hedge trimmings, garden waste, branches or brush. Yard waste
shall not include grass clippings, tree stumps, tree roots or tree branches in
excess of four inches in diameter.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted
12-3-12)
§ 52.03 SEPARATION OF LEAVES FROM RUBBISH AND PLACEMENT AT THE CURB FOR
REMOVAL.
   (A)   In accordance with the Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-241(b), leaves may not
be disposed of in a landfill or incinerator. Leaves collected by persons, firms
or corporations shall be processed for the purpose of composting in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   During the declared leaf collection season, residents shall place all
leaves into paper leaf bags as defined in this chapter. These paper leaf bags
shall be placed at the curb on collection days specified by the Director of
Public Works. Leaves placed at the curb without being contained in paper leaf
bags, or placed at the curb after the scheduled collection days, shall be in
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   No other yard waste or other material shall be placed in paper leaf
bags.
   (D)   No tape, staples or string shall be used as a closure on paper leaf
bags.
   (E)   Leaves shall not be placed in plastic bags during the leaf collection
season for collection as refuse. Leaves shall not be mixed with refuse for
collection as refuse.
   (F)   Paper leaf bags shall be placed at the curb separate from any refuse
of bulk trash, and shall not obstruct any fire hydrant, sidewalk, driveway or
street.
   (G)   No person or property owner shall rake, place or blow, or cause to be
raked, placed or blown, any leaves into any street within the town, from
private lands, property or sidewalk.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 LEAVES AND YARD WASTE COLLECTED BY COLLECTORS.
   (A)   Leaves and yard waste collected by collectors shall be transported
separately to a compost facility approved by the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection. A list of such facilities in this area will be
available from the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Any collector who transports leaves and-or yard waste in accordance
with division (A) of this section to a facility located within the town shall
be required to obtain a permit.
   (C)   Permits may be purchased by collectors at the Department of Public
Works, 1125 Shepard Avenue, Hamden. Fees for such permits are to be established
by the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted
12-3-12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Public Works may, from time to time, establish regulations
pertaining to the matters of this chapter.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)
§ 52.06 EXEMPTION.
   Residents unable to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall submit
information to the Mayor or his/her designee to establish such inability or
disability, and if approved, may rake or cause their leaves to be raked to the
curb in loose piles. Residents may be required to present such information in
order to qualify on a yearly basis.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)
§ 52.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   Whenever the Director of Public Works has reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall
give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor. The notice
shall be delivered either by hand or by certified mail to the property owner,
shall include a statement of the violation and shall indicate a deadline for
remedial action which allows reasonable time for compliance. If corrective
action is not taken within the time period allowed, the Director of Public
Works may take such action as is appropriate under §
52.99.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted
12-3-12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTIES.
   Every person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, including
regulations established hereunder, shall be fined $100 for every such
violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Penalties imposed under this chapter shall not be applied to
violations occurring prior to October 1, 1994.
(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)
CHAPTER 53: TREES
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Intent
   
53.03    Jurisdiction
   
53.04   Responsibilities of tree warden and tree commission
   
53.05    Definitions
   
53.06   General regulations and operations
   
53.07   Permits, licenses and insurance
   
53.08   Tree planting
   
53.09   Enforcement & penalties
   
53.10   Severability
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and enhance the town
trees that constitute the town's community forest by establishing a framework
for tree policies, regulations and standards. The town shall be proactive in
conserving the values associated with these trees by encouraging maintenance,
minimizing unnecessary removals and encouraging new tree planting. A healthy
community forest benefits the public interest in many ways including the
following: improved air quality, reduced storm water runoff and erosion,
traffic calming, quieter neighborhoods, energy savings, wildlife habitat,
increased property values, and a generally improved quality of life.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.02 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (a)   Establish regulations for the care of the town's community forest with
the consent and advice of the Mayor;
   (b)   Institute policies regarding the town trees and community forest;
   (c)   Document jurisdiction, enforcement responsibilities and penalties for
violations; and
   (d)   Promote best practices in the management of town tree resources.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.03 JURISDICTION.
   The town shall have control of all street trees, shrubs and other plantings
in any public street, park, public right-of-way, or other public place within
the town limits and shall have the power to plant, protect, care for, remove or
replace such trees, shrubs, or other plantings. Control shall include any
limbs, roots, or parts of trees and shrubs that extend or overhang any town
owned property.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITIES OF TREE WARDEN AND TREE COMMISSION.
   (a)   Tree Warden. The position, powers and duties of the Tree Warden are
defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 23-58 through 23-60. Per statute, this person
is appointed by the Mayor for a term of two years. The Tree Warden shall
control and care for all trees and shrubs in whole or in part on town-owned
land. It is the responsibility of the Tree Warden and/or the Director of Public
Works or their designee to enforce the regulations of this chapter.
   If the Tree Warden does not possess a current Connecticut arborist license,
the town shall be required to contract the services of a licensed arborist to
work in a consulting role with the Tree Warden.
   (b)   Tree Commission. The Tree Commission's duties, responsibilities and
rights are defined by §§
33.140 to
33.143 of the Hamden Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   “ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER.” The owner of a parcel of land, adjacent to a
public tree.
   “ANSI A300 STANDARDS.” Written specifications to manage trees, shrubs and
other woody plants developed by the Tree Care Industry Association and the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
   “CANOPY COVER.” The land area covered by tree crowns, as viewed from the
air.
   “COMMUNITY FOREST.” Those trees and tall shrubs located on public property
as defined by this chapter.
   “HAZARDOUS TREE.” Any tree determined to be a risk to public safety or
property that meets the criteria defined in § 53.06(b)(l) below of this
chapter.
   “ISA.” International Society of Arboriculture.
   “PROPERTY OWNER.” The owner of record of any parcel of land.
   “PRUNE.” The selective removal of parts of a tree such as branches, usually
for the purpose of maintaining a tree's health, reducing risk and providing
clearance.
   “RIGHT-OF-WAY.” Any land in the public ownership adjacent to any accepted
town road or easement.
   “SHRUB.” A woody plant usually branched from the base, less than 15 feet
when mature.
   “STREET TREE.” Any tree located within the town right-of-way of a town road.
   “TOWN PROPERTY.” Any land owned by the Town of Hamden or under its
jurisdiction or management, including property within lawfully established
rights-of-way.
   “TOWN TREES.” All trees on the town's public property, including town street
trees.
   “TREE.” A perennial woody plant having a main trunk and usually a distinct
crown, reaching a height of at least 15 feet when mature.
   “TREE LAWN.” The green planting space between the edge of the street and the
edge of the sidewalk, or between the edge of the street and the edge of the
town's right-of- way as measured from the centerline of the street.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.06 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND OPERATIONS.
   The town shall have the discretion to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs on public property and rights-of-way, as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the health and
function of the community forest. Operational goals include:
   • maintaining canopy cover by replacing any tree removed by the town or
permitted contractors on a one-to-one basis
   • monitoring the health of the community forest through an accurate and
updated inventory of town trees
   • follow best management practices and industry standards
   (a)   Protection. As valued assets of the town, canopy cover and healthy
trees may be protected in the following ways:
      (1)   Establishing clearance limits over roadways and sidewalks to allow
for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   Taking necessary precautions to protect trees and their root zone
during maintenance procedures, such as lawn mowing and weed trimming, and
during construction activities, including sidewalk and street work, soil
grading and trenching, and compaction of soil caused by repeated vehicular
traffic within tree root zones.
   (b)   Criteria for tree removal and pruning.
      (1)   Hazardous trees. Any tree on town property that has been determined
to be a hazard may be pruned or removed by the town. Such pruning or removal
shall be undertaken at the discretion of the Tree Warden and in a manner
consistent with the Connecticut General Statutes. To be considered a hazard
tree (or limb), the Tree Warden may consider the following criteria:
         (A)   It is sufficiently large enough to cause damage or injury should
it fail;
         (B)   It has a target that would be damaged or would cause injury
should it fail;
         (C)   It has a condition that would make it likely to fail. Such
conditions may include dead or damaged condition, insect infestation, disease,
significant root damage, or other physical damage or signs of decay or distress
as noted by the Tree Warden.
         (D)   It is a risk to public health, safety or welfare.
      (2)   Infrastructure improvement. Town trees that fail to meet the
criteria of a hazardous tree may be removed as part of a bona fide
infrastructure improvement or construction project and only when all reasonable
accommodations and alterations have been considered and at the discretion of
the Tree Warden and in a manner consistent with the Connecticut General
Statutes. The town will develop plans for the installation of new plantings,
where feasible, prior to the removal of a tree or trees required for
infrastructure improvement or construction projects.
      (3)   Public safety. Town government agencies, including the Police
Department, Fire Department, and Department of Public Works, may report to the
Tree Warden any town tree that they believe constitutes a threat to public
safety - for example to motorists, pedestrians, or users of town recreational
facilities. In the event that such a tree is identified, options including
pruning, installing signage, or installing traffic signals will be evaluated.
Removal of the tree will be performed only if no other cost-effective
alternative exists. Such removal shall be undertaken at the discretion of the
Tree Warden and in a manner consistent with the Connecticut General Statutes.
      (4)   Utility maintenance. Utilities and their contractors seeking to
prune and/or remove town trees to maintain their distribution lines are
governed by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-234. Absent an exception enumerated in the
statute, such activity will require a permit from the Tree Warden. The Tree
Warden or a designee will review and approve the pruning or removal plan for
each tree in a manner consistent with the Connecticut General Statutes.
         (A)   Pruning: The town endorses the industry standard of directional
pruning to maintain canopy cover while accomplishing line clearance objectives.
The practice of ground to sky pruning for line maintenance is discouraged
except in select instances.
         (B)   Removal: All removals must meet the criteria of § 153.06(b)(1)
Hazardous Trees, with the exception of instances governed by state statute.
         (C)   Stump grinding: Stumps left as the result of utility maintenance
designated by the Tree Warden or other town designee as a safety hazard to
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic shall be ground flush with surrounding
surfaces.
         (D)   Appropriate species should be retained: Small tree and shrub
varieties designated as compatible with utility distribution lines should not
be removed.
      (5)   Nuisance conditions. The Tree Warden may permit the removal of a
town tree or shrub if they determine that the tree or shrub poses a nuisance to
the community forest, as in the case of invasive species or weedy conditions.
Such decision shall be made only after posting of notice in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes.
   (c)   Disposal. The removal of town trees by the town will include the
removal of all debris and the grinding of stumps, within the priorities and
assigned resources of the Public Works Department.
   (d)   Prohibited criteria for removal. Unless it otherwise satisfies a
criterion for removal as defined by this chapter, a town tree will not be
removed for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   To facilitate views (including advertising signs)
      (2)   To create off-street parking
      (3)   To allow for installation of solar panels
      (4)   To reduce the extent of leaf, flower or fruit drop
      (5)   To reduce the impact from any bird or other animal waste or noise
   (e)   Tree pruning. The town shall encourage the pruning of town trees and
shrubs as an alternative to removal wherever possible. Pruning or thinning of
tree branches or limbs has several objectives including reducing risk,
improving health, developing better structure and providing clearance. Pruning,
especially of young trees, is essential to tree health, maximizing tree
benefits and minimizing future costs of tree maintenance.
   Pruning should be done according to ANSI A300, part 1 as explained in ISA
best management practices or in a management plan provided by the Tree
Commission.
   (f)   Appeals. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the decision of
the Tree Warden may appeal such decision through the procedures defined by the
Connecticut General Statutes.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.07 PERMITS, LICENSES AND INSURANCE.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual or entity other
than the town and its agents to perform work on a tree on town owned property
or in a town right-of-way without meeting the following requirements:
   (a)   Permit. A permit is required for any entity except the town to do work
on a tree on town property or in a town right-of-way. Tree work includes but is
not limited to: removal, planting, pruning, bracing, cabling, spraying and
other remedial treatments for disease or infestation. A detailed description of
the work to be performed must be included in the permit application and
approved by the Tree Warden prior to the issuance of a permit. A permit must be
issued by the Tree Warden if all the requirements for the permit have been met.
A copy of the permit must be present on the work site and available for public
inspection. In addition, the Tree Commission shall receive a copy of all
permits prior to the work defined in the permit being performed. Only the Tree
Warden or their designee may issue permits. The entity obtaining the permit
shall abide by the standards as set forth in this chapter and policies and
specifications of the town. No individual or company will be issued a permit
without proper electrical accreditation when working within 10 feet of
electrical wires. Failure to follow the conditions of the permit and the
requirements of this chapter shall be cause for the revocation of the permit
and additional penalties as determined by the Tree Warden and defined by state
and local statutes.
   (b)    Licensed arborist. Any work performed on a town tree including
pesticide application under a permit issued by the Tree Warden must be
performed by or under the direction of a licensed arborist. All work performed
must meet current ANSI A300 standards as explained in ISA best management
practices.
   (c)   Insurance. Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall
first file evidence of possession of general liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000/$3,000,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000/$3,000,000
property damage indemnifying the Town of Hamden and/or any person injured or
whose property was damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described. The town shall be added as an additional insured. Applicants
shall maintain workers' compensation insurance in statutory amounts.
   (d)   Debris. All debris generated as a result of the permitted work on a
public tree will be removed from the site by the contracted arborist or firm.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.08 TREE PLANTING.
   (a)   Planting of new trees. The town will support an ongoing tree planting
program with a goal of creating and maintaining a healthy community forest with
no net loss of town trees. Any property owner who agrees to care for a tree for
a period of at least three years may request a tree, however planting plans
will focus on streets and neighborhoods with reduced canopy cover. Subject to
the availability of funding, the number of trees planted will reflect the
number removed each year so there will be a goal of no net loss in the number
of trees. Diversity in planting will be encouraged. Tree planting on town
property shall be managed by the Public Works Department under supervision of
the Tree Warden. The Tree Warden and Tree Commission will coordinate on tree
selection and planting plans.
   (b)   List of recommended trees. The Tree Warden, in consultation with the
Tree Commission and the Planning and Zoning Department, shall maintain and
publish a list of recommended tree varieties including those appropriate for
locations with overhead wires, narrow tree lawns and other limiting factors.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.09 ENFORCEMENT & PENALTIES.
   In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 23-59, the Tree Warden is hereby
authorized to administer and enforce this chapter on behalf of the town. The
Tree Warden shall prepare all permits, procedures, and necessary documents and
shall maintain accurate records of all activities conducted.
   Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
in an amount of $250.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
§ 53.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application
thereof to any particular circumstances shall ever be held invalid or
unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the remainder hereof, which shall
continue in full force and effect and applicable to all circumstances to which
it may validly apply.
(Ord. 725, passed 3-7-22)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
         
71.   WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS
         
72. TRUCK TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
Fire Zones
   
70.01   Defined
   
70.02   Establishment of
   
70.03   Filing of orders
   
70.04   Appeal of orders; hearing
   
70.05   Marking zones
   
70.06   Cost of marking zones
   
70.07   Parking or standing in zones prohibited; prima facie evidence
   
70.08   Towing away vehicles
   
70.09   Notice of violation; payment
Securing of Loads
   
70.15   Construction and loading requirements
   
70.16   Securing loads and coverings
   
70.17   Violation prohibited
Towing
   
70.20   Authority to remove and impound vehicles — Illegally parked vehicles;
notice to owner of vehicle; release of impounded vehicle; record of impoundment
of vehicle
   
70.21   Tower to be authorized and insured
   
70.22   Request for immediate hearing when vehicle is impounded
Snow Removal
   
70.25   Depositing snow on highways prohibited
Miscellaneous
   
70.30   Parking prohibited
   
70.31   School crossing guards
   
70.32   Handicapped parking spaces
   
70.33   Handicapped parking eligibility
   
70.34   Parking prohibited
   
70.35   Parking tickets
   
70.36   Presumption in reference to illegal parking
   
70.37   Formal hearing procedure; parking violation hearing officers
 
   
70.99   Penalty
FIRE ZONES
§ 70.01 DEFINED.
   As used in §§
70.01 through
70.09 "FIRE ZONE" is a designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size
to permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public
highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property as
hereinafter set forth.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF.
   Whenever the fire marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of
persons occupying or using any premises, public or private, having a capacity
of at least 15 persons, requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly
access of fire and other emergency equipment, he shall establish such fire zone
by written order and cause to be made public, announcement of the fire zone
establishment. He shall cause a copy of the order to be delivered to the owner
or owners, or agents thereof, of any private land on which the fire zone is
established.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.03 FILING OF ORDERS.
   Whenever a fire marshal establishes a fire zone, he shall file one copy of
his order with the clerk of the legislative council and one copy with the
traffic authority.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.04 APPEAL OF ORDERS; HEARING.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the order may file with the clerk of the
legislative council, within 15 days after the date of the order, written notice
of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of aggrievement.
   (B)   After hearing, the legislative council may affirm, modify, or rescind
the order.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.05 MARKING ZONES.
   Upon establishment of a fire zone, the traffic authority shall cause to be
erected or installed adequate signs, markings, and other devices to delineate
the fire zone.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.06 COST OF MARKING ZONES.
   Signs, markings, and other devices erected or installed on privately owned
premises shall be at the cost of the owner and may be billed for and collected
in the same manner as municipal taxes; provided the traffic authority causes
notice of lien to be filed on the land records within 60 days after the
erection or installation.
(Adopted 3-2-70)
§ 70.07 PARKING OR STANDING IN ZONES PROHIBITED; PRIMA-FACIE EVIDENCE.
   (A)   No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in a fire
zone, or to obstruct a fire hydrant, except when actually picking up or
discharging passengers.
   (B)   The registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the
operator of the vehicle.
(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75) Penalty, see §
70.99(A)
§ 70.08 TOWING AWAY VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire zone which has been established
in accordance with §§
70.01 to
70.09, inclusive, or any motor vehicle found standing within 10 feet of a fire
hydrant may be towed, upon the direction of a police officer, the fire chief,
the fire marshal, any deputy fire chief or any person acting in the capacity of
deputy fire chief, to any public or private parking facility, and all expenses
of the towing any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner of
the vehicle.
(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)
§ 70.09 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; PAYMENT.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is found standing in violation of §
70.07, a police officer, the fire chief, the fire marshal, any deputy fire
chief, or any person acting in the capacity of deputy fire chief shall serve
upon the owner or operator of the vehicle, or place upon the vehicle, a notice
directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the police department
prior to a time specified in the notice. If any person receiving the notice
shall appear as directed and shall pay an amount as specified in the notice,
not exceeding $5, the payment shall bar a prosecution for violation of §
70.07.
(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)
SECURING OF LOADS
§ 70.15 CONSTRUCTION AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate or shall cause to be operated or moved any vehicle
on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, loaded or properly covered
so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, blowing, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom, except that some substances may be dropped or
sprinkled on the roadway for the purpose of securing traction, cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
(`66 Code, § 56-1) Penalty, see §
70.99(B)
§ 70.16 SECURING LOADS AND COVERINGS.
   No person shall operate or shall cause to be operated or moved any vehicle
on any highway with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is
securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose,
detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway.
(`66 Code, § 56-2) Penalty, see §
70.99 (B)
§ 70.17 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall violate any provisions of §§
70.15 to
70.17, inclusive.
(`66 Code, § 56-3) Penalty, see §
70.99 (B)
TOWING
§ 70.20 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND VEHICLES — ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES;
NOTICE TO OWNER OF VEHICLE; RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; RECORD OF IMPOUNDMENT
OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this
Chapter or any parking ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Traffic
Authority, such vehicle may be removed under the direction of a member of the
Police Department by means of towing the vehicle to a towing garage. Such
removal shall be at the risk and expense of the owner.
   (B)   Vehicles towed for any violation of this Chapter or any parking
ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Traffic Authority shall be stored
in a safe place and shall not be restored to the owner of such vehicle until
payment of towing and storage fees. Storage fees shall not be charged for any
vehicle removed or towed to a designated Town owned garage or parking area.
   (C)   Whenever a Police Officer removes or causes the removal of a vehicle
for a violation of this Chapter, or any parking ordinance, rule, regulation or
order of the Traffic Authority, such Officer shall within a reasonable time,
report such action to the Desk Sergeant on duty or other designated person who
shall notify the owner of the vehicle upon the owner's inquiry of the removal
and the reasons thereof, and the name and location where the vehicle is
impounded.
   (D)   The owner of the vehicle impounded under this section shall have the
right to contest such impoundment by application on a form prescribed by the
Chief of Police.
   (E)   The owner of any vehicle impounded shall be duly informed as to which
provisions of this Chapter, Town ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the
Traffic Authority has necessitated the impoundment of said vehicle.
   (F)   Before the owner of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove
the impounded vehicle from such impound, such person shall provide evidence of
his/her identity, and ownership, shall sign a receipt for such vehicle, and
shall pay the cost of towing and storing for each day or portion of a day that
such vehicle is stored by the tower in excess of the first twenty-four (24)
hours.
   (G)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of the
names of the owners of all vehicles impounded, the nature and circumstances of
each violation and the disposition of each case.
   (H)   The Town, its officers, agents, and employees shall not be liable for
any damage done to any vehicle as a result of towing and storing affected under
the terms of this Chapter.
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)
§ 70.21 TOWER TO BE AUTHORIZED AND INSURED.
   Any person authorized to remove a vehicle under the provision of this
Chapter, shall be an authorized tower for the Hamden Police Department and
shall carry adequate insurance to indemnify and hold the Town harmless against
any and all claims for damages caused to such vehicle while such vehicle is
being removed or stored by such authorized tower.
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)
§ 70.22 REQUEST FOR IMMEDIATE HEARING WHEN VEHICLE IS IMPOUNDED.
   Any person whose vehicle is impounded may request an immediate hearing on
the validity of the charges on which the impoundment was based. A hearing shall
be convened thereafter by one of the parking violation hearing officers as soon
as practicable. The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to the rules
of evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or affirmation. In
considering the charges, the hearing officer may consider all relevant facts
and circumstances and may require the personal appearance of the person
requesting the hearing and the issuing officer. Should the hearing officer find
in favor of the person charged, he/she shall so certify to the Town, and the
record of charge or charges shall be removed from the files of the Town and the
vehicle released to the owner. Should the hearing officer find the issuance of
the charge(s) proper, he/she shall so certify to the Town and no further appeal
hearing shall be considered. The hearing officer shall determine the amount due
the Town for the cost of impoundment and the amount due for citations
outstanding. The owner may regain possession by paying the amount found due by
the hearing officer and establishing his/her identity and right to possession
and upon signing a proper receipt for the vehicle. If not paid the same day,
the owner shall also pay all charges due for the storage of the vehicle.
(C.G.S. § 14-150) (Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)
SNOW REMOVAL
§ 70.25 DEPOSITING SNOW ON HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall deposit, or permit to be deposited, any snow on a
public highway. The registered owner of any motor vehicle equipped for, or
capable of, use in snow plowing shall be presumed to be the operator of such
vehicle.
   (B)   "MOTOR VEHICLE" as used in this section includes all combustion-engine
vehicles, whether wheeled or tracked.
   (C)   No person shall violate any provision of this section.
(Adopted 2-2-70) Penalty, see §
70.99 (A)
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 70.30 PROHIBITING MOTOR VEHICLES BETWEEN THE SIDEWALK AND THE CURB OR ON
MEDIAN DIVIDERS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon, nor shall any motor
vehicle be left parked, standing, or stopped, on or across any piece of
property located between the sidewalk and the curb or any median divider except
to cross the property to enter or leave adjacent areas or to perform necessary
construction or maintenance.
   (B)   "MEDIAN DIVIDER" as used in this section shall be defined as an
intervening space or physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section
separating traffic lanes provided for vehicles proceeding in different
directions.
   (C)   Disabled motor vehicles removed from traveled portions of the highway
at the direction of a police officer or those motor vehicles clearly bearing
disabled notices for a period of 24 hours, pending removal, shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Provisions of this section shall be enforced by sworn members of the
town department of police service by affixing a parking violation notice to any
vehicle in violation of this section.
(Ord. 165, passed 4-3-78) Penalty, see §
70.99 (C)
§ 70.31 SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
   School crossing guards duly appointed by the chief of police are hereby
empowered and authorized to stop or direct traffic in those areas deemed
necessary for the protection of children traveling to and from school.
(Ord. 185, passed 9-10-79)
§ 70.32 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all new and existing
nonresidential sites that have a parking area for 20 or more vehicles,
including but not limited to, shopping centers, office buildings, commercial
buildings, mercantile buildings, warehouses, storage buildings, manufacturing
buildings, schools, and public buildings.
   (B)   Use. After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for
handicapped persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless
a handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle and the
vehicle contains a designation issued by the commissioner of motor vehicles for
the state or some other governmental authority which designation shall be
visible.
   (C)   Number of spaces to be provided.
      (1)   On each side having parking spaces for at least 20 but not more
than 25 spaces, at least one space shall be specially designated and reserved
for handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking shall be in
accordance with the following table.
Total parking on site Required number of handicapped parking spaces
Total parking on site Required number of handicapped parking spaces
26-50                 2
51-75                 3
76-100                4
101-150               5
151-200               6
201-300               7
301-400               8
401-500               9
501-1000              2% of total
over 1000             20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
 
      (2)   Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as
possible to elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances, and so located that the
handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles to
reach entrances, ramps, walkways, and elevators.
   (D)   Parking spaces. Each such space designated for handicapped parking
shall not be less than 15 feet in width, including a three feet cross hatch,
unless the same would require the enlarging of existing parking spaces, in
which event the existing parking space width shall be permitted. Each space
shall be designated by above grade signs with white lettering against a blue
background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking - State Permit
Required". Such signs shall be erected, installed, and maintained by and at the
expense of the owner, operator, lessee, or tenant of the site and shall further
indicate that unauthorized use of the space shall subject the violator to a
fine. If the signs and markings called for herein are not installed within 30
days after written request by the town police department, the town may proceed
to install the same and impose the cost thereof against the owner of the site.
   (E)   Owner's responsibility. The registered owner of any vehicle parked in
violation of this section shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of
the violation.
(Ord. 191, passed 4-7-80) Penalty, see §
70.99(D)
§ 70.33 HANDICAPPED PARKING ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any on-street parking space
designated by the Traffic Authority for parking by handicapped persons unless a
handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle and the
vehicle contains a designation issued by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for
the state or some other governmental authority. Such designation shall be
visible.
   (B)   The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this
section shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of violation.
   (C)   The penalty for violations of this section shall be found in §
70.99(D)
(Ord. 313, passed 1-16-91)
§ 70.34 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of any of the
following traffic regulations except when in compliance with the direction of a
Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal.
      (1)   Overtime Parking. No vehicle shall be parked beyond the time
permitted on streets so designated for specific time limitations.
      (2)   More Than 12-Inches From Curb. No vehicle shall be parked on any
street with its wheels more than twelve (12) inches from the curb.
      (3)   More Than One Space. Vehicles are to be parked as so designated by
appropriate markings.
      (4)   Obstructing Driveway. No person shall park or leave stationary on a
public highway any vehicle in front of or so as to obstruct or interfere with
the ingress or egress of any private driveway or alleyway except with the
permission of the owner of such driveway or alleyway.
(C.G.S. § 14-252)
      (5)   25-Feet of Stop Sign. No vehicle shall be parked within 25-feet of
any stop sign prescribed by the Traffic Authority or the State Traffic
Commission.
(C.G.S. § 14-251)
      (6)   Entrance to Public Building. No vehicle shall be parked as to
obstruct the ingress or egress to a public building.
      (7)   Parking on Sidewalk. No vehicle shall be left parked, standing or
stopped on or across any public sidewalk except to cross such sidewalk to enter
or leave adjacent areas or to perform any necessary sidewalk construction,
maintenance or snow removal.
(C.G.S. § 14-250a)
      (8)   25-Feet From Corner. No vehicle shall be parked within 25-feet of
the corner of any intersection or a marked crosswalk.
(C.G.S. § 14-251)
      (9)   Public Service Vehicle Stop/Stand. No person other than an operator
of a motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire shall
park any vehicle in any officially designated public service motor vehicle
stand, and no operator of any such motor vehicle shall park such vehicle upon
any highway in any business district other than a public service motor vehicle
stand. This provision shall not prevent the operator of any such motor vehicle
from temporarily stopping such vehicle in accordance with parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(C.G.S. § 14-305)
      (10)   Parking Prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in any area as so
designated by appropriate signs and/or markings erected by the Traffic
Authority or the State Highway Commission.
(§ 14-307)
      (11)   Obstructing Traffic. No person shall be permitted to remain
stationary within the limits of a public highway in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic. A vehicle
that has become disabled to such an extent that it is impossible or
impracticable to remove it may be permitted to remain for a reasonable time for
the purpose of making repairs or obtaining sufficient assistance to remove it.
(§ 14-251)
      (12)   Double Parking. No person shall park in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic upon the
highways.
      (13)   Mayor's Proclamation. Whenever traffic conditions make it
necessary that parking within the paved portion of the highway or adjacent
thereto be curtailed, a special parking restriction may be declared. While the
restriction is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked, any
motor vehicle on any portion of any highway to which it applies.
      (14)   Wrong Side of Street. Vehicles must be parked facing the same
direction as the flow of traffic.
   (B)   Prohibited or restricted commercial motor vehicle parking.
      (1)   No person shall park or leave standing a commercial motor vehicle
on any town street or portion thereof in a residential district. For purposes
of this division (B), a "RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT" shall be defined as an area
zoned for residential use under the Hamden zoning regulations and as shown on
the Hamden zoning map. In the event that a street is the boundary of a
residential and non-residential district, the prohibition shall apply only to
the residential side of the street. This prohibition shall not apply to the
parking or standing of such a vehicle for the purpose of making pick-ups or
deliveries from or to any home, structure or building located within the
residential district, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in
the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any such home, building
or structure, or for loading and unloading. This prohibition shall also not
apply to: school buses on or between daily routes; town, state or utility
company vehicles parked for purposes of performing work on such street or
utility; nor shall it apply to firefighting apparatus or other authorized
emergency vehicles parked for the purpose of performing emergency or routine
services.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (B), "COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE" means
a motor vehicle having a gross motor vehicle weight rating of 11,000 pounds or
more and designed or used to transport passengers or property.
   (C)   Any violation shall be subject to penalties as set forth in § 70-99
(E).
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 483, passed 4-14-03)
§ 70.35 PARKING TICKETS.
   The Chief of Police may void a parking ticket in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   Ticket is on its face improper in that it is incomplete or contains
obvious errors;
   (B)   Ticket issued to the blind, handicapped or veterans pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes §§ 14-253 and 14-290 respectively; and
   (C)   Ticket(s) issued to official police, fire and any vehicles exempt by
statutes (marked and unmarked).
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)
§ 70.36 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any hearing charging a violation of any law, regulation, rule, ordinance
or order governing vehicle parking, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any law, regulation, rule, order or
ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of such parking violation the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. If the violation
is unregistered, it is presumed that the last registered owner is the present
owner of said vehicle.
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)
§ 70.37 FORMAL HEARING PROCEDURE; PARKING VIOLATION HEARING OFFICERS.
   (A)   Any person or owner of a vehicle cited for a violation of this
ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Town pertaining to parking, may
request in writing, on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, a formal
hearing before a Parking Violations Hearing Officer(s) within fifteen (15) days
of issuance of a parking violation citation.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint parking violation hearing officer(s) other
than a police officer, persons working in the Police Department or person(s)
authorized to issue tickets. Such officer(s) shall serve for a term of two (2)
years from the effective date of appointment.
   (C)   The hearing officer(s) shall be empowered to hear appeals from the
issuance of parking violation citations and take such other actions in
processing parking violations as authorized by State statutes and Town
ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   In scheduling a formal appeal hearing, the appellant shall be
notified by mail of the place and the time of hearing. Such notice shall be
provided at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than thirty (30) days prior
to the scheduled hearing date.
      (2)   The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to the rules of
evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or affirmation.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be construed in accordance
with the provisions of applicable State statutes and Town ordinances.
      (4)   In considering an appeal, the hearing officer(s) may consider all
relevant facts and circumstances and may require personal appearance of the
appellant and issuing officer.
      (5)   Should the hearing officer(s) find in favor of the appellant, he/
she shall so certify to the Town and the record of the citation shall be
removed from the files of the Town.
      (6)   Should the hearing officer(s) find the issuance of the citation
proper, he/she shall so certify to the Town and inform the appellant of the
applicable fine.
      (7)   If such violation is not paid on the date of the judgment of the
hearing officer(s), the Town shall send, by first-class mail, a notice of the
penalty assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than
thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a
certified copy of the notice of penalty assessment with the Clerk of the
Superior Court for the geographical area of New Haven, together with an entry
fee as required by statute. The certified copy of the notice of penalty
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve (12)
month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as
one record of assessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs against such person in favor of the Town.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the hearing
officer(s) assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of
a civil money judgment and a Levy of execution on such judgment may issue
without further notice to such person.
(C.G.S. § 7-152b).
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
70.07 or
70.25 shall be fined not more than $100.
(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75) (Ord. adopted 2-2-70)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
70.15 through
70.17 shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
('66 Code, § 56-3)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §
70.30 shall be fined not more than $25 for each violation.
(Ord. 165, passed 4-3-78)
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of §§
70.32 or
70.33, any town police officer may issue a parking citation, which parking
citation shall provide for a fine equivalent to the maximum parking fine then
currently prevailing in the town, payable to the town and remitted to the
police department within seven days of the parking citation date. If any fine
is not paid within seven days, a penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall
immediately become due and payable in addition to the original fine and a
warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator.
(Ord. 191, passed 4-7-80; Am. Ord. 313, passed 1-16-91)
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of §
70.34 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each violation.
Any town Police Officer may issue a parking citation, which parking citation
shall provide for a fine equivalent to the maximum parking fine prevailing in
the town, payable to the town and remitted to the Police Department within 15
days of the parking citation date. If any fine is not paid within 15 days, a
penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall immediately become due and payable
in addition to the original fine, and a warrant may be issued for the arrest of
the violator.
(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 377, passed 5-4-98)
CHAPTER 71: WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Declaration by the Mayor
   
71.04   Termination of snow emergency
   
71.05   Parking restricted
   
71.06   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence
   
71.07   Impounding vehicles
   
71.08   Towing and storage
   
71.09   Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in violation of this
chapter
   
71.10   Citation for unlawfully parked vehicle
   
71.11   Severability
   
71.12   Promulgation of regulations
   
71.13   Hearing procedure
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety,
convenience, and welfare of the town to regulate and restrict the parking of
vehicles on public streets and highways within the control and limits of the
town, during a period of snow emergencies, so as not to impede the
transportation and movement of food, fuel, medical care, fire, health, police
protection, and other vital facilities of the town.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "CHIEF OF POLICE." The Hamden Chief of Police or any person authorized to
act as a representative of the Chief of Police.
   "OPERATOR." The person using, operating, or having the care, custody or
control of a vehicle being used, operated, or found upon a highway.
   "OWNER." Any person, firm, corporation, or association holding title to a
vehicle or having legal right to register same.
   "PARK." The standing of a vehicle other than temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers on
a public street or highway, whether occupied or not.
   "SNOW EMERGENCY." Whenever the Mayor finds, on the basis of falling snow,
sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the united states
Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or freezing rain that
weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be
expedited and that parking on town streets or highways be prohibited or
restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the Mayor shall put into effect
a snow emergency by declaring it in the manner prescribed herein.
   "STREET OR HIGHWAY." The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is under the control and
maintenance of the town, dedicated, appropriated or open to public travel or
other use.
   "VEHICLE." Every device upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.03 DECLARATION BY THE MAYOR.
   A snow emergency shall be declared by the Mayor of the town and in the
Mayor's absence by the acting Mayor. The Mayor shall cause each declaration
made pursuant to this chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts
or telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the town. The
Mayor may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of
general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action
taken by the Mayor, including the time it became or will become effective.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.04 TERMINATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Once in effect, a snow emergency under this chapter shall remain in effect
until terminated by announcement of the Mayor in accordance with §
71.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.05 PARKING RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful at any time during the period of any snow emergency
under the provisions of this chapter for:
   (A)   Any person to park or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any odd
numbered portion of a town street or highway;
   (B)   Any person to allow, permit or suffer a vehicle to stand or park on
any town street or highway in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PROVISIONS TEMPORARILY EFFECTIVE TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
   Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by declaration of the
Mayor or upon occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily
in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in
effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law
relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency
vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a Police Officer.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.07 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter may be impounded and
no person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter without
first paying the cost of removal and the cost of storage. Any payments required
by this section shall not be construed as a penalty so as to preclude
prosecution for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle impounded under
this section is permitted to remove the vehicle from the place of impoundment,
he or she shall furnish evidence of his or her identity and ownership, furnish
evidence that payment was made to the Hamden Police for any citation issued
under §
71.10 of this chapter, sign a receipt for the vehicle and shall pay, in full,
the fee for towing and charges for storage.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.08 TOWING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Any Hamden Police Officer by direction of the Chief of Police is
authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial
towing service, any car or other vehicle parked in violation of this chapter to
a towing garage. Such removal shall be at the risk and expense of the owner.
   (B)   Vehicles towed for any violation of this chapter, shall be stored in a
safe place and shall be restored to the owner of such vehicle upon payment of
an established storage fee.
   (C)   Whenever a Police Officer removes or causes the removal of a vehicle
for a violation of this chapter, such officer shall within a reasonable time
report such action to the desk sergeant on duty or other designated person who
shall notify the owner of the vehicle upon the owner's inquiry of the removal
and the reason thereof, and the name and location where the vehicle is
impounded.
   (D)   The town, its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable for
any damage done to any vehicle as a result of towing and storage effected under
the terms of this section.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.09 EVIDENCE WITH RESPECT TO VEHICLES PARKED OR LEFT IN VIOLATION OF THIS
CHAPTER.
   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in violation of
this chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked or left in violation of this chapter, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the
person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.10 CITATION FOR UNLAWFULLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   When any vehicle is found parked in violation of this chapter, any
Police Officer finding such violation shall take its registration number and
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation on a form provided
by the Chief of Police stating that such vehicle is parked unlawfully and shall
state the penalty for such violation. Such citation shall state the provision
of each violation.
   (B)   No person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter
until payment is received by the Hamden Police for any citation issued for a
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Any owner or operator of the vehicle on which the citation was
attached may make payment in person or remit by mail in the form of a check or
money order payable to the Town of Hamden and delivered to the Hamden Police
Department as specified on the citation, as a penalty for violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.12 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The Legislative Council may adopt regulations consistent with this chapter
which thereafter shall have the effect of an ordinance.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.13 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   An owner of a vehicle cited for a violation of this chapter may,
within seven days of issuance of a parking violation citation, request in
writing, on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, a formal hearing before a
Parking Violations Hearing officer(s);
   (B)   The Mayor, shall appoint parking violation hearing officer(s) other
than policemen, persons working in the police department or person authorized
to issue tickets. Such officer(s) shall serve for a term of two years from the
effective date of appointment.
   (C)   The hearing officer(s) shall be empowered to hear appeals from the
issuance of parking violation citations and take such other actions in
processing parking violations as authorized by the state statutes and Town
ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   In scheduling formal appeal hearings, the appellant shall be notified
by mail of the place and time of hearing. Such notice shall be provided at
least 15 days, but not more than 30 days, prior to the scheduled hearing date.
   (E)   The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to the rules of
evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or affirmation.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall be construed in accordance with
the provisions of applicable state statutes and town ordinances.
   (G)   In considering an appeal, the hearing officer(s) may consider all
relevant facts and circumstances and may require personal appearance of the
appellant and issuing officer.
   (H)   Should the hearing officer(s) find in favor of the appellant, he shall
so certify to the town and the record of the citation shall be removed from the
files of the town and any payments made by the appellant shall be refunded.
   (I)   Should the hearing officer(s) find the issuance of the citation
proper, he shall so certify to the town and inform the appellant by first-class
mail.
   (J)   If such violation has not been paid by the date of the judgment of the
hearing officer(s), the town shall send by first class mail a notice of the
penalty assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30
days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice
of penalty assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical
area in which the town is located together with an entry fee as required by
statute. The certified copy of the notice of penalty assessment shall
constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12 month period, assessments
against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment.
The Clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of such record of assessment and
court costs against such person in favor of the town. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the general statutes, the assessment of the hearing officer(s),
when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment
and a levy of execution of such judgment may issue without further notice to
such person.
   (K)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal may be
instituted as provided by statute within 30 days of the mailing of notice of
such assessment. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as a limitation on
the power of the Superior Court to impose a fine in accordance with the
ordinances of the town for violations thereof.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any owner, operator, person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50
for each violation.
(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)
CHAPTER 72: TRUCK TRAFFIC
Section
   
72.01   Definition
   
72.02   Restrictions on certain streets
   
72.03   Erection of signs
   
72.04   Penalties for offenses
   
72.05   Severability
§ 72.01 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated by the context.
   "TRUCK." Every commercial motor vehicle other than public safety,
educational, municipal and municipal purpose vehicles, having a gross weight of
14,000 pounds or over and designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and includes a motor vehicle designed and used for
the purpose of drawing a semi-trailer as well as the vehicle drawing the semi-
trailer and the semi-trailer.
(Ord. 722, passed 6-22-21)
§ 72.02 RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
Todd Street- No person shall operate any truck on Todd Street except while on a
trip with a point of origin from or destination on Todd Street.
(Ord. 722, passed 6-22-21)
§ 72.03 ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   The Chief of Police shall cause to be erected appropriate signs on Todd
Street, which signs shall clearly spell out that truck traffic, as defined
above in §
72.01, is prohibited on Todd Street in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 722, passed 6-22-21)
§ 72.04 PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES.
   Any person violating the terms of §
72.02 above, shall be fined $50 per offense, each day's continued violation
constituting a separate offense.
(Ord. 722, passed 6-22-21)
§ 72.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application
thereof to any particular circumstances shall ever be held invalid or
unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the remainder hereof, which shall
continue in full force and effect and applicable to all circumstances to which
it may validly apply.
(Ord. 722, passed 6-22-21)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS; FOWL
         
91.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES
         
92.   CURFEW
         
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
         
94.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
         
95.   PARKS
         
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
97.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
98.   SCENIC ROADS
         
99.   FAIR HOUSING; HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
         
100.   EMERGENCY ALARMS
         
101.   NOISE
         
102.   TOBACCO PRODUCTS
         
103.   HAZARDOUS WASTE
         
104.   [RESERVED]
         
105.   FACIAL RECOGNITION
         
106.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY SERVICES RECORDS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS; FOWL
Section
   
90.01   Prohibited locations for housing
   
90.02   Ratproofing
   
90.03   Securing at night; manure receptacles
   
90.04   Exceptions
   
90.05   Violation prohibited
   
90.06   Inspection of premises
   
90.07   Dog defecation
   
90.08   Fees
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR HOUSING.
   No person shall erect, use, or maintain any building or structure for
housing domestic animals or fowl which is located within 50 feet of a dwelling
house.
('66 Code, § 8-1) Penalty, see §
90.99(A)
§ 90.02 RATPROOFING.
   No person shall erect, use, or maintain any building or structure for
housing domestic animals or fowl unless the same shall be effectively
ratproofed in accordance with such rules and regulations prescribed for that
purpose by the director of health.
('66 Code, § 8-2) Penalty, see §
90.99(A)
Cross-reference:
   Ratproofing methods, see Title XV,
Ch. 154, §§
154.20 through
154.22
§ 90.03 SECURING AT NIGHT; MANURE RECEPTACLES.
   The owner or keeper of any domestic animals or fowl shall keep and maintain,
effectively closed during the nighttime, all doors of any building or structure
wherein the domestic animals or fowl are housed and shall further cause all
droppings and manure from the domestic animals or fowl to be kept in a
ratproofed and fly-tight receptacle in accordance with the rules and
regulations prescribed for that purpose by the director of health.
('66 Code, § 8-3) Penalty, see §
90.99(A)
§ 90.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any doghouse used for
keeping a dog as a house pet nor shall the provisions of §§
90.02 and
90.03 of this chapter apply to any building or structure that is used or
maintained for housing domestic animals or fowl when located on a farm
consisting of 3 or more acres.
('66 Code, § 8-4)
§ 90.05 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter or fail to comply with
any rule or regulation adopted hereunder by the director of health.
('66 Code, § 8-5) Penalty, see §
90.99(A)
§ 90.06 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   The director of health is authorized to make inspections of all
premises within the town which house 4 or more dogs, if the owner or occupant
of the premises does not hold a valid and current kennel license. The
inspections should ensure that the proper levels of health and sanitation are
being maintained and that the presence of the dogs does not cause violations of
the housing code or other lawful rules and regulations adopted to protect
health and safety within the town.
   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the director of health, it is necessary or
desirable to inspect any premises, he shall arrange for this at a reasonable
time and with the consent of the owner or occupant. If the consent is refused,
the director of health shall resort to a properly issued warrant.
   (C)   If, in the course of the inspection, the director of health determines
that the dogs or other animals housed in the premises are being mistreated, he
shall report this to the dog warden, who shall take the necessary action, not
inconsistent with his powers, to protect the animals and alleviate the problem.
(Ord. 166, passed 4-3-78)
§ 90.07 DOG DEFECATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "PERSON." Any individual who is in charge of the dog at the time of the
violation or, if no one is in charge or control of the dog, person shall mean
the owner of any duly licensed dog, or if the dog is unlicensed, person shall
mean the actual owner of the dog determined by the circumstances surrounding
the care and custody of the dog at or about the time of the violation. If there
is more than one person owning a dog, all such persons shall be jointly liable
for any fines imposed hereunder.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog to
defecate upon any sidewalk, public street, median divider within public
streets, grass, or paved strips between streets and sidewalks, public parks and
other public property, unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited
by such animal immediately before leaving the area of the defecation.
   (C)   The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any blind person
when accompanied by a guide dog, to any deaf person when accompanied by a guide
dog or to any physically handicapped person who under the circumstances is
unable to comply with this section.
   (D)   This section shall be enforced by the town dog warden and his
assistants.
(Ord. 175, passed 2-5-79) Penalty, see §
90.99(B)
§ 90.08 FEES.
   The Legislative Council has established the following fees to be charged by
the town:
 
                             Fee
                             15 for each incident, plus any advertising cost,
                             and the amount determined to be the full cost of
Redemption                   detention (cost of impound) and care, including,
                             but not limited to, veterinary care of such
                             impounded dog, cat or other animal.
Cost of impound              15 per day
                             Amount determined to be the full cost of detention
Quarantine                   (cost of impound) and care, including, but not
                             limited to, veterinary care of such quarantined
                             animal.
Sale as a pet (adoption fee) 5
Euthanasia and cremation     Actual cost
Cremation only               Actual cost
 
(Ord. 262, passed 7-10-87; Am. Ord. 607, passed 5-2-11)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50.
('66 Code, § 8-5)
   (B)   Any violation of §
90.07 shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $25.
(Ord. 175, passed 2-5-79)
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES
Section
Motor Vehicles; Appliances
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Legislative intent
   
91.03   Storage restrictions
   
91.04   Notice of violation
   
91.05   Failure to comply; lien on land
   
91.06   Exceptions
   
91.07   Violation prohibited
Refrigerators
   
91.10   Abandoning, etc. prohibited
   
91.11   Removal of snap locks and doors
   
91.12   Violation prohibited
 
   
91.99   Penalty
MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES
§ 91.01 Definitions.
   For the purpose of §§
91.01 to
91.07, inclusive, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
   (A)   Enforcement officer. The director of health or his designated agent or
deputy.
   (B)   Junk appliance. Washing machine, drying machine, stove, refrigerator,
freezer, air-conditioning device and machine, water heater and water cooler and
device for the storage of hot water or cold water, dishwasher, television
receiver, furniture, office equipment, machine or implement for business,
manufacturing or farming purposes and any other similar thing or part thereof,
in an inoperative or discarded condition.
   (C)   Junk vehicle. Any motor vehicle, or part thereof, which is not
currently licensed by the commissioner of motor vehicles for lawful operation
on the public highways of this state and is in a rusted, wrecked, discarded,
partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.
   (D)   Operator. Any person who has apparent charge, care or control,
possession or occupancy of land.
   (E)   Owner. Any person who:
      (1)   Has any legal title to, or beneficial interest in, any land with or
without actual possession or occupancy thereof; or
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of any land as an owner or as an agent
of an owner, or as an officer, director or employee of a corporation or other
business entity, which is an owner or an agent of an owner, or as an executor,
administrator, trustee, conservator or guardian of an owner or the estate of an
owner.
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.02 Legislative intent.
   (A)   It is found and declared that junk vehicles and junk appliances upon
any property within the town:
      (1)   Are detrimental to public safety, health and welfare;
      (2)   Constitute a nuisance and particularly imperil the health and
safety of children;
      (3)   Constitute a potential source of fire and explosion;
      (4)   Are and may become harborages of rodents and breeding places of
insects; and
      (5)   Threaten and depreciate neighboring properties.
   (B)   The preservation of public health, the elimination of such public
peril and the general protection of property and maintenance of property values
are proper concerns of the town.
   (C)   The enactment of §§
91.01 to
91.06, inclusive is necessary for the protection and preservation of the public
health and safety, and property and property values.
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.03 Storage restrictions.
   No owner or operator of any parcel of land, wholly or partly within the town
shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, or retain, or cause or permit
to be retained, any junk vehicle or junk appliance on the land, except in a
suitable enclosed and secured structure.
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.04 Notice of violation.
   On information or complaint of any violation of §
91.03, the enforcement officer shall cause to be served written notice, either
personally or by mail, upon the owner or operator of the land on which the
violation is found or complained of, setting forth, and ordering correction of,
the violation. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
To:               
   As Owner Or Operator Of
               , in the
   Address
Town of Hamden.
You are hereby notified that you are in violation of §
91.03 of the code of ordinances of this town, in that a junk vehicle or junk
appliance has been found deposited or retained upon the above listed land, and
you are hereby ordered to remove said junk vehicle or junk appliance within ten
(10) days from the date of this notice. Failure to comply with this notice
within the time stated is punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.) for each day of noncompliance.
In addition to possible fine, the Town of Hamden may cause the removal of said
junk vehicle or junk appliance and all costs and expense so incurred shall be
chargeable to you, shall constitute a lien against your property, and may be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of delinquent taxes.
TOWN OF HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT
Dated:                  By:               
                      Authorized Signature
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.05 Failure to comply; lien on land.
   (A)   Upon the failure of any owner or operator of any land to comply with
the provisions of any notice issued in accordance with §
91.04, the enforcement officer or his agents may enter upon the land and cause
to be removed the junk vehicle or junk appliance.
   (B)   All costs and expense incurred in connection with the removal shall be
charged to the owner of the land, and shall constitute a lien upon the land.
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.06 Exceptions.
   (A)   Section
91.03 shall not apply to any land actually operated and occupied for the sale,
repair, reconditioning, or remodeling of motor vehicles when operated in
conformance with zoning regulations of the town and applicable general statutes
of this state.
   (B)   Section
91.03 shall not apply to any land actually operated and occupied by any person
for the sale or service of appliances when all storage is visually screened, to
a height of at least 6 feet, from the street and from all adjoining properties,
and when all storage areas are maintained in a neat and orderly fashion as not
to create health hazards, insect breeding places, or rodent harborage, and when
all exterior storage areas are securely locked and physically inaccessible to
any person not employed or engaged in the business.
(Adopted 8-5-68)
§ 91.07 Violation prohibited.
   (A)   No person, who as owner or operator of any parcel of land, shall fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice served in
accordance with §
91.04.
   (B)   No person shall resist, obstruct, or interfere with any agent,
servant, or officer of the town when engaged in the execution of any provision
of §§
91.01 to
91.06, inclusive.
   (C)   The penalties provided in §
91.99 (A) and (B) of this chapter shall be in addition to any other relief or
remedy provided by §§
91.01 to
91.06, inclusive or penalty provided by law.
(Adopted 8-5-68) Penalty, see §
91.99 (A) and (B)
REFRIGERATORS
§ 91.10 Abandoning, etc. prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or any other, container of any
kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening
from the inside of the icebox. refrigerator or container.
('66 Code, § 4-1) Penalty, see §
91.99 (C)
§ 91.11 Removal of snap locks and doors.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind
which has an airtight snap lock or any other devices therein without first
removing the snap lock or doors from the icebox, refrigerator or container.
('66 Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see §
91.99 (C)
§ 91.12 Violation prohibited.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
91.10 to
91.12, inclusive, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('66 Code, § 4-3) Penalty, see §
91.99 (C)
§ 91.99 Penalty.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §
91.07 (A) shall be fined not more than $50.
('66 Code, § 4-10)
   (B)   Whover violates any provision of §
91.07 (B) shall be fined not more than $100.
('66 Code, § 4-10)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
91.10 to
91.11, inclusive, shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than
30 days.
('66 Code, § 4-3)
CHAPTER 92: CURFEW
Section
   
92.01   Applicable age group; hours
   
92.02   Parent responsibility
   
92.03   When effective; notice
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 Applicable age group; hours.
   No child under the age of 16 years shall loiter upon any street, alley or
public place within the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
unless the child shall be accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or some
adult person authorized by the parent or guardian to attend the child.
('66 Code, § 16-1)
§ 92.02 Parent responsibility.
   No parent or guardian shall permit any child under the age of 16 years to
loiter any street, alley or public place within the town between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless the child shall be accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian or some adult person authorized by the parent or guardian to
attend the child.
('66 Code, § 16-2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 When effective; notice.
   The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be suspended until
such time and for such period or periods as the legislative council shall deem
advisable or expedient. Whenever, in the opinion of the legislative council,
the safety and the protection of the public shall be served by the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter, the council shall publish once in some
newspaper having a circulation in the town notice of its decision to declare
this chapter in force and thereupon this chapter shall forthwith, as of the
date of publication of the notice and for the period as shall be stated in the
notice, become enforceable and in effect.
('66 Code, § 16-3)
§ 92.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of §
92.02 shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
('66 Code, § 16-2)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Discharge prohibited; exception
   
93.02   Sale and storage
   
93.03   When discharge is permitted
   
93.04   When manufacture, sale of fireworks permitted
   
93.05   Use of signaling devices
   
93.06   Violation prohibited
Outdoor Fires
   
93.10   Definition
   
93.11   Kindling of fires
   
93.12   Incinerators
   
93.13   Location and care of incinerators
   
93.14   Cooking fires
   
93.15   Nonliability of town officials
   
93.16   Violation prohibited
Space Heaters
   
93.20   Purpose
   
93.21   Definition
   
93.22   Sale, installation, etc. prohibited
   
93.23   Use of, prohibited
   
93.24   Fire department inspector
   
93.25   Violation prohibited
Permits and Fee Schedules
   
93.30   Permits
   
93.31   Operating permit fee schedule
   
93.32   Occupancy operating permit and inspection fee schedule
   
93.33   Plan review fee schedule
   
93.34   Exemptions from fees; exception
   
93.35   Penalty for non-payment
   
93.36   Fees for reinspection
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 Discharge prohibited; exception.
   (A)   The discharge, firing or use of all firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes,
Roman candles, fire balloons or other fireworks or substances designed and
intended for pyrotechnic display, and all pistols, canes, cannons or other
appliances, using blank cartridges or caps, containing chlorate of potash
mixture, is prohibited in the town.
   (B)   The mayor and the chief of the fire department, however, upon written
application may grant written permission for the display of fireworks, provided
that, in their opinion, the display or displays shall be of a character and so
located, discharged or fired as not to constitute a hazard to surrounding
property nor endanger any person or persons.
('66 Code, § 25-1) Penalty, see §
93.99 (A)
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 530, §§ 29-96 to 29-101, inclusive.
§ 93.02 Sale and storage.
   The sale of fireworks at retail and the storage or sale of fireworks at
wholesale is prohibited except as herein provided.
('66 Code, § 25-2) Penalty, see §
93.99 (A)
§ 93.03 When discharge is permitted.
   No provision of §§
93.01 to
93.06, inclusive, shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of a pistol or
other firearms necessary or proper in carrying out any part of a theatrical
performance or an Independence Day program where a permit has been obtained
from the proper town official.
('66 Code, § 25-3)
§ 93.04 When manufacture, sale of fireworks permitted.
   No provision of §§
93.01 to
93.06, inclusive, shall be deemed to prohibit the manufacture, keeping,
storage, transportation and sales of pistols, revolvers, firearms, ammunition
and explosives in compliance with the laws of this state; nor prohibit the
storage or sale of fireworks by any wholesale dealer or jobber who shall sell
and deliver the same outside of the limits of the town; provided, however, that
articles above mentioned in this section when in the process of delivery shall
be securely packed in closed containers.
('66 Code, § 25-4)
§ 93.05 Use of signaling devices.
   No provision of §§
93.01 to
93.06, inclusive, shall be deemed to prohibit the possession or use of
signaling devices necessary for the safe operation of railroads or aircraft.
('66 Code, § 25-5)
§ 93.06 Violation prohibited.
   The violation of any provisions of §§
93.01 to
93.06, inclusive, shall be deemed a misdemeanor and the chief of the fire
department may remove or cause to be removed, at the owner's expense, all
stocks of fireworks or other combustibles exposed for sale or held in stock in
violation of §§
93.01 to
93.06, inclusive.
('66 Code, § 25-6) Penalty, see §
93.99 (A)
OUTDOOR FIRES
§ 93.10 Definition.
   For the purpose of §§
93.10 to
93.16, inclusive, an outdoor fire shall mean any fire in the open air or
outside the confines of a building for the purpose of:
   (A)   The burning of woodland, grassland, swampland, leaves and other forest
debris;
   (B)   The burning as a means of disposal of any type of structure, marine
and air craft, vehicles, and the burning of debris from any of the foregoing;
and
   (C)   The burning as a means of disposal of papers, rubbish and all types of
combustibles.
('66 Code, § 43-1)
§ 93.11 Kindling of fires.
   (A)   No person shall kindle an outdoor fire except in an approved type of
incinerator without permission from the fire marshal or his designee, which
permission may be denied if in his opinion conditions are unsafe for burning.
   (B)   No outdoor fire shall be kindled between sunset and sunrise.
   (C)   No outdoor fire shall be left unattended at any time except in an
approved type of incinerator.
   (D)   Outdoor fires must be extinguished before sunset.
   (E)   Outdoor burning of garbage is prohibited.
('66 Code, § 43-2) Penalty, see §
93.99 (B)
§ 93.12 Incinerators.
   (A)   An "approved incinerator" shall mean any metal drum of adequate
capacity, any masonry incinerator or any steel or cast iron receptacle with
solid or perforated sides, front and backs, used to burn papers, rubbish and
combustibles, with sufficient perforations to provide adequate ventilation to
insure proper combustion.
   (B)   Every approved incinerator must be equipped with a spark arrester or
cover which shall be sufficient to prevent the escape of sparks and embers.
Spark arresters may be of perforated sheet metal or wire mesh (screen), but the
openings shall not exceed 1/4 inch square. The spark arrester must cover the
entire opening of the incinerator.
   (C)   Draft doors or openings designed to create a draft or stimulate
combustion must be protected with a 1/4 square inch wire mesh screen.
   (D)   Incinerators for the use of occupants of apartment houses, multiple-
family dwellings, commercial and industrial establishments must be approved by
the fire marshal.
('66 Code, § 43-3) Penalty, see §
93.99 (B)
§ 93.13 Location and care of incinerators.
   (A)   No approved incinerator shall be located within 20 feet of any
building, property line or any combustible. No incinerator may be located on
street pavement or within the curb area.
   (B)   All incinerators must be emptied periodically to prevent choking and
poor combustion,
   (C)   Whenever an incinerator is so located or in such condition as to cause
it to be a menace to life, health or property, in the opinion of the fire
marshal, the fire marshal shall serve written notice upon the owner or user of
such incinerator to relocate, clean or replace the incinerator within 5 days of
the date of the notice, Failure on the part of the owner or user to comply with
the notice shall be grounds upon which the fire marshal may order the
discontinuance of the use of the incinerator.
('66 Code, § 43-4) Penalty. see §
93.99 (B)
§ 93.14 Cooking fires.
   Sections
93.10 to
93.16, inclusive, do not apply to fires for cooking purposes.
('66 Code, § 43-5)
§ 93.15 Nonliability of town officials.
   (A)   The town, the town fire department and the officers, agents and
employees of each shall not be held responsible for any damage which may be
caused by an incinerator which has been approved, either as to construction or
location, by the fire marshal.
   (B)   The town, the town fire department and the officers, agents and
employees of each shall not be held responsible for any damage by any outdoor
fire for which permission has been granted.
('66 Code, § 43-7)
§ 93.16 Violation prohibited.
   Any person or firm who violates any provision of §§
93.10 to
93.16, inclusive, as enacted, or who shall fail to comply with any notice or
order by the fire marshal of the town fire department, may be subject to arrest
and prosecution by the proper authorities and may be fined as provided by §
93.99.
('66 Code, § 43-6) Penalty, see §
93.99 (B)
SPACE HEATERS
§ 93.20 Purpose.
   The provisions hereinafter contained in §§
93.20 to
93.25, inclusive, are declared for the purpose of controlling the sale, use,
installation and storage of space heaters as defined in §
93.21 of this chapter. The hazards which may result from the use of such units
can be eliminated through regulation for the ultimate protection of lives and
property in the town.
('66 Code, § 60-1)
§ 93.21 Definition.
   "Space heater" as used in §§
93.20 to
93.25, inclusive, shall mean a heating unit which uses or is designed to use
solid, liquid or gaseous fuels, which is designed to heat or is used to heat
the area in which it is located, and which when installed is not firmly affixed
in a permanent position by a rigid pipe connection, is not permanently
connected to a chimney stack or flue and is not permanently vented.
('66 Code, § 60-2)
§ 93.22 Sale, installation, etc. prohibited.
   No person, firm or corporation shall store, keep, sell or cause to be sold a
space heater as defined in
93.21. No person, firm or corporation shall use, cause or allow to be used in
any dwelling (whether same is owned, occupied, leased or otherwise used by
them) a space heater is defined as §
93.21.
('66 Code, § 60-3) Penalty, see §
93.99 (C)
§ 93.23 Use of, prohibited.
   No person, firm or corporation shall use or maintain or permit the use or
maintenance in any building in the town of any space heater as defined in §
93.21. For the purpose of this section, it shall be deemed that a property
owner has permitted the illegal use of a space heater if, knowing that the
premises are not centrally, heated, he has failed to inform himself as to the
legality of any heating apparatus installed by the occupants of the property.
('66 Code, § 60-4) Penalty, see §
93.99 (C)
§ 93.24 Fire department inspector.
   Whenever the fire chief or fire marshal, upon inspection, shall determine
that any heating unit, for any reason, is dangerous to use, or that its use
would be contrary to applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations, he
shall order its removal. The fire department shall keep a record of all
inspections and orders made with relation to §§
93.20 to 93.26, inclusive.
('66 Code, § 60-5)
§ 93.25 Violation prohibited.
   Every person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of §§
93.20 to 93.26, inclusive, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('66 Code, § 60-6) Penalty, see §
93.99 (C)
PERMITS AND FEE SCHEDULES
§ 93.30 PERMITS.
   (A)   No building or structure subject to the Connecticut State Fire Safety
Code and/or State Fire Prevention Code shall be constructed, used, occupied,
enlarged, altered or repaired unless a permit has been granted for said
activity by the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   No person shall undertake any of the operations or activities
described in §§
93.31 to
93.33 of this subchapter until such person shall have obtained a permit from
the Fire Marshal. Said permit shall be valid from the date of issue as follows:
      (1)   Issued in conjunction with building permit: shall follow building
permit guidelines;
      (2)   Issued for occupancy operation: 12 months.
      (3)   All other permits: 12 months.
No continuation, expansion, diminution or modification of said operations shall
be undertaken without obtaining a permit from the Fire Marshal.
   (C)   No person shall install, enlarge, alter, remove, repair or replace any
fire protection system in any building or structure subject to the Connecticut
State Fire Safety Code and/or State Fire Prevention Code, until such person
shall have obtained a permit from the Fire Marshal.
   (D)   The permit(s) required pursuant to this section shall be required in
addition to any other permits or licenses required by federal, state or local
law.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.31 OPERATING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
Blasting/explosives permit     Per State Statute               $60
Ammonium Nitrate               To store                        $50
Automobile Wrecking Yards      To operate automobile wrecking  $50
                               yards
                               To operate stationary lead-
                               acid battery systems having an
                               electrolyte capacity of more
Battery System                 than 100 gal (379 L) in         $50
                               sprinklered buildings or 50 gal
                               (189 L) in nonsprinklered
                               buildings
                               To use in connection with
Candles, Open Flames, and      assembly areas, dining areas of $30
Portable Cooking               restaurants or drinking
                               establishments
Combustible Material Storage   To store more than 2500 ft3     $50
                               (70.8 m3) gross volume
                               To sell, handle on- site,
                               manufacture and store consumer
Consumer Fireworks (1.4G)      fireworks (1.4G) Applicant will $200
                               need to submit inventory list
                               and site plans for review
                               To operate all exhibits and
Exhibit and Trade Shows        trade shows held within a       $50
                               jurisdiction
Fairs - No Rides               To conduct the events           $50
Flame Effects                  To use flame effects before an  $100
                               audience
                               (1) To use or operate, repair
                               or modify a pipeline for the
                               on-site transportation of
                               flammable or combustible
                               liquids
                               (2) To store, handle or use
                               Class I liquids in excess of 5
                               gallons or in excess of 10
                               gallons outside a building
                               Exception:
                               A permit is not required for
                               the following:
                               (a) The storage or use of Class
                               I liquids in the fuel tank of a
                               motor vehicle, aircraft, motor
                               boat, mobile power plant, or
                               mobile heating plant unless
                               such storage in the opinion of
                               the AHJ would cause an unsafe
                               condition
                               (b) The storage or use of
                               paints, oils varnishes, or
                               similar flammable mixtures when
                               such liquids are stored for
                               maintenance, painting, or
                               similar purposes for a period
                               of not more than 30 days
Flammable and Combustible      (3) To store, handle or use
Liquids; Including Underground Class II or Class III A liquids Residential: $50
Storage Tank installation or   in excess of 25 gallons in a    Commercial: $100
removal                        building or in excess of 60
                               gallons outside a building.
                               Exception: Fuel oil used in
                               conjunction with oil burning
                               equipment
                               (4) To remove Class I or Class
                               II liquids from an underground
                               storage tank used for fueling
                               motor vehicles by any means
                               other than approved, stationary
                               on-site pumps normally used for
                               dispensing purposes.
                               (5) To operate tank vehicles,
                               equipment, tanks, plants,
                               terminals, wells, fuel
                               dispensing stations,
                               refineries, distilleries, and
                               similar facilities where
                               flammable and combustible
                               liquids are produced,
                               processed, transported, stored,
                               dispensed, or used
                               (6) To alter, clean, repair,
                               line with a protective coating,
                               remove, abandon, place
                               temporarily out of service, or
                               otherwise dispose of a
                               flammable or combustible liquid
                               tank
                               (1) To store, transport on
                               site, dispense, use, or handle
                               hazardous materials in excess
                               of the amounts listed in Table
                               1.12.8(d) of 2015 CSFPC
                               (2) To repair, abandon, remove,
                               place temporarily out of
Hazardous Materials            service, close, or              $50
                               substantially modify a storage
                               facility or other area
                               regulated by Chapter 60 of the
                               2015 CSFPC when the hazardous
                               materials in use or storage
                               exceed the amounts listed in
                               Table 1.12.8(d) of the 2015
                               CSFPC
                               To use any building or portion
High- Piled Combustible        thereof as a high-piled storage $50
Storage                        area exceeding 500 ft2
                               (46.45m2)
                               For hot work. For additional
Hot Work Operation s           permit requirements for hot     $50
                               work operations, see section
                               41.1.5 of 2015 CSFPC
Laboratories                   To operate                      $50
                               To store, use, handle, or
Liquefied Petroleum Gases      dispense LP-Gas of 125 gallons  $50
                               (water capacity) aggregate
                               capacity or greater
Membrane Structures, Tents,    To locate, erect, or place      $50
and Canopies - Permanent
                               To operate an air- supported
                               temporary membrane structure or
                               tent having an area in excess
Membrane Structures, Tents,    of 200 ft2 (18.6m2) or a canopy
and Canopies - Temporary       in excess of 400 ft2 (37.2m2)   $30
                               Exception:
                               Temporary membrane structure,
                               tents, or canopy structures
                               used exclusively for camping
                               To store, transport on site,
                               use or handle materials in
Organic Peroxide Formulations  excess of amounts listed in     $50
                               Tables 1.12.8(c) and (d) of the
                               2015 CSFPC
                               To store, transport on site,
                               use, or handle materials in
Oxidizers                      excess of amounts listed in     $50
                               Tables 1.12.8(c) and (d) of the
                               2015 CSFPC
                               To use a parade float for
Parade Floats                  public performance,             No fee
                               presentation, spectacle,
                               entertainment or parade
                               To manufacture, store, or sell
                               pyrotechnic articles including
Pyrotechnic Articles/Sparklers sparklers and fountains.        $200
                               Applicant will need to submit
                               inventory list and site plans
                               for review
Pyrotechnics Before a          To display and use pyrotechnic
Proximate Audience             materials before a proximate    $100
                               audience
Pyroxylin Plastics             To store, handle, assemble, or  $50
                               manufacture pyroxylin plastics
Special Outdoor Events,        To locate and operate special
Carnivals, and Fairs           outdoor events, carnivals and   $50
                               fairs
                               To operate any spray room,
                               spray booth, or preparation
Spraying or Dipping of         work station, or to conduct a
Flammable Finish               spraying or dipping operation   $50
                               utilizing flammable or
                               combustible liquids or powder
                               coatings
Special Outdoor Events         To locate and operate special   $50
                               outdoor events
                               To place a tar kettle,
Tar Kettles                    placement shall be obtained     $50
                               prior to the placement of a tar
                               kettle
                               To use an open area or portion
Tire Storage                   thereof to store tires in       $50
                               excess of 500 tires
Torch- Applied Roofing         To use a torch to apply roofing $50
Operation                      materials
                               Processes identified in the
Other                          Connecticut State Fire          $50
                               Prevention Code, but not listed
                               in this table
 
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.32 OCCUPANCY OPERATING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE.
Ambulatory Health Care    To operate an ambulatory   $50
                          health care occupancy
                                                     Up to 11 dwelling units:
Apartment Buildings and   To operate an apartment    $40
Dormitories               building or dormitory      12 or more dwelling units:
                                                     $80
Assembly Occupancies :    To operate an assembly     $50
Liquor Licenses           occupancy with liquor      1 day liquor license: $30
                          license
Assembly Occupancies :    To operate a place of
Including Special         assembly                   $50
Amusement Buildings
Automotive Fuel Servicing To provide automotive fuel $50
                          servicing
Business Occupancies      To operate a business      $50
                          occupancy
Day-Care Occupancies      To operate a day-care      $50
                          occupancy
                          To engage in business of
Drycleaning Plants        dry-cleaning or to change  $50
                          to a more hazardous
                          cleaning solvent
Educational Occupancy     To operate an educational  $50
                          occupancy
Health Care Facility      To operate a health care   $160
                          occupancy
                          To operate a hotel, motel  Up to 11 dwelling units:
Hotels and Bed and        or bed and breakfast       $40
Breakfast Establishments  establishment              12 or more dwelling units:
                                                     $80
Industrial Occupancies    To operate an industrial   $50
                          occupancy
Mercantile Occupancies    To operate a mercantile    $50
                          occupancy
Repair Garages and        To operate service
Service Stations          stations and repair        $50
                          garages
Residential Board and     To operate a residential   $50
Care Occupancies          board and care occupancy
Storage Occupancies       To operate a storage       $50
                          occupancy
Any other occupancy
requiring Fire Marshal                               $30
Certificate
 
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.33 PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The fee for building plan review, fire protection system plan review
and fire alarm system plan review and inspections for new construction,
renovations, additions or modernization of buildings or structures shall be
based on the estimated cost of the construction or alteration.
   (B)   Estimated cost of the construction or alteration:
      (1)   $0.00 up to and including $10,000: $55.00 fee.
      (2)   In excess of $ 10,000: $55.00 fee plus $5.00 fee per $1,000 or
fraction thereof.
      (3)   Any building plans for structures 10,000 square feet or greater may
be required to have an independent plan review, to be determined at the sole
discretion of the Office of the Fire Marshal. The independent plan review shall
be conducted by a plan reviewer hired by the applicant and subject to the
approval of the Office of the Fire Marshal. The applicant shall pay all costs
associated with the contracted plan reviewer's independent review. The
applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along with
documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in full, prior to the
Office of the Fire Marshal's review and approval of such plan.
   (C)   Exception. Plan reviews are not required for private dwellings
occupied by one or two families as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 29-292(a)
(l), as may be amended.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16; Am. Ord. 697, passed 2-26-18)
§ 93.34 EXEMPTIONS FROM FEES; EXCEPTION.
   Departments and agents of the Town of Hamden Board of Education shall be
required to obtain all permits, inspections and plan review required pursuant
to §§
93.31,
93.32, and
93.33 but all fees associated therewith shall be waived.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.35 PENALTY FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   Penalties for non-payment. Failure to pay fees as prescribed by this
subchapter may result in a penalty of legal action or closure. Interest on
delinquent bills will be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent per
month from the due date (18% per annum). Minimum interest charged is $2.00 per
bill. Any fees owed will negate the issuance of any further permits until the
fees are paid in full. Emergency work will be considered if it poses a threat
to life safety. The Fire Marshal may choose to write infractions for operating
without a town permit in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.36 FEES FOR REINSPECTION.
   The fees for an issued permit include the initial inspection and one re-
inspection. All subsequent re-inspections shall be assessed an additional $50
fee. Payment for all such re-inspections shall be made payable to the
“Treasurer”, Town of Hamden, in advance of such re-inspection.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
§ 93.99 Penalty.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
93.01,
93.02 or
93.06 shall be fined $100 for each day’s violation.('66 Code, § 25-6)
('66 Code, § 25-6)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
93.11 to
93.13, inclusive shall be fined $100 for each violation. ('66 Code, § 43-6)
('66 Code, § 43-6)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
93.22,
93.23 or
93.25   shall be fined $100. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
('66 Code, § 60-6)
   (D)   Any person who commences any work which is subject to the permit
requirements of §§
93.31,
93.32 and/or
93.33 without first obtaining a permit shall be required to pay a penalty equal
to the amount of the permit fee otherwise applicable. Said penalty shall be
payable in addition to the required permit fee. No such penalty shall be
imposed upon a person who commences emergency repair work without a permit
provided that a permit is sought promptly thereafter.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)
CHAPTER 94: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
Bringing into Town
   
94.01   Permit required
   
94.02   Violation prohibited
Transportation and Keeping
   
94.05   Nuisance prohibited
   
94.06   Hours for collection
Littering
   
94.10   Word usage and definitions
   
94.11   Littering prohibited
   
94.12   Commercial and retail properties
   
94.13   Responsibilities of owners of private property
   
94.14   Distribution and posting of notices; handbills
   
94.15   Placing of handbills on vehicles
   
94.16   Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted
   
94.17   Enforcement
   
94.18   Notice of violations
   
94.19   Citations; penalties
   
94.20   Appeal; hearing procedure for citations
   
94.21   Removal by town
   
94.22   Violations and penalties
Hamden Municipal Landfill
   
94.25   Purpose
   
94.26   Definitions
   
94.27   Regulations
   
94.28   Fees
   
94.29   Violations
   
94.30   Responsibility for landfill supervision
Solid Waste Disposal
   
94.35   Declaration of policy
   
94.36   Definitions
   
94.37   Storage of refuse
   
94.38   Collection and transportation of refuse
   
94.39   Disposal of refuse
   
94.40   Use of solid waste disposal area and transfer station
   
94.41   Use of system
   
94.42   Recycling
   
94.43   Issuance of permits
   
94.44   Violations; notice
   
94.45   Suspension and revocation of permits; appeal
   
94.46   Statutory authorization
   
94.47   Charter authority
 
   
94.99   Penalty
BRINGING INTO TOWN
§ 94.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall bring any garbage or rubbish into the town from any other
town without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Legislative Council.
('66 Code, § 30-1) Penalty, see §
94.99 (A)
§ 94.02 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall knowingly or willfully violate any
provision of §
94.01, and in doing so shall forfeit such permit.
('66 Code, § 30-2) Penalty, see §
94.99 (A)
TRANSPORTATION AND KEEPING
§ 94.05 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No refuse, filth, garbage, offal, manure or other offensive or noxious
substance shall be transported, kept or used within the town in such manner as
to cause injury to other persons, or which constitutes a public or private
health nuisance. The Director of Health is empowered to make reasonable
regulations for the transportation, use or keeping of the substances.
('66 Code, § 30-3) Penalty, see §
94.99 (B)
§ 94.06 HOURS FOR COLLECTION.
   Collection of refuse, solid waste or recyclable materials shall be conducted
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 569, passed 1-5-09) Penalty, see §
94.99(B)
LITTERING
§ 94.10 WORD USAGE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense includes the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
      "AIRCRAFT." Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented used or
designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "AIRCRAFT" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
      "AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE." A litter storage and collection
receptacle.
      "COMMERCIAL HANDBILL." Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet and any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature
which:
         (a)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
         (b)   Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest of thereof by sales;
         (c)   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the sole purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this
division shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when any of the same
is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided that nothing contained in
this division shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without
a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or
under any ordinance of this town; or
         (d)   While containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominately and essentially an advertise-ment and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
      "DUMP." To discard (a) more than one cubic foot in volume of litter at
one time, or (b) furniture, garbage bags or contents thereof or other similar
materials. Material which has been placed at a location with an intent to leave
it indefinitely at such location, or material which has not been removed from a
location within 45 days, is deemed discarded.
(C.G.S. § 22a-248(12))
      "GARBAGE." Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      "LITTER." Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste material,
whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or
synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including but not limited to
any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or
can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material,
or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn
or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers
or other packaging or construction material which has not been deposited in a
litter receptacle.
(C.G.S. § 22a-248(4))
      "LITTER RECEPTACLE." A receptacle suitable for the depositing of litter.
(C.G.S. § 22a-248(6))
      "NEWSPAPER." Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by law and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and sold to the
public.
      "NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL." Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, or other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid
definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
      "PARK." A park, reservation, play-ground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the town owned or used by the town and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
      "PERSON." Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
(C.G.S. § 22a-2)
      "PRIVATE PREMISES." Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
      "PUBLIC PLACE." Any area that is used or held out for use by the public,
whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
(C.G.S. § 22a-248(9))
      "REFUSE." All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles
and industrial wastes.
      "RUBBISH." Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, household items, tires,
appliance, crockery, plastic grocery shopping bags, paper, plastic and aluminum
wrapping and similar items.
      "TOWN." Town of Hamden.
      "VEHICLE." Includes every device capable of being moved upon a public
highway and in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human or
animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(C.G.S. § 22a-248(17))
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.11 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-250, no person shall throw,
scatter, spill or place or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or
placed, or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any public property in the
state or upon private property in this state not owned by him or in the waters
of this state, including but not limited to any public highway, public park,
beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, mobile manufactured home
park, highway, road, street or alley except:
      (1)   When such property is designated by the state or town thereof for
the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized to use such
property for such purpose;
      (2)   Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
said private or public property or waters.
   (B)   When any such material or substances are thrown, blown, scattered or
spilled from a vehicle, the operator thereof shall be deemed prima facie to
have committed such offense.
(C.G.S. § 22a-250(b))
   (C)   Penalties for any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall be in accordance with §
94.22.
(C.G.S. § 22a-226d(a))
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.12 COMMERCIAL AND RETAIL PROPERTIES.
   In order to aid in the disposition of litter in the town, all owners of
commercial or retail property open to the public shall be required to comply
with local planning and zoning regulations regarding the manner of, number of,
and placement of trash receptacles as set forth in said planning and zoning
regulations as determined by the type of operation and its accompanying zoning
requirements.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.13 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; provided however, that this section
shall not prohibit storage of litter in authorized private receptacle for
collection.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as permitting the
establishment of litter on vacant lots, or the maintenance of private dumping
areas.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.14 DISTRIBUTION AND POSTING OF NOTICES; HANDBILLS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall affix to a telegraph, telephone,
electric light or power pole, or to a tree, shrub, rock or other natural object
in any public way or grounds, a playbill, picture, notice, advertisement or
other similar thing.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(a))
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or throw any
advertisement within the limits of any public way or grounds, or upon private
premises or property, unless same is left at the door of the residence or place
of business of the occupant of such premises or property, or deposit or throw
any refuse paper, camp or picnic refuse, junk or other material within the
limits of any public way or grounds, except at a place designated for that
purpose by the authority having supervision and control of such public way or
grounds, or upon private premises or property without permission of the owner
thereof, or affix to or maintain upon any tree, rock or other natural object
within the limits of a public way or grounds any paper or advertisement other
than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of state statutes, or
affix to or maintain upon the property of another without his/her consent any
word, letter, character or device intended to advertise the sale of any
article.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(c))
   (C)   The affixing of any playbill, picture, notice, advertisement or other
similar thing concerning the business or affairs of any person, firm or
corporation to a pole, shrub, tree, rock or other natural object, within the
limits of any public way or grounds in violation of the provisions of this
section by an agent or employee of such person, firm or corporation, shall be
deemed to be the act of such person, firm or corporation, and such person or
any member or officer of such corporation, as the case may be, shall be subject
to the penalty herein provided, unless such act is shown to have been done
without his knowledge or consent.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(d))
   (D)   The affixing of each individual playbill, picture, notice,
advertisement or other similar thing to a pole, shrub, tree, rock or other
natural object, or the throwing of each individual advertisement or lot of
refuse paper or other material within the limits of any public way or grounds
or on private premises, shall constitute a separate violation of the provisions
of this section.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(e).
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.15 PLACING OF HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   Other than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of local, state
or federal law, no person shall leave or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle whereby it is indicated in a
conspicuous manner that the owner or occupant of said vehicle does not want to
have any handbills left on such vehicle.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.16 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS PROHIBITED WHERE POSTED.
   Other than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of local, state
or federal law, no person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if there is placed on said
premises in a conspicuous position near or at the entrance thereof a sign
bearing the words "NO TRESPASSING," "NO PEDDLERS OR AGENTS," "NO
ADVERTISEMENTS," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of said premises do not desire to have the right to privacy disturbed
or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
94.22
§ 94.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated under
this subchapter. The enforcement officer may order any person who violates this
subchapter to abate such violation, and shall be hereby authorized and
empowered to issue citations for violations of this subchapter in accordance
with section §
94.19.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of this subchapter and annually thereafter,
the Legislative Council shall appoint and may remove a Litter Enforcement
Officer (Enforcement Officer) who shall be a resident of the town during his/
her term, and who shall carry out the provisions of this subchapter and have
such other duties as the Mayor may provide. The Legislative Council shall set
the method and amount of the compensation. The Enforcement Officer shall be
under the daily supervision of the Town Planner and/or other official
designated by the Mayor. The Enforcement Officer shall report to the Town
Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor for assignment, and shall
make weekly reports to the Town Planner on the status of all investigations and
complaints.
   (C)   Complaint forms shall be made available in the office of the
Legislative Council, Town Clerk's office, Town Planner's office and on the
town's website for those citizens who wish to make reports of littering. These
forms are to be returned to the office of the Legislative Council. The Litter
Enforcement Officer shall investigate these complaints. The Enforcement Officer
shall perform routine inspections of all areas of the town on a rotating basis
and issue appropriate citations as necessary.
   (D)   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor shall
submit a written report to the Legislative Council, not later than 12:00 noon
of the day on which the regular Council meeting is held, containing not less
than: address of, and date of each investigation or inspection initiated by the
Enforcement Officer; address of each alleged violation concerning which
information or complaint has been received by the Enforcement Officer; date of
such receipt; date of correction notice issued; date(s) of each re-inspection
and disposition of each case closed.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.18 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   The town shall serve a written notice to an owner, agent, tenant and/or
person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly referred to as
the "Owner"), of a violation(s) of this subchapter to the owner's last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall direct
the removal, correction or abatement of the violation within ten calendar days
after receipt of written notice and notify the owner that failure to remove or
correct the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance
with §
94.19; the fines and penalties imposed; and that if the owner fails to remove
or correct the violation, the town may cause the abatement of the violation at
the expense of the owner of the premises on which such violation exists.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.19 CITATIONS/PENALTIES.
   The town shall serve a written citation notifying the owner of a violation
of this subchapter to the owner's last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Such citation shall inform the owner of the allegations
against him/her and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; that
he/she may contest his/her liability before a citation hearing officer by
delivering in person or by mail written notice to the Town Planner or the
Legislative Council Office within ten calendar days of the date of the citation
(s); that if he/she does not demand such a hearing he/she shall be deemed to
have admitted liability; that an assessment and judgment shall be entered
against him/her; and that such judgment may issue without further notice.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.20 APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other
than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct
the hearings authorized by this section.
   (B)   If the person who is sent a citation pursuant to §
94.19 wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or
fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the town.
Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to
establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any
person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten
days of the date of the first notice provided for in §
94.19 shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated town
official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for herein, and shall follow the procedures set forth in
division (D) of this section.
   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided
the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
an interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing town official or
Police Officer shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall be deemed to
be a business record within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and
evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official
or Police Officer shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests.
A person wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and
may present evidence in his/her behalf. A designated municipal official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality.
If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by
default against him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the
applicable provisions(s) of this subchapter. The hearing officer may accept
from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports,
and other official documents by mail, and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she deems
fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of
the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall
dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If
he/she determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such
person as provided by this subchapter.
   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send, by first class mail, a notice of the assessment to the
person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12
months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with
the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main
Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter
judgment, in the amount if such record of assessment and appropriate court
costs against such person favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so
entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a
levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such
person.
   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing
a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-
259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court, Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the judges of the Superior Court.
(C.G.S. § 7-152c)
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.21 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant property within the town,
or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such
owner's property which is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his/her
last known address.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within ten days after receipt of written
notice provided for in §
94.18 and division (A) of this section, or within ten days after the date of
such notice in the event same is returned to the town because of inability to
make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the town may cause the abatement of the
litter at the expense of the owner(s) of the premises where such litter exists.
   (C)   Conference granted to owner/agent. Any owner or agent notified under
division (A) of this section shall be granted a conference with the President
of the Legislative Council or other official designated by the President of the
Legislative Council upon his/her request. Such conference shall be granted as
soon as practicable, but the conference shall in no way stay the abatement
order.
   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such work, the
enforcement agent shall determine the actual cost thereof and bill the owner or
agent therefor. Upon the failure of the owner or agent to remit to the town the
amount of such charge within 30 days from the date of such notice, the
enforcement agent, within 90 days from the date of such notice, shall cause to
be recorded in the land records of the town a sworn statement showing the cost
and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location
of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn
statement shall constitute a lien on the property. Any appeal from any final
action taken following this section may be taken in accordance with §
94.20.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
§ 94.22 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating:
      (1)   Section
94.11(A)(1) shall be fined as follows:
         First Offense: $50
         Second Offense: $100
         Third Offense: $250
         More Than Three Offenses: $500
      (2)   Section
94.11(A)(2) shall be fined $50.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
94.14(A) shall be fined $50.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(a))
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
94.14(B) shall be fined $50.
(C.G.S. § 23-65(c).
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any other section of this
subchapter for which a penalty is not provided for in divisions (A) through (C)
of this section, shall be fined $50 per violation.
(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
HAMDEN MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
§ 94.25 PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this subchapter is to insure the safe and orderly
use of the Hamden Municipal Landfill; to prevent the premature exhaustion of
this important municipal resource; and to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the town.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
§ 94.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR." Any person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation that collects, transports, or dumps garbage for the payment of a
fee.
   "DUMPING." The depositing, discharging, placing, or disposing of garbage by
any person.
   "GARBAGE" or "WASTE MATERIAL." Trash, rubbish, refuse, or any unwanted or
discarded materials. It shall not include hazardous waste nor other prohibited
substances.
   "HAZARDOUS WASTE." Material that is defined and governed by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.), and Conn.
Gen. Stat. 22a-114 et seq.
   "LICENSED COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR." Including only such commercial collector as
is the holder of a valid license issued by the Director of Public Works or his
agent pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
   "MUNICIPAL LANDFILL." The area that has been designated by the town and is
presently in operation.
   "PERSON." Including, but not limited to, individuals, societies,
associations, municipal corporations, or its agents and employees, firms,
partnerships, associations, and corporations.
   "PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE." Material so designated by regulations drafted
pursuant to §
94.27 and for that reason prohibited from disposal at the municipal landfill.
   "RESIDENT." An individual who resides or owns real property in the town or
any person having a place of business within the town.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
§ 94.27 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall deposit or otherwise dump any garbage at the municipal
landfill or other town-operated disposal site unless such garbage is waste
material generated within the town and unless such person is licensed to do so
by the Director of Public Works or his designated agent.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works or his agents or employees may require
any person, including but not limited to a licensed commercial collector,
seeking to dump waste material at the municipal landfill, to certify in
writing, under penalty of false statement as provided for in the state
statutes, that the waste material to be dumped was not generated or collected
outside the town. Any licensed commercial collector refusing to provide such
certification shall not be permitted to dispose of such material in the
landfill and shall remove his vehicle from the landfill site immediately.
   (C)   No garbage may be deposited or dumped at any site that is not
designated for that purpose by the Director of Public Works, or licensed for
that purpose by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Dumping shall be permitted only at times and on days designated by the
town in accordance with this subchapter.
   (E)   The Director or Public Works or his agents or employees may refuse to
accept at the landfill any highly dangerous materials such as, but not limited
to, materials exposed to highly infectious or contagious disease or toxic,
inflammable, explosive, or radioactive refuse or hazardous waste, or any
materials that do not conform with the requirements set forth in regulations
promulgated pursuant to division (F) below.
   (F)   The Director of Public Works or his agents or employees shall issue
annual landfill licenses and shall promulgate licensing and other regulations,
which may require bonding contracts for each licensed vehicle and fines up to
$100 per incident or such higher amount as may be permitted by law that is
deemed necessary to enforce this section and insure sanitary landfill and
garbage disposal practices.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
§ 94.28 FEES.
   (A)   Any person who deposits or dumps any waste material at a town landfill
or dump site shall pay a dumping fee. The method of determining said fee shall
be established by the Director of Public Works. Residents who are dumping from
a passenger car, including a station wagon or a pick-up truck, shall be
excluded from this provision.
   (B)   Such fee shall be established, amended or changed, when required by
action of the Legislative Council upon request by the Mayor.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
§ 94.29 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter shall pay a
fine for each offense. Each separate truckload of material deposited or
otherwise dumped at the municipal landfill or dump site or at a site other than
one designated for such purposes by the town shall be deemed a separate
offense, and such person may be charged with the actual expense of removal and
disposition of such substance outside the town in addition to any other fines,
fees, or penalties required herein.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works may suspend or revoke the landfill and
dumping license described in this section, refuse to renew such license, or
prohibit any person from dumping for a period of up to one year in cases where
he has determined that person has violated any provision of this subchapter.
   (C)   A license granted pursuant to this subchapter of the Town Code shall
not be suspended or revoked except after a hearing, upon due notice, where the
licensee shall have an opportunity to be present, represented by counsel,
examine any evidence presented, be present arguments and evidence on all issues
involved.
   (D)   Any partner, joint venturer, employer, principal, agent, employee of a
person that has violated any provision of this section, and any shareholder who
owns more than 10% of any stock in a corporation that has violated any
provision of this subchapter, shall be presumed to be a person who has violated
a provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
§ 94.30 RESPONSIBILITY FOR LANDFILL SUPERVISION.
   The material to be dumped shall at all times be under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works, who shall specify the nature and content of all such
material which may lawfully be dumped, and it shall be his responsibility to
oversee and regulate all dumping operations and shall exercise due care to
protect adjacent waterways from debris emanating from such operation.
(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
§ 94.35 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In order to promote, protect, and preserve the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of the town (hereinafter referred to as the
municipality), it is hereby declared to be in the public interest that the
accumulation, preparation, removal, storage, collection, transportation, and
disposal of solid waste be regulated so as to prohibit the harboring and
spreading of rodents and insects, to prevent the spread of disease, to minimize
the potential for air, surface and groundwater pollution, and to prevent
unsightliness resulting in a reduction of the quality of life.
   (B)   This municipality is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of
refuse generated within its boundaries, to collect a charge therefor and to
license or permit collectors.
   (C)   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, this
municipality has executed the municipal contract dated November 22, 1985, which
provides for a long-term solid waste disposal process which will conserve
landfill space and recover energy from solid waste but will still allow the
municipality to encourage and promote recycling.
   (D)   The municipal contract requires this municipality to cause all
acceptable solid waste generated within its boundaries, except for recycled
materials, to be delivered to the system.
   (E)   The enactment of this ordinance is in furtherance of this
municipality's solid waste plan.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)
§ 94.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings herein defined.
   "ACCEPTABLE SOLID WASTE." Solid waste normally collected from households and
industrial and commercial establishments for disposal at a sanitary landfill
but does not include nonprocessible solid waste that has been properly rejected
by the company at the facility in accordance with Section 4.01 of the municipal
contract, and unacceptable waste.
   "ACTUAL ACCEPTANCE DATE." The date the facility is deemed accepted as
provided for in Subsection 7.05(a) of the facility contract dated December 1,
1986, or the date upon which there has been a facility buy-down under Article 9
or Article 10 thereof, whichever occurs first.
   "ANNUAL OPERATING PLAN." The detailed operating plan for the facility
provided for in Section 5.10 of the municipal contract.
   "ANNUAL SERVICE PLAN." The detailed service plan described in Section 5.10
of the municipal contract.
   "APPROVED CONTAINER." Standard containers, dumpster-type containers, roll-
off containers, and special containers used for the transportation, storage, or
disposal of refuse, consistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
   "ASHES." The cold residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other
combustible materials.
   "BUNDLE." Boxes, cartons, paper, trimmings, and similar matter bound so as
not to exceed four feet in length and six and one-half feet in perimeter and
which shall not weigh over 75 pounds.
   "COLLECTOR." Any person, firm, corporation, or governmental agency or
entity, or the like which engages in the business of collecting and/or removing
refuse within this municipality.
   "COMPANY." Wallingford Resource Recovery Associates, L.P. or its lawful
successor under the service contract dated December 1, 1986, or the facility
contract.
   "CONTAINER." An approved container.
   "CRRA." The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority.
   "DIRECTOR." The Director of Public Works of this municipality or his
authorized representative.
   "DUMPSTER-TYPE CONTAINER." A dumpster-type container which is designed to
allow collection and storage of refuse at a specific site, which is so
constructed that the container can be emptied by the equipment used for
collection into the collection equipment at the storage site, which has a
tight-fitting cover or closure and which is of watertight construction where
intended or used for storage of garbage or liquid wastes.
   "FACILITY." The solid waste disposal and resource recovery facility to be
constructed and operated in the Town of Wallingford, Connecticut by the company
pursuant to the Facility Contract and the service contract and all appurtenant
structures and equipment.
   "FACILITY CONTRACT." The facility contract for design and construction of a
resource recovery facility between CRRA and the company, a copy of which is on
file in the Town Clerk's office.
   "GARBAGE." All putrescible wastes except sewage and body wastes, including
vegetable and animal offal.
   "HEALTH DIRECTOR." The Health Director of this municipality or his
authorized representative, or any person or agency performing the functions of
the Health Director.
   "LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY." The Legislative Council of this municipality.
   "MUNICIPAL CONTRACT." The municipal solid waste delivery and disposal
contract between CRRA and this municipality, a copy of which is on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
   "MUNICIPALITY." The Town of Hamden.
   "NONPROCESSIBLE SOLID WASTE." The following categories of solid waste (other
than unacceptable waste):
      (1)   Street sweepings;
      (2)   Noncombustible construction materials and demolition debris,
including masonry, brick and stone, structural steel, re-bar, and structural
shapes;
      (3)   Oversized bulky waste, that is, items which exceed seven feet by
three feet by five feet in size;
      (4)   Tree stumps, logs, brush, and combustible demolition debris which
exceeds four feet in length and four inches in diameter or four inches in
thickness; and
      (5)   Other items not normally burned in a mass-burn facility, such as
white goods and engine blocks, the processing of which would cause damage to
the facility (except for ordinary wear and tear.
   "PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITY."
      (1)   Any of the Towns of Cheshire, Hamden, North Haven, and Wallingford,
the City of Meriden and any other Connecticut municipality which shall enter
into an agreement with CRRA for disposal of waste by the system, which
agreement is generally the same as the municipal contract; and any other
Connecticut municipality delivering solid waste to the system pursuant to the
terms of the municipal contract.
   "PERMITTEE." A person who is granted a permit by the municipality under the
terms of this subchapter during the time such permit is valid.
   "PERSON." Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other
entity or organization of any kind.
   "PERSON IN CHARGE." The foreman or other person in charge of the solid waste
disposal area.
   "RECYCLABLE MATERIALS." Materials suitable for recycling.
   "RECYCLING." A method of reducing the volume of wastes which results in the
separation, extraction, refinement or utilization of materials, including, but
not limited to, aluminum or other metal cans and products, glass, high-grade
paper, newsprint and cardboard, which may then be marketed or delivered for
reuse in manufacturing or other processes.
   "REFUSE." Garbage, ashes, and rubbish, but not unacceptable waste as herein
defined.
   "RESIDUE." That material remaining after the processing of solid waste at
the facility and includes solid waste accepted but not processed at the
facility.
   "RESIDUE DISPOSAL SITE." The properly licensed and permitted site or sites
specified by CRRA to be used for the processing for disposal or the disposal of
residue, nonprocessible solid waste, and all acceptable solid waste not
accepted at the facility.
   "RESIDUE DISPOSAL SITE OPERATING PLAN." The detailed operating plan for the
residue disposal site provided for in the service contract.
   "ROLL-OFF CONTAINER." A removable container designed to be left at a
location to be filled with refuse, then by means of special equipment, to be
transported to another location where it is emptied for disposal of its
contents.
   "RUBBISH." All nonputrescible waste materials except ashes, including but
not limited to paper, cardboard, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and industrial
wastes. The term rubbish as used herein shall not mean nor shall it include in
its meaning unacceptable waste.
   "SERVICE CONTRACT." The waste disposal services contract between CRRA and
the company for the processing and disposal of acceptable solid waste at the
facility, a copy of which is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
   "SOLID WASTE." Unwanted and discarded solid materials, consistent with the
meaning of that term pursuant to Section 22a-260(7) of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Semi-solid and liquid materials of the type that are customarily
collected and treated in a municipal sewage and/or water treatment system are
not solid waste nor, for the purposes of this subchapter, is unacceptable
waste.
   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA." The sanitary landfill operated by this
municipality or such other area as may be designated by the Director as a solid
waste disposal area for the disposal of refuse, but shall not include the
facility or the residue disposal site.
   "SPECIAL CONTAINER." Any other storage container approved by the Director
which does not violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.
   "STANDARD CONTAINER." A watertight, plastic or metal container with handles
or bails, having a tight-fitting cover, not weighing over 35 pounds when empty,
not weighing over 75 pounds when filled, and not having more than a 32-gallon
capacity.
   "STATE." The State of Connecticut.
   "SYSTEM." The complete resource recovery system, including the facility and
the residue disposal site, for the processing or disposal of acceptable solid
waste and nonprocessible solid waste.
   "UNACCEPTABLE WASTE."
      (1)   Explosives, pathological waste, hazardous chemicals or materials,
radioactive materials, sludges, cesspool or other human waste, human and animal
remains, motor vehicles, liquid wastes, and hazardous substances as defined in
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as it
may be amended from time to time hereafter, and any analogous federal, state,
or local law, ordinance, rule, or regulation as may be applicable at the time
of delivery of waste to the system, other than such insignificant quantities of
the foregoing as are customarily found in normal household, industrial, and
commercial waste and as are permitted by law to be treated and disposed of in
facilities not specifically permitted or licensed to treat or dispose of such
materials, including hazardous substances;
      (2)   Any item of waste, either smoldering or on fire;
      (3)   Wastes in quantities and concentrations which by law require
special handling in their collection or processing; and
      (4)   All other items of waste which, at the time of delivery to the
system, would be likely to pose a threat to health or safety, or would not
normally be disposed of in a sanitary landfill, except that if such waste would
be legally processible at the facility, even though it could not be disposed of
at a sanitary landfill before being so processed, it shall not be unacceptable
waste at the facility, or would be prohibited by any judicial decision, order
or action of any federal, state, or local government or any agency thereof, or
any other regulatory authority, or any applicable law or regulation, from being
processed at the facility.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)
§ 94.37 STORAGE OF REFUSE.
   (A)   No person within the municipality shall store or otherwise have
garbage on his property or on property in his control unless all such garbage
shall be stored on the property in a place not visible from the street and
shall be kept in approved containers which shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be kept closed at all times. Garbage shall not be stored by
any person for more than seven days, exclusive of holidays. If special
circumstances require it, the Health Director may order a shorter time period
for storage of garbage.
   (B)   No person within the municipality shall store or otherwise have
rubbish and ashes on his property or property in his control unless all such
rubbish and ashes are kept in a satisfactory manner. "Satisfactory manner"
means all rubbish and ashes shall be kept in approved containers or bundles.
Rubbish and ashes shall not be stored by any person for more than 30 days. The
Health Director may, for cause shown, extend this period.
   (C)   Unauthorized accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish and other waste
material on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any existing accumulation of the same within seven days after
notification by the Health Director shall be deemed a violation of this
subchapter, which violation shall be deemed to have caused irreparable harm to
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (D)   No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the
municipality any refuse, garbage, rubbish, or other waste material in such a
manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements or other means to
any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, stream,
body of water, or to any other place in the municipality.
   (E)   No person shall combine or place refuse and unacceptable waste in the
same container. No person shall place unacceptable waste into any container
used for refuse, nor shall any person place refuse into any container that is
or has been used for unacceptable waste.
   (F)   Doors shall be removed from the hinges of all iceboxes, refrigerators,
freezers, stoves, other major metal appliances or other large containers with
doors affixed prior to disposal and prior to storage in any accessible place
for collection or disposal.
   (G)   Approved containers may be placed at curbside no more than 24 hours
prior to collection and any empty containers shall be removed from the curbside
or street no more than 24 hours after collection.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.38 COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE.
   (A)   No person other than this municipality shall engage in the business of
collection, storage, or removal of refuse in this municipality unless such
person shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the Director of Public
Works.
   (B)   Collectors shall keep their premises neat and orderly and shall keep
all vehicles, containers, and equipment in good and sanitary condition, and
said vehicles, containers, and equipment shall be constructed, equipped,
maintained, and operated so as to permit no loss of refuse, including liquid
waste therefrom when said vehicles are being used; provided, however, that any
vehicle to be used for the sole purpose of transporting rubbish, as defined in
this subchapter, shall not be required to be constructed or operated to prevent
the escape of liquid wastes. All vehicles and containers shall have canvas or
other suitable covers approved by the Health Director.
   (C)   The transportation of refuse by any person, whether or not a
collector, shall be subject to the provisions of division (B) above.
   (D)   No person shall transport unacceptable waste to the solid waste
disposal area.
   (E)   Pursuant to the provisions of the municipal contract, the Mayor may
designate routes for the transportation of refuse or residue to the system by
persons from participating municipalities. Persons transporting refuse or
residue shall use only such designated routes.
   (F)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor, the Legislative Council shall
take such measures as it deems effectual for the removal or collection of
garbage, rubbish, and other waste materials from the municipality and may, in
such years when a determination and sufficient appropriation for the same has
been made for such purpose, employ or make contracts with one or more persons
or corporations for the removal or collection of garbage, rubbish, or other
waste material under the direction of the Director. Before such employment or
contract begins, the Legislative Council shall, by resolution upon
recommendation by the Mayor, adopt regulations concerning collection which
shall state the area from which refuse shall be collected, the method and
frequency of collection, bonding requirements, and all other regulations
required for the health, welfare, and safety of municipal residents.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see
94.99
§ 94.39 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   Any person residing or having a place of business in the municipality
shall be responsible for the removal of his refuse to a lawful place for
disposal either by himself or by a lawful collector. Refuse shall be disposed
of at regular and frequent intervals, but in no event less frequently than
prescribed in §
94.37.
   (B)   No refuse collected, generated or disposed of in this municipality
shall be deposited for disposal except at such sites and under such conditions
as may be approved by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see
94.99
§ 94.40 USE OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA AND TRANSFER STATION.
   (A)   The solid waste disposal area shall be open such hours as may be
designated by the Director of Public Works, subject to approval by resolution
of the Legislative Council and no dumping shall be permitted except at such
designated times.
   (B)   Any person intending to unload at the solid waste disposal area shall
follow the instructions of the person in charge.
   (C)   No appliances, white goods, recyclable salvage material, tires,
construction or demolition material, debris from a structure fire, trees,
stumps, limbs or trunks of trees shall be dumped at the solid waste disposal
area until the person in charge is notified of such items. The person in charge
will direct the person transporting such material where the material can be
dumped. The approved site for such material may be other than the solid waste
disposal area.
   (D)   No person shall bring flammable powders or other combustible materials
or substances which have a low flash point to the solid waste disposal area.
   (E)   Without prior written permission from the Director of Public Works, no
person shall dispose of storage barrels, drums, or other similar containers at
the solid waste disposal area, unless such containers are completely emptied
and crushed flat prior to disposal. The Director of Public Works may, upon ten
days notice published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality require written permission from the Director of Public Works
before any disposal of any containers.
   (F)   The following materials shall be considered to be unacceptable for
disposal at the solid waste disposal area: unacceptable waste; rock ledge,
stones, rocks and boulders, or fragments thereof whose largest dimension is in
excess of ten inches; and materials which have not been prepared for
collection, collected, or transported in accordance with this subchapter.
   (G)   No person shall bring to or discharge at the solid waste disposal area
any material of any nature which has picked up by such person outside the
limits of the municipality. The Director of Public Works shall have the right
to inspect the contents of any vehicle or container brought to the solid waste
disposal area. Each piece of refuse brought into the solid waste disposal area
in violation of this subchapter constitutes a separate violation of this
subchapter.
   (H)   There shall be no scavenging at the solid waste disposal area.
   (I)   The Legislative Council may, upon recommendation of the Mayor,
establish by resolution a fee schedule which requires payment by weight or
volume for various categories of refuse deposited at the solid waste disposal
area.
   (J)   The use of the municipal solid waste disposal area shall be at a
person's or his agent's risk and shall be subject to the following conditions:
in consideration of the grants and privileges to use the municipal waste
disposal area, the person or his agent shall, as a condition precedent, release
the municipality from any right of action, claim, or demand which may otherwise
accrue to him by reason of the loss of any of his property while in, upon, or
about the premises at any municipal solid waste disposal area and further
agrees for such consideration to indemnify the municipality and save it
harmless from all claims, demands, actions, costs, and charges to which the
municipality may be subject or which it may have to pay by reason of injury to
any person or property or loss of life or property suffered or sustained by any
person or agent while in, upon, or about the premises of the municipal solid
waste disposal area.
   (K)   Materials governed by the State Public Health Code and designated by
the Health Director as contaminated and condemned shall be destroyed under the
supervision of the Health Director. The Health Director may promulgate
regulations concerning the nature of such materials and their method of
disposal.
   (L)   Any person delivering refuse to the solid waste disposal area may be
required to show identification in such form as is approved by the Director of
Public Works and which may include a sticker or other identification to be
displayed on each vehicle.
   (M)   The provisions of this section shall remain in force only until CRRA
accepts town solid waste on a regular basis and the town's solid waste disposal
area is closed. The Director of Public Works shall notify all licensed
collectors and publish notice of the effective date of this section.
   (N)   If this municipality establishes a transfer station for use after the
actual acceptance date, the provisions of this section shall apply to the use
of the transfer station except that no collector or person doing business in
this municipality shall deliver to the transfer station refuse from commercial
collection or from said business.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see
94.99
§ 94.41 USE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   Any person using the system shall comply with any rules established by
the company for use of the facility, rules established by CRRA for use of the
residue disposal site, the municipal contract, the collector contract, the
annual operating plan, the annual residue disposal site operating plan, the
annual service plan and any regulations promulgated by the municipality
pursuant to division (B) below.
   (B)   If, in his opinion, it is necessary or desirable to do so for the sake
of clarity or to protect the interests of the municipality, the Director of
Public Works may prepare municipal regulations governing the use of the system
with the approval of the Mayor and the Municipal Attorney. Such regulations
shall be effective when they are approved; when a copy of such regulations has
been delivered by certified mail to each of the persons possessing a permit
hereunder; and when a copy of such regulations has been placed on file with the
Town Clerk.
   (C)   Any person using the system shall report refuse collected or generated
within the limits of this municipality as being from this municipality to the
system operators and shall report any refuse collected or generated outside the
limits of this municipality as being from the city or town in which it was
collected.
   (D)   Any person shall deliver to the facility all acceptable solid waste
generated within municipal boundaries, except presegregated recyclable
materials, to the extent requested by the Director of Public Works in
accordance with a plan developed by CRRA and the company for use in start-up
and acceptance testing of the facility by the company. The Director of Public
Works will notify such person at least 15 days prior to start-up and acceptance
testing of the expected need for such waste. The Director of Public Works shall
give such person at least one day of prior notice of the specific amount of,
and the time schedule for, the delivery of acceptable solid waste to the
facility during this period.
   (E)   Commencing on the actual acceptance date, all persons shall deliver or
cause to be delivered to the system pursuant to the terms of the municipal
contract all of the acceptable solid waste generated within the boundaries of
this municipality except pre-segregated recyclable materials.
   (F)   No person shall deliver any waste material to the system which was
collected, generated or removed from a location outside the limits of the
participating municipalities, nor shall any person deliver unacceptable waste
to the system unless such delivery is permitted pursuant to Section 9.16 of the
municipal contract.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.42 RECYCLING.
   (A)   Purpose. There is hereby established a program for the mandatory
separation of recyclables from solid waste within the Town of Hamden to comply
with the Connecticut General Statutes.
   (B)   Definitions. All definitions, except those set forth below, shall be
the same as those contained in the Solid Waste Ordinance. As used in this
section, the words and terms listed in this section shall have the following
meanings.
      “AGENT.” The person appointed by the Mayor as the municipal agent
pursuant this section.
      “CARDBOARD.” Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials, boxboard (food and beverage boxes) which have a minimum of
contamination by food or other material.
      “COLLECTOR.” Any person, firm, corporation or the like which engages in
the business of collecting and/or removing solid waste within this
municipality.
      “GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.” A glass bottle or jar of any size
or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or
animal consumption.
      “GRASS CLIPPINGS.” Banned from disposal (should be left on the lawn, or
if necessary, composted).
      “LEAVES.” The foliage of trees.
      “MATERIAL DESIGNATED FOR RECYCLING OR RECYCLABLE ITEM.” Any item required
by division (C)(1) of this section to be separated from solid waste and
recycled.
      “METAL FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.” An aluminum, bi-metal, steel, tin-
plated steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to
package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption.
      “NEWSPAPER.” Used or discarded newsprint and advertising inserts which
have a minimum of contamination by food or other material.
      “OFFICE PAPER.” Used or discarded high-grade paper, white paper and
manila paper including, but not limited to, paper utilized for file folders,
tab cards, index cards, post-it notes, writing, typing, printing, computer
printing, and photo-copying, construction paper, colored paper/envelopes, junk
mail and all other mail including envelopes (windows OK), magazines, catalogs
which are suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination.
Included also are soft cover books and hard cover books if the cover and binder
are removed.
      “PERSON.” Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other
entity or organization of any kind.
      “PLASTIC CONTAINERS #1-7.” Any empty and rinsed plastic containers and
their lids (not styrofoam, not plastic bags) less than five gallons that have a
numbered triangle on the bottom of the container including but not limited to
food and beverage containers, shampoo bottles, medicine bottles, laundry
detergent containers, cups, and the like.
      “RECYCLER.” Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or
other entity or organization of any kind engaged in the business of recycling.
      “RESIDENTIAL.” Any dwelling unit contained in a building containing six
or fewer such units, provided such building has no units not designated for use
as a dwelling. Any dwelling unit contained in a common interest community of
more than six units shall not be considered residential.
      “SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE.” The Solid Waste Ordinance of this municipality.
      “STORAGE BATTERY.” Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles,
tractors, and like applications.
      “WASTE OIL.” Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   Each person in this municipality shall separate from his or her
solid waste and shall cause to be recycled the following items: glass food and
beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers, office
paper, juice and milk cartons, plastic containers #1-7, aluminum foil and
trays, cardboard, grass clippings, leaves, storage batteries, scrap metal,
waste oil, and electronics. Placing any of the above items in a container with
solid waste is prohibited unless such item, because of contamination or some
other inherent quality cannot be recycled.
      (2)   Persons living in residential units shall place glass food and
beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers, office
paper, juice and milk cartons, plastic containers #1-7, aluminum foil and
trays, cardboard, grass clippings and leaves for collection at such times and
in such manner as shall be ordered by the Director of Public Works. Storage
batteries, scrap metal, waste oil, grass clippings and electronics shall be
taken to such location or locations as may be designated by the Director of
Public Works.
      (3)   Each person occupying a residential unit shall place the materials
described above, at such location, at such time in such manner as shall be
designated by the Director of Public Works. Containers shall be emptied and
cleaned prior to being placed out for collection. No non-recyclable solid waste
shall be mixed with any recyclable items placed out for collection.
      (4)   Each person who does not dispose of solid waste through a collector
shall separate materials designated for recycling and deliver or cause all such
materials to be delivered to a recycler. Any person transporting recyclable
items not picked up by the town collected from a residence, however, shall
bring such materials to the town's designated recycling drop-off locations.
      (5)   No person shall take any material which has been separated for
recycling from any public or private property in this municipality unless
specifically authorized to do so under the terms of these regulations.
      (6)   The Mayor shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection with the name of a person to receive information and respond to
questions regarding recycling and shall designate a municipal agent to enforce
these regulations.
      (7)   Any collector who has reason to believe that a person from whom he
or she collects solid waste has discarded recyclable items with other solid
waste in violation of these regulations shall promptly notify the agent of the
alleged violation. If so requested by the agent, a collector shall provide a
notice, warning or other information as specified by the agent to any person
suspected by the collector or by the municipality of violating separation
requirements. A collector shall also assist the municipality in identifying any
person responsible for creating loads containing significant quantities of
recyclable items mixed with other solid waste.
      (8)   The owner of any residential property containing seven or more
dwelling units shall make provisions for the residents of such dwelling units
to properly separate materials.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The Litter Enforcement Agent and/or the Mayor's designee shall be
responsible for enforcement of the provision of this section. All notices and
fines required or permitted by this section shall be issued by the Litter
Enforcement Agent and/or the Mayor's designee. Fines shall be paid to
"Treasurer, Town of Hamden."
      (2)   Penalty: failure to abide by the provision of this section shall be
considered a violation and punishable as follows:
         (a)   First offense per calendar year- written warning.
         (b)   Second offense (if within the same 12 month period as the first
offense)- $50 fine.
         (c)   Three (or more) offenses (if within the same 12 month period as
the second offense) - $100.
      (3)   Appeal: whenever a fine is imposed under this section, an appeal
may be filed within ten days of the issuance of the citation by filing a
written notice of an appeal to the town's Hearing Officer. The filing of an
appeal shall stay any fine imposed until such time as a decision is rendered on
the appeal. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation and
hearing as permitted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c.
(Ord. 612, passed 8-1-11)
Cross-reference:
   Uniforms packaging regulations, see
Chapter 122
§ 94.43 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   In order to qualify for a permit, an applicant must present documents and
information to the Director of Public Works to assure the municipality that the
applicant possesses the financial and other qualifications and has available
the necessary equipment to adequately perform the service of collection,
transportation, storage, and removal of refuse. Such documents and information
shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Certificates of insurance showing coverage satisfactory to the
Director of Public Works;
      (2)   A certificate declaring under penalty of false statement as
provided in the Connecticut General Statutes that no person, partner, joint
venturer, employer, principal, agent, or shareholder associated with the
applicant has violated this subchapter or the collector contract within the
past 12 months or is under a period of permit suspension or revocation at the
time of application, or a statement completely and accurately describing any
such suspension, revocation, violation or alleged violation;
      (3)   A list of the names and addresses of any and all persons owning an
interest in the applicant's business;
      (4)   A description of the area served by the applicant by street names
or a map marked to show the area and streets served;
      (5)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's customers
residing or located within this municipality;
      (6)   A list of collection equipment and the capacity of such equipment
for all equipment owned or leased by the applicant at the time of application
or upon acquisition thereafter, including containers, used or intended to be
used in this municipality for collection, transportation or storage of refuse
and the capacity and location of each such container;
      (7)   A certification that all collection and transportation vehicles and
equipment used or intended to be used by the applicant in this municipality for
collection, transportation, or storage of refuse comply with all applicable
safety requirements; and
      (8)   Proof of compliance with any bond or other financial security
required by the municipal contract. As a further condition precedent to
issuance of a permit, the applicant must number all vehicles and containers
used or intended to be used for the collection, transportation, or storage of
refuse within this municipality. The applicant shall be further required to
notify the Director of Public Works in writing within 15 days of any changes
with regard to such information, except that the list of names and addresses
required under division (A)(5) above shall be updated and submitted to the
Director of Public Works no less often than quarterly provided that there are
any changes to such list.
   (B)   No person shall be issued a permit unless each collection vehicle,
roll-off container, or other container used by such person in the collection of
refuse has been inspected by the Health Director and the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative. In lieu of inspection and approval by the Chief of
Police the Director of Public Works may accept or request a certification that
all such vehicles and containers complies with all applicable safety
requirements. Such certification shall be in such manner and form as shall be
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. Upon a satisfactory inspection of
all such vehicles and containers, the Health Director and the Chief of Police,
if he has performed the safety inspection, shall sign the application form
evidencing applicant's compliance with this section. Each vehicle shall be
subject to inspection at any time by the Director of Public Works, the Health
Director, or the Chief of Police, or their authorized representatives.
   (C)   Only one permit may be issued to each applicant hereunder whether such
applicant is an individual, partnership, or corporation and regardless of the
number of vehicles such applicant uses in the collection of refuse.
   (D)   No permit except a temporary permit shall be issued after June 30,
1988 unless the applicant has signed a collector contract committing him to
take proper responsibility for his actions as a designee of the Municipality
under the terms of the municipal contract. Such collector contract shall be
prepared by the Municipal Attorney with the approval of the Mayor and the
Director of Public Works and shall include language requiring liquidated
damages as compensation for damages to the municipality caused by any violation
by the applicant of contracts or rules regarding the system or any regulations
promulgated by the municipality.
   (E)   The Director of Public Works may issue short-term temporary permits
which shall have a duration of not more than two weeks.
   (F)   All permits, except for temporary permits, issued hereunder shall be
valid for a period of one year from July 1 of each year. (Any annual permit
which is valid at the time of passage of this subchapter or any annual permit
issued after adoption of this subchapter, is hereby extended to expire on June
30, 1989). All permittees shall cause such permit identification as is required
by the Director of Public Works to be displayed conspicuously, in the manner
prescribed by the Director of Public Works, on each vehicle and container used
in this municipality in the business of collection, storage, or transportation
of refuse.
   (G)   Each applicant for a permit hereunder shall pay a fee for such permit
and inspections, which fee shall be set as part of a fee schedule to be
established by resolution of the Legislative Council upon the recommendation of
the Mayor. The permit fee may be based on the number of vehicles and containers
used by the applicant and the capacities of such vehicles or containers. No
proration of such fees shall be allowed for late registration.
   (H)   When any permittee shall sell or transfer all or part of his business,
it shall be the obligation of both the permittee and the purchaser or
transferee to notify the Director of Public Works, in writing, of such sale or
transfer no later than 24 hours after completion of said transaction. No
prorated refunds shall be issued.
   (I)   Any person having a place of business in this municipality who removes
the refuse from his business for disposal by himself shall first apply for and
obtain a permit. Any such person shall comply with all of the provisions of
this section except for division (A)(3), (4), and (5).
   (J)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant if any person, partner,
joint venturer, employer, principal or agent associated with the applicant,
shareholder who owns more than 10% of such applicant's stock, or employee
having some responsibility for the applicant's business is, at the time of
application, associated with any person, collector or other business which is
under a period of permit suspension or revocation in accordance with the terms
of this subchapter, or has been associated with any such person, collector, or
other business during a period of suspension or revocation of the permit of
such person, collector, or other business, which suspension or revocation
remains in effect at the time of application.
   (K)   Permits granted hereunder shall not be transferable or assignable.
   (L)   The Director of Public Works may, in his discretion, issue a
reciprocal permit to any applicant who has obtained a permit from any town,
city or borough which is a party to a municipal solid waste delivery and
disposal contract with CRRA governing participation at the facility by that
town, city, or borough. The terms, conditions, and expiration date of such
permits shall be set at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.44 VIOLATIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Director of Public Works has reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this subchapter, he
shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor. Such
notice shall be delivered either by hand or by certified mail to the last known
address of the permittee, shall include a statement of the violation and shall
allow a reasonable time to remedy the violation. If corrective action is not
taken within the time period allowed, the Director of Public Works may take
such action as is appropriate under §
94.45, and may cause the violation to be corrected and shall bill the person
for the cost thereof.
   (B)   Whenever the Health Director finds that a situation exists involving
the collection, storage, transportation, or disposal of refuse which endangers
the public health, he may, as an emergency measure correct the same without and
notice to the owner or occupier of the premises and upon completion of the
work, he shall determine the reasonable cost of the work and bill the owner or
tenant therefor. Such cost shall constitute a lien on the property on which the
corrective measure is taken. Upon recommendation of the Health Director, the
provisions of this division may be enforced by the Director of Public Works who
shall have all of the powers and authority granted the Health Director by this
division.
   (C)   Failure to pay any disposal fee established by this municipality or by
CRRA shall be considered a violation of this subchapter after any invoice for
payment remains outstanding for more than 30 days. As soon as he becomes aware
of it, the Director of Public Works shall give written notice of this violation
to the violator.
   (D)   Provisions of any false information, certifications or documents shall
be deemed a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see
94.99
§ 94.45 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS; APPEAL.
   (A)   A permit may be revoked because of a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or any of the various plans, rules, regulations
or contracts governing the use of the system. At the time the Director of
Public Works becomes aware of a violation he shall give notice as specified in
§
94.44(A). If the violation is not corrected within the specified period, the
Director of Public Works shall impose penalties and collect damages as provided
for in this subchapter and the collector contract.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall temporarily suspend a permit if any
portion of any valid bill from the municipality, CRRA, or the company remains
unpaid by the permittee 45 days after the billing date. He shall revoke the
permit for one year if the permittee has failed to pay the bill in full within
60 days of the billing date. If the bill has not been paid in full by the end
of the one year revocation period, the Director of Public Works shall
permanently revoke any future permit rights.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall suspend the permit of any permittee
who is refused the right to use the facility or the residue disposal site for
so long as the permittee is refused the use of the facility or the residue
disposal site.
   (D)   The Director of Public Works shall revoke for one year the permit of
any person who violates the provisions of §
94.40(G), §
94.41(E) or (F), or §
94.44(D).
   (E)   If a permittee should willfully, intentionally, or through gross
negligence deliver unacceptable waste to the system or the solid waste disposal
area, except such unacceptable waste as may be allowed by the company or CRRA
pursuant to Section 9.16 of the municipal contract, his permit shall be
permanently revoked.
   (F)   Upon revocation or suspension of a collector's permit, no vehicle or
container of the collector may be used for the collection or storage of refuse
within this municipality and no vehicle or container of the collector shall be
allowed access to the solid waste disposal area or to the system until such
permit has been reinstated or a new permit has been issued.
   (G)   Any person aggrieved by a decision to suspend or revoke a permit may,
within seven days of the date of such notice, appeal such decision by
submitting a written request for a hearing to the Director of Public Works. If
such suspension or revocation was for reasons other than those specified in
division (B), (C), (D) or (E) above, the suspension or revocation shall not
take effect until after the requested appeal hearing is held. If the activity
resulting in the suspension represents a hazard to public health or safety, the
suspension or revocation shall be effective until the final determination of
the appeal. The right of appeal shall not apply to any suspension or revocation
imposed under divisions (C), (D), or (E) above.
   (H)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor, the Legislative Authority may by
resolution appoint an Appeals Board to hear such appeals as may be requested
under this section.
   (I)   If any permittee notified of a violation shall request an appeal
hearing, the Appeals Board shall conduct a hearing within ten days of the
request. The Board shall render a ruling within five days after the final day
of the hearing, which ruling may sustain, modify, or reverse the decision of
the Director of Public Works. If the ruling of the Board is in favor of the
permittee, the permit shall be reinstated in accordance with the ruling.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89) Penalty, see
94.99
§ 94.46 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   This subchapter is authorized pursuant to Sections 7-148, 22a-220, 22a-220a,
and 22a-221 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)
§ 94.47 CHARTER AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter shall become effective pursuant to
Chapter III of the Town Charter.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
94.01 or
94.02 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense.
('66 Code, § 30-2) (Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
94.05 or
94.06 shall be fined $100 for each violation.
('66 Code, § 30-3) (Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 569, passed 1-5-09)
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties provided elsewhere in §§
94.35 through
94.47, any person violating any provision of these sections shall be fined $50
for each separate violation.
(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89; Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS
Section
Brooksvale Recreation Park
   
95.01   Recreation area designated
   
95.02   Hunting and trapping prohibited; exceptions
   
95.03   Development by town
   
95.04   Violation prohibited
   
95.05   Designation of Town Green District for wildlife habitat preserve, bird
sanctuary, and park, arts, historic and recreational areas, as well as for
public educational facility
   
95.06   Development of a portion of the Town Green District for wildlife
habitat preserve, bird sanctuary and for park, arts, historic and recreation
purposes
   
95.07   Development of a portion of the Town Green District for public
educational facility purposes
Park Regulations
   
95.10   Director to formulate regulations
   
95.11   Violation prohibited
   
95.12     Establishment of Parks and Recreation Commission
Farmington Canal Commission
   
95.20   Establishment of Commission
   
95.21   Commission's organization
   
95.22   Powers and duties
   
95.23   Limitations
Town Center Park Commission
   
95.30   Establishment of Commission
   
95.31   Commission's organization
   
95.32   Powers and duties
   
95.33   Limitations
 
   
95.99   Penalty
BROOKSVALE RECREATION PARK
§ 95.01 RECREATION AREA DESIGNATED.
   The area embraced within the Brooksvale Recreation Park in this town shall
be and the same is designated as a wildlife area, bird sanctuary and recreation
area.
('66 Code, § 46-1)
§ 95.02 HUNTING AND TRAPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or
molest in any manner any bird or any animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to destroy starlings or other birds (such as jays
or English sparrows) or predatory animals (such as wildcat or fox) when such
birds or animals are found to be congregating, a nuisance or menace to health
or property. If any such are declared by qualified authorities to be creating a
public nuisance, and the Legislative Council be so informed, appropriate action
may be taken by duly constituted officials after a thorough investigation.
Trapping or killing of animals or birds shall not be resorted to unless Audubon
Societies, bird clubs, garden clubs or humane societies are unable to find a
satisfactory alternative.
('66 Code, § 46-1) Penalty, §
95.99(A)
§ 95.03 DEVELOPMENT BY TOWN.
   Nothing in §§
95.01 to
95.04, inclusive, shall be construed as preventing the town, through its
representatives or commissions, from constructing, reconstructing, leveling off
areas, cutting down trees or in any way from developing the area for
recreational activities and purposes.
('66 Code, § 46-2)
§ 95.04 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall violate any provision of §§
95.01 to
95.06, inclusive.
('66 Code, § 46-3) (Am. Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92) Penalty, §
95.99(A)
§ 95.05 DESIGNATION OF TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR WILDLIFE HABITAT PRESERVE, BIRD
SANCTUARY, AND PARK, ARTS, HISTORIC AND RECREATIONAL AREAS, AS WELL AS FOR
PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL FACILITY.
   The area within the 79 acres, more or less, of land owned by the town and
commonly known as Meadowbrook and Meadowbrook South shall be and the same is
designated as open space to be used as a wildlife habitat preserve, a bird
sanctuary, and as park, arts, historic and recreational areas. Of this open
space area, at least 20 acres shall be preserved and maintained as a permanent
wildlife habitat preserve and bird sanctuary. The remaining 20% of the town
green district may be utilized for a public educational facility.
(Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)
§ 95.06 DEVELOPMENT OF A PORTION OF THE TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR WILDLIFE
HABITAT PRESERVE, BIRD SANCTUARY AND FOR PARK, ARTS, HISTORIC AND RECREATION
PURPOSES.
   Nothing in §§
95.01 through
95.05 shall be construed as preventing the town from developing or redeveloping
the 80% portion of the town green district designated for open space use for a
wildlife habitat preserve, a bird sanctuary, or for park, arts, historic and
recreational purposes and access thereto. No construction shall be permitted
for other than these specified purposes in the area of the district designated
for open space uses.
(Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)
§ 95.07 DEVELOPMENT OF A PORTION OF THE TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR PUBLIC
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY PURPOSES.
   Nothing in §§
95.01 through
95.05 inclusive shall be construed as preventing the town from developing for
public educational facility purposes and access thereto the remaining 20% of
the town green district that is not designated for open space use. No
construction shall be permitted for other than public educational facility
purposes and access thereto in this non-open space area.
(Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)
PARK REGULATIONS
§ 95.10 DIRECTOR TO FORMULATE REGULATIONS.
   The director of parks and recreation shall formulate all regulations
governing use by the public of parks and recreation facilities which are the
responsibility of the department of parks and recreation. Any such regulations
with no fiscal impact or monetary value to the town shall be subject to
approval by the Major and the Parks and Recreation Commission. Any such
regulations with any fiscal impact or monetary value to the town shall be
subject to approval by the Mayor, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the
Legislative Council. Within ten days of approval, each regulation shall be
filed with the clerk of the Legislative Council.
(Effective 7-30-70) (Am. Ord. 478, passed 11-4-02)
§ 95.11 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall violate any regulation of the director of parks and
recreation.
(Effective 7-30-70)
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Subject to approval of the Mayor or designee and the Chief of
Police or designee, alcoholic beverages may be sold and/or distributed by the
Town of Hamden or a designated third party at certain events in specifically
designated locations within a park or facility of the Town of Hamden and/or the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
      (2)   Any alcoholic beverage sold and/or distributed, shall be consumed
within the specifically designated location.
      (3)   Any exception granted under this section shall be subject to all
rules and regulations promulgated by the Town of Hamden and any relevant Boards
and/or Commissions and shall further be subject to all local, state and federal
laws including State of Connecticut liquor permits.
      (4)   Nothing in this subdivision is intended to provide for the issuance
of a permit or permission to sell, distribute or consume alcoholic beverages on
properties or facilities of the Hamden Board of Education and/or Hamden Public
Schools.
      (5)   Upon the mutual approval by the Mayor or designee and the Chief of
Police or designee, and the payment of $150, a revocable town permit shall be
granted to a designated third party describing the place, time and date of the
event.
      (6)   In consideration of approval for the sale and/or distribution of
alcoholic beverages on town premises and the issuance of a permit, designated
third party must purchase and show proof of general liability insurance and
liquor liability insurance with a copy of an additional insured endorsement
specifically naming the Town of Hamden as an additional insured and ensuring
the third party vendors policy does not exclude the serving or selling of
alcohol. The third party vendor shall maintain all insurances and adequate
limits of liability insurance coverage while engaging in the activity as
required by the Town's Risk Manager. The third party vendor shall provide
evidence that its staff is properly trained in the serving/selling of alcohol,
has obtained the appropriate state permits and agree to indemnify and hold the
Town of Hamden, its Boards, Commission, agents and/or employees from and
against any and all liability arising out of or related in any way to the
issuance of the permit and/or the sale, distribution and consumption of such
alcoholic beverages related to such permit.
   (C)   No pet is allowed in any park or facility of the department of parks
and recreation, except in areas designated by the director of parks and
recreation or his designee.
   (D)   No vehicle of any type is allowed in any park unless expressly
authorized by the director of parks and recreation or his designee.
   (E)   Unless otherwise expressly authorized, all park and recreation
facilities of the town shall be open from sunrise to sunset.
   (F)   No person shall be permitted in any park or recreational facility of
the town while it is closed.
   (G)   There shall be no hunting in, on or above any park or recreational
facility or land owned by the town.
   (H)   With the exception of a dedicated golf course facility, there shall be
no golfing in or on any park or recreational facility of the town.
(Ord. 317, passed 9-3-91; Am. Ord. 672, passed 4-18-16; Am. Ord. 726, passed 4-
18-22)
§ 95.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Services Commission shall consist of seven
members recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative
Council, who shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
   (B)   The seven appointed members shall serve three year terms; however, in
the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to
serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed from
the Commission as set forth in section
7-1:H of the Charter.
   (C)   Powers. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be advisory to both
the Recreation division of the Arts, Recreation and Culture Department as well
as the Parks division of the Public Works Department. The Commission shall
study the parks and recreational facilities and programs of the town, shall
develop proposals as to the improvement of the facilities and programs, make
recommendations to the Director and Mayor concerning the activities of the
department, and aid the Directors in carrying out the programs of the
departments. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall set the fees for the use
of the town's parks and recreation facilities and programs subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council.
   (D)   The Commission shall be responsible for an annual park report.
(Ord. 618, passed 6-4-12)
FARMINGTON CANAL COMMISSION
§ 95.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Farmington Canal Commission shall consist of nine members
recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council, who
shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   The nine appointed members shall serve three-year terms; however, in
the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to
serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed from
the Commission by the Mayor for good cause, which shall include failure to
attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings in a calendar year.
   (C)   The Commission shall confer and advise the Town Engineer, who in
consultation with the Parks and Recreation Director, shall serve as a staff
member of the Commission.
(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 410, passed 5-
1-00)
§ 95.21 COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Farmington Canal Commission shall elect a Chairperson from their
membership. The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)
§ 95.22 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Farmington Canal Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the procurement, completion, and oversight of the Farmington Canal
project, including the following:
   (A)   Recommend improvements in the property to accomplish its purpose as a
linear park.
   (B)   To monitor compliance with state and federal laws and regulations.
   (C)   To assess the availability of federal, state, and local funds; and,
monitor the procurement of such funds.
   (D)   Establish a budget for the Farmington Canal Linear Park.
   (E)   Make recommendations for the application foe and the distribution of
funding to the Mayor and Council.
   (F)   To monitor the planning, construction and maintenance of the
Farmington Canal Linear Park.
   (G)   To review all proposed purchases of rights-of-way along the Farmington
Canal Line; and, make, recommendations to the Mayor and Legislative Council
concerning any purchases.
   (H)   To report bi-monthly to the Mayor and Legislative Council concerning a
comparison of the Farmington Canal Line budget and actual expenditures;
progress of the planning, construction and maintenance; possible changes
needed; and an assessment of the other future needs as related to the Park and
its effect on ancillary town services after conferring with department heads.
   (I)   To consider any other issue concerning the Farmington Canal Line and
make recommendations as such Commission deems appropriate.
(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)
§ 95.23 LIMITATIONS.
   The Farmington Canal Commission shall have no authority to incur any
expenses without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The
Commission shall have no fiscal authority.
(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)
TOWN CENTER PARK COMMISSION
§ 95.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Town Center Park Commission shall consist of five members
recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council, who
shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
Membership shall include:
      (1)   Not more than three members from one political party.
      (2)   Two members who are appointed for three-year terms.
      (3)   Two members who are appointed for two-year terms.
      (4)   One member who is appointed for a one-year term.
      (5)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year terms.
   (B)   The five appointed members shall serve three-year terms; however, in
the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to
serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed from
the Commission by the Mayor for good cause, which shall include failure to
attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings in a calendar year.
   (C)   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the
Mayor, and Director of Parks and Recreation, the Arts Commission Coordinator
and the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)
§ 95.31 COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Town Center Park Commission shall elect a Chairperson from its
membership. The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its
operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for conducting the Commission's business.
(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)
§ 95.32 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Center Park Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the completion and oversight of the Town Center Park project,
including the following:
   (A)   Develop and recommend a comprehensive plan for the Town Center Park.
   (B)   Develop and recommend policies for the operation of the Town Center
Park.
   (C)   Recommend improvement to the property to accomplish its purpose as a
town park.
   (D)   Assess the availability of federal, state and local funds and monitor
the procurement of such funds.
   (E)   Make recommendations for the application and the distribution of
funding to the Mayor and Council.
   (F)   Monitor planning, construction and maintenance of the Town Center
Park.
   (G)   Review and report to the Mayor and Legislative Council concerning the
budget, expenditures and progress of planning, construction and maintenance of
the Town Center park.
   (H)   Assess needs related to the Town Center Park and its effect on
ancillary town services after conferring with department heads.
   (I)   Consider any other issues concerning the Town Center Park and make
recommendations as such Commission deems necessary.
(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)
§ 95.33 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing within this subchapter shall be construed as conferring any
administrative authority over staff or operations of the Town Center Park or
its programs.
   (B)   The Town Center Park Commission shall have no authority to incur any
expenses without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The
Commission shall have no fiscal authority.
(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Whoever violates any provision of §§
95.02 or
95.04 shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both.
('66 Code, § 46-3)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §
95.11 shall be fined not more than $50.
(Ord. 317, passed 9-3-91)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Sidewalks and Curbs
   
96.01   Work permit required; fee; traffic control
   
96.02   Application for work permit
   
96.03   Issuance of work permit
   
96.04   Maintenance
   
96.05   Contractor to be licensed
   
96.06   Supervision required
   
96.07   Rules, regulations, specifications
   
96.08   Violation prohibited
Sidewalk Construction
   
96.10   General regulations
   
96.11   Sidewalks in general
   
96.12   Cement concrete sidewalks
   
96.13   Bituminous concrete sidewalks
   
96.14   Resurfacing cement concrete sidewalks with bituminous concrete
   
96.15   Driveway aprons
   
96.16   Curbs, general
   
96.17   Cement concrete curbs
   
96.18   Granite or flagstone curb
   
96.19   Bituminous curb
   
96.20   Curb cuts to accommodate the physically handicapped
Snow and Ice Removal
   
96.25   Definitions
   
96.26   Responsibility for removal
   
96.27   Notice of violations; enforcement
   
96.28   Removal by town; collection of costs
   
96.29   Penalties for offenses
   
96.30   Promulgation of regulations
   
96.31   Snow and ice, public sidewalks; liability
   
96.32   Hearing procedure
Obstructing
   
96.35   Prohibited
   
96.36   Violation prohibited
 
   
96.99   Penalty
SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
§ 96.01 WORK PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, repair, lay or relay
any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or combined curb and gutter upon the public
highways and streets of the town, or cause the work to be done or commence with
the construction of the work unless the person, firm, or corporation shall have
obtained a permit from the Legislative Council or its designated agent;
provided, that emergency permission may be granted for commencement of the work
upon oral notice which shall be followed immediately by a written application
for a permit as herein provided.
   (B)   The fee for each permit shall be $50.
   (C)   (1)   The use of a uniformed police officer(s) shall be required for
all sidewalk and curb work performed adjacent to roadways that significantly
restricts the roadway to traffic and creates a traffic hazard. The Chief of
Police or his/her designee shall determine that a traffic hazard exists, due to
the effect on traffic patterns and flow at the time of the proposed work. The
officer(s) shall be authorized by the Police Department and the cost of same be
charged directly to the permittee or company performing such work.
      (2)   Where the officer(s) provides services to more than one permittee,
each permittee shall be responsible proportionately for such expense. If the
Police Department is unable to supply a uniformed police officer(s) at any
time, the permittee or company performing the work shall then be required to
provide a flag person for all such work.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee may authorize use of flag
persons on a temporary basis when:
         (a)   The work is in an isolated area;
         (b)   Traffic is light to moderate;
         (c)   Work will be completed with minimum disruption, generally within
three hours;
         (d)   Work will be conducted on "secondary" or "non-peripheral"
roadways during non-peak traffic hours (0700 to 0900 and 1600 to 1800); or
         (e)   Work will be completed with minimal disruption within 30
minutes.
      (4)   Police officer instructions/duties, responsibilities at job sites
shall be issued by the patrol bureau commander of the Police Department with
the approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. When on duty, all
police officers shall wear orange safety coats or traffic vests, and shall
utilize appropriate equipment, including but not limited to flags and
flashlights in executing their responsibilities.
      (5)   Public utilities or other entities responding to emergency
situations that may threaten public safety may utilize a traffic control person
until a police officer arrives at the location of the emergency. If the on-duty
shift commander determines a uniformed police officer should be assigned to the
location for the purpose of traffic control and public safety, the public
utility company or other entity shall bear the cost of such traffic control.
(Adopted 4-24-68; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 417, passed 9-5-00; Am.
Ord. 461, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 591, passed 6-7-10) Penalty, see §
96.99(A)
§ 96.02 APPLICATION FOR WORK PERMIT.
   Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the council and
shall contain information as may be deemed necessary by the council, or its
designated agent, and the form shall contain a provision that all work
contemplated shall be performed in compliance with all applicable laws and
ordinances of the town and any regulations relating thereto, and the form shall
contain a representation by the applicant that he shall indemnify and save
harmless the town from any and all damages to persons or property resulting
from, or caused by, any act or omission in the performance of the work to be
done.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
§ 96.03 ISSUANCE OF WORK PERMIT.
   (A)   Except in emergency, the existence of which shall be determined by the
town, a permit shall be issued only during those months of the year seasonable
for the construction or repair.
   (B)   All permits shall be maintained at the location of the work authorized
thereby and shall be exhibited on request to an authorized agent of the
Legislative Council.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
§ 96.04 MAINTENANCE.
   The owner, and every person, firm or corporation having the care or custody
of any building or parcel of land bordering upon any highway or street in the
town where there is any footway, sidewalk or curb, shall maintain such footway,
sidewalk or curb in a safe and convenient condition for the use of the public
and shall promptly repair all defects therein endangering or incommoding public
travel upon the same, and shall promptly remove and correct any obstructions
that may be placed or found thereon. If the owner, person, firm or corporation
having the care or custody of any such building or parcel of land shall fail to
repair the defects after written order to do so, or fail to remove and correct
the obstructions after written notice to do so, the Legislative Council, or its
designated agent, may cause the repair or removal and correction to be
performed, and the expense so incurred shall be a lien in favor of the town
upon the property until paid and may be recovered in an action at law brought
in the name of the town.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
§ 96.05 CONTRACTOR TO BE LICENSED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall, as contractor or otherwise,
engage in the work of constructing, laying, relaying or repairing sidewalks,
driveway aprons, curbs or combined curbs and gutters upon the public highways
and streets of the town until licensed by the Legislative Council, or its
designated agent, in accordance with the provisions hereof. License as a
sidewalk, driveway apron and curb contractor may be issued to any person, firm
or corporation upon satisfactory evidence that the applicant is fully
responsible, suitable and competent for such purpose and has agreed in writing
to comply with the provisions of §§
96.01 to
96.08, inclusive, and the rules and regulations as may be adopted hereunder.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a license as a sidewalk, driveway apron or curb
contractor, each applicant shall file with the Legislative Council or its
designated agent evidence of insurance coverage of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate liability and property damage and a
satisfactory bond of a surety company acceptable to the Council, in the sum of
$10,000 conditioned that:
      (1)   The applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the town of and
from any and all claims and actions of every kind and description that may be
brought against the town, for or on account of any injuries or damages received
or sustained by any person caused by, or resulting from, the construction or
repair of a sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or combined curb and gutter by the
applicant, his servants, agents or employees, or of or from any act or omission
in performing the work;
      (2)   The applicant shall fully perform the work in accordance with the
provisions hereof and shall replace and restore that portion of any highway or
street in which the applicant, his servants, agents or employees shall make any
excavation in a manner and condition acceptable and satisfactory to the
Legislative Council, or its designated agent;
      (3)   The applicant shall comply in all respects with any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof and with the terms of the
permit issued to him; and
      (4)   Shall pay all fines imposed upon him for violating any provision
hereof. Each application shall state the location of applicant's place of
business, the trade name of the business and shall contain such other
information as the council, or its designated agent, may require.
   (C)   The applicant shall give personal attention to the work to be done
under any permit issued to him hereunder and shall employ in the performance of
the work competent and responsible persons.
   (D)   No license, as herein provided, shall be required of an owner who
personally constructs, lays, relays or repairs any sidewalk, driveway apron,
curb or combined curb and gutter bordering on his own property, provided a
permit under §§
96.01 to
96.03, inclusive, has been secured.
   (E)   All licenses shall expire on December 31, next following their date of
issuance, unless sooner revoked. Upon violation of any ordinance, or rule or
regulation adopted hereunder, any license may be suspended or revoked upon such
terms and for the period as the Legislative Council, or its designated agent,
may fix. The fee for each license shall be $100 and the license shall not be
transferable.
   (F)   Neither issuance of the license by the Legislative Council, or its
designated agent, nor the establishment of specified design, specifications or
workmanship by the town engineer confers any liability upon the town, or agency
or department thereof, for the sufficiency or durability of the work, nor does
the town in any manner guarantee workmanship performed under the license, nor
does the issuance of the license or the establishment of the designs and
specifications invalidate the legal obligations of the property owner to
construct, reconstruct, and maintain sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs in a
manner satisfactory to the Legislative Council.
(Adopted 4-24-68; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 590, passed 6-7-10)
Penalty, see §
96.99 (A)
§ 96.06 SUPERVISION REQUIRED.
   The Legislative Council, or its designated agent, shall give grades and
lines work and shall supervise the construction, laying, relaying, and repair
of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs, or combined curbs and gutters and all
other work of a similar nature to be performed on the public highways and
streets of the town, but the supervision shall not relieve the contractor from
his obligation to perform the work strictly in accordance with the provisions
hereof and the provisions of other laws or ordinances relating to sidewalks and
curbs.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
§ 96.07 RULES, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS.
   The Legislative Council or its designated agent shall adopt from time to
time reasonable rules, regulations, and specifications for the construction of
sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs, and combined curbs and gutters. No sidewalks
other than cement concrete may be laid or constructed upon the public highways
or streets of the town.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
§ 96.08 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of §§
96.01 through
96.08.
(Adopted 4-24-68) Penalty, see §
96.99 (A)
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 96.10 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Notice for line and grade:
      (1)   Request for permit, line, and grade must be made of the engineering
department not less than 24 hours before starting construction.
      (2)   Any deviation from line and grade from the standard cross section
must receive prior approval from the Legislative Council.
   (B)   Line and grade. The engineering department shall mark on the ground
the line and grade which shall govern all work, etc., and no walk, driveway
apron, or curb contractor shall commence work on a public highway until a
permit has been obtained and the line and grade have been marked. The
surveyor's stakes marking line and grade shall not be removed until the time as
the inspector has verified that the line and grade has been complied with. In
no case will the stakes be deviated from unless approved by the Legislative
Council.
   (C)   Notice before starting work. Notice must be given at the office of the
engineering department not less than 24 hours before starting any work, stating
time, place, and character of such construction.
   (D)   Seasonal work:
      (1)   Permits will be issued for cement concrete work and bituminous
concrete work to be performed between April l, and December l.
      (2)   Construction work will be restricted to weather limitations - that
the bituminous material shall not be applied on a wet surface, or when
temperature is below 60°F. in the shade and rising, or when weather conditions
are otherwise unfavorable:
         (a)   Cement concrete shall not be applied when temperature is below
40°F. in the shade and falling.
         (b)   No material shall be applied on ground which contains any
thickness of frost.
      (3)   Emergency permits may be issued by authority or the Legislative
Council at other times subject to meeting specialized requirements as may be
established by the engineering department in each specific case.
   (E)   Cleanup. All excess material shall be removed from the project, and
adjacent side cleaned up in a workmanlike manner immediately after the end of
the curing period of cement concrete work or immediately after completion of
placing of bituminous concrete, granite or flagstone.
   (F)   Failure to meet requirements. Failure on the part of the contractor or
owner to fully meet the general or specific requirements as herewith set forth
may result in nonacceptance of the work by the town and in revocation of
existing license and refusal to issue future permits to the contractor.
   (G)   Responsibility of the property owner:
      (1)   By ordinance, the property owner is responsible for the
construction and maintenance of sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs.
      (2)   By adoption of these rules, regulations and specifications
pertaining thereto, nothing shall be construed to relieve the property owner of
his legal obligations.
      (3)   The specifications are in keeping with good practice. Inspection of
the work and adherence thereto is the responsibility of the property owner, and
no claim against the town shall be honored by the town for failure of the work
involved to meet the expectations of the property owner or contractor either
present or future.
('66 Code, § 59-9)
§ 96.11 Sidewalks in general.
   (A)   Sidewalks may be constructed or reconstructed of either cement
concrete or of bituminous concrete in accordance with the specifications
pertaining thereto.
   (B)   But, upon election by the owner of his choice of material for the
sidewalk, the entire sidewalk fronting his property shall be of one continuous
type of material. No patching will be permitted of the other type of material.
   (C)   Unless otherwise required all sidewalks shall be a minimum of 4 feet 6
inches wide on the surface.
   (D)   All sidewalks shall, unless otherwise impracticable, have a slope of a
minimum 1/4 of an inch per foot of width, pitching to the street.
   (E)   At driveways, sidewalk materials, design and construction shall
conform to specifications for driveway aprons.
('66 Code, § 59-10)
§ 96.12 Cement concrete sidewalks.
   (A)   Cement concrete sidewalks. These sidewalks shall consist of a minimum
of 4 inches finished thickness of cement concrete on a foundation course of a
minimum of 4 inches compacted thickness. Top course and foundation shall be of
the same width.
   (B)   Excavation. Excavation, including removal of all existing sidewalk,
shall be made to the required depth and width below finished grade. All soft
and yielding or other unsuitable materials shall be promptly removed from the
street. Under certain conditions, if approved by the engineering department,
existing sidewalk may remain and be resurfaced.
   (C)   Foundation:
      (1)   The excavation shall be filled with good cinders, gravel, broken
stone or other suitable material which meets the approval of the engineering
department, well tamped or rolled to a minimum of 4 inches compacted thickness.
Cinders shall be moderately coarse, gritty and free from large lumps and
powdery material.
      (2)   When gravel is used, it shall conform to the latest revision of
requirements of Article 2.10.02 for gravel fill of the latest revision of
Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction,
Connecticut State Highway Department. This foundation shall be thoroughly
compacted.
   (D)   Forms for cement concrete. Forms shall be of metal or wood; straight,
free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing from the pressure
of concrete. Forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the sidewalk.
Forms shall be securely staked, braced and held firmly in place to the required
line and grade and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar.
All forms shall be cleaned and oiled or wetted before concrete is placed
against them.
   (E)   Expansion and contraction joints. Contraction and expansion joints
must be placed in sidewalk construction. Contraction joints will not be spaced
more than 5 foot intervals. Expansion joints must be placed wherever the
sidewalk meets another walk, driveway, building, wall, merestone, catch basin
or any rigid object. Expansion joints must consist of premolded asphaltic
material 1/2 inch minimum thickness and as wide as the depth of the walk. In
any case, expansion joints will not exceed 50 foot intervals.
   (F)   Composition of mix. The mixture shall consist of one part cement, 2
parts sand and 3 parts trap rock proportioned, mixed, placed, etc., in
accordance with the latest revision of § 6.01 for Class -A- Concrete of the
latest revision of Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental
Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department.
   (G)   Materials:
      (1)   Cement shall be air-entraining portland cement with 6 + 1 % air
content by volume. Portland cement shall conform to the latest ASTM C 175 Type
1A.
      (2)   Concrete aggregates shall conform to tentative specifications for
Concrete Aggregates ASTM C 33, and shall meet the requirements of Article
6.01.02 except that the trap rock shall consist of commercial 3/4 inch sized
aggregate.
   (H)   Water. Water shall conform to requirements of Article 4.01.02 and not
more than 6 gallons per sack of cement shall be permitted in the mix. Water
used in mixing concrete shall be clean and free from deleterious amounts of
acids, alkalies or organic materials. The amount of water added shall in no
case produce a slump of more than 4 inches. Concrete producing more than a 4
inch slump will be rejected.
   (I)   Measuring and mixing for cement concrete mixture:
      (1)   All stone, sand and cement used in cement concrete walks, aprons
and curbs and combined curbs and gutters shall be accurately measured in a
manner satisfactory to the engineering department.
      (2)   A bag of cement containing 94 pounds may be taken as one cubic foot
in proportioning mixtures.
      (3)   The cement concrete shall be thoroughly mixed by machine in a
manner satisfactory to the engineering department. The concrete shall be mixed
only in the quantity required for immediate use. Retempering concrete shall not
be permitted. Hand mixing will be permitted only for patching.
      (4)   Concrete shall be mixed in the approved batch mixer for a period of
not less than 1 1/4 minutes after all materials except a part of the water are
in the drum, during which time the drum speed shall be not less than 14 nor
more than 20 revolutions per minute. Any concrete which has been mixed for less
than the required time or more than 30 minutes or has developed initial set
will be rejected. If a project is of such a nature that concrete cannot be
poured within the 30 minutes, smaller loads must be ordered. Under no
circumstances will a mixing truck be allowed to remain on a project more than
30 minutes. No mixer will be allowed on a project from another project. For
small load requirement. new loads will be ordered unless all concrete can be
deposited within 30 minutes.
   (J)   Transporting of cement concrete mixtures. The transporting of cement
concrete mixtures shall conform to the requirements of §§ 6.01.01 and 6.01.03
of the latest revision of Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and
Incidental Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department.
   (K)   Placing cement concrete. The properly proportioned and mixed concrete
shall be placed in one course in accordance with § 6.01.
   (L)   Finishing cement concrete. The surface of the concrete shall be
finished with a wood float or by other approved means. The surface shall not be
overfloated, thereby causing segregation in the mix. The outside edges of the
slab and all joints shall be edged with a 1/4 inch radius edging tool. Each
slab shall be divided into 2 or more sections by forming dummy joints with a
jointing tool as directed. No floating or edging shall be accomplished on a wet
surface.
   (M)   Protecting cement concrete work. The contractor shall protect the
work, during the construction, by suitable barricades to protect the public and
from damage from any and all causes. In extremely hot weather, the cement
concrete shall be protected from the direct rays of the sun. The finished work
shall be protected from rains until it has hardened sufficiently to eliminate
danger from this source. In cold weather the work shall be protected from
freezing. The work shall be barricaded to prevent damage from traffic until
such time as the cement concrete has set sufficiently to sustain the traffic.
Barricades shall not be permitted for more than 48 hours without written
consent of the engineering department and if not removed upon notice to do so
will be removed forthwith at the expense of the owner or contractor.
   (N)   Curing. Ali cement concrete sidewalk shall be cured by either of the
following methods:
      (1)   Apply a fine spray of a colorless membrane curing compound. The
compound shall be acceptable to the engineer and shall be sprayed with approved
equipment.
      (2)   Wet burlap coverings, hay or straw or other approved covers, kept
wet and retained in position for a minimum of 5 days.
('66 Code, § 59-11)
§ 96.13 Bituminous concrete sidewalks.
   (A)   Bituminous concrete sidewalks. These sidewalks shall consist of 2
inches compacted thickness of bituminous concrete on a foundation course of 4
inches compacted thickness. The foundation course shall be at least 2 inches
wider on each edge than the finished width of the bituminous concrete.
   (B)   Excavation. Excavation shall be the same as described under excavation
for cement concrete sidewalks except that the width shall be 2 inches wider on
each edge making an overall width 4 inches wider.
   (C)   Foundation. The foundation shall be the same as described under
foundation for cement concrete sidewalks except that the width shall be 2
inches wider on each edge making an overall width 4 inches wider.
   (D)   Forms for bituminous concrete:
      (1)   Forms shall be of metal or wood; straight, free from warp and of
sufficient strength to resist springing from the impact of the roller. If of
wood, they shall be of 2 inch surfaced plank except that at sharp curves
thinner material may be used; if of metal, they shall be of an approved
section. All forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the sidewalks and
shall be securely staked, braced and held firmly to the required line and
grade. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled each time they are used.
      (2)   Forms may be omitted upon approval of the engineering department in
which case the bituminous concrete must be spread to a width slightly greater
than required after which a chalk line shall be marked and both edges cut to a
straight line giving full required width. Patching edges will not be permitted.
   (E)   Composition of mix. The mixture of the bituminous concrete shall meet
the requirements of the latest revision of Articles 4.06.02 and 4.06.03, Dense
Graded Bituminous Concrete Pavement, of the Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges and Incidental Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department. No
mixing will be permitted at the site.
   (F)   Materials. Bituminous material, namely asphalt cement, coarse
aggregate, fine aggregate, mineral filler, shall meet the latest revision of
requirements of Article 4.03.02 of the above stated document.
   (G)   Mineral filler. The mineral filler used in the mix and for dusting
shall meet the latest revision of requirements of Article 4.03.02 of the above
stated document.
   (H)   Measuring and mixing bituminous concrete mixture. The measuring or
weighing of all materials and mixing shall be done in a commercial plant which
has been approved by the state highway department and in accordance with
Article 4.03.03 of the above stated document.
   (I)   Transporting of bituminous concrete mixtures. Such shall be done in
accordance with the latest revision of Article 4.03.03-7 of the above stated
document, except that maximum haul allowed shall not exceed 20 miles.
   (J)   Placing of bituminous concrete:
      (1)   The bituminous concrete may be spread either by machine or by hand.
      (2)   If a machine is used the machine must be an approved mechanical
spreader into which the material is dumped and the machine must be capable of
spreading the full width and striking off the material to the appropriate loose
depth.
      (3)   When hand methods are used the mixture upon arrival shall be dumped
on approved steel dump sheets outside the area on which it is to be spread and
shall then immediately be distributed into place by means of suitable shovels
and spread with metal lutes in a uniform layer of appropriate loose depth.
Under no circumstances shall rakes be used.
   (K)   Compacting bituminous concrete:
      (1)   Compaction may be obtained by machine roller, hand roller or a
vibratory compactor.
      (2)   When a hand roller is used, it shall weigh not less than 500 pounds
and the bituminous concrete must be laid in 2 equal courses of one inch
compacted depth each course.
      (3)   When a machine roller is used it shall weigh from 3 to 5 tons. The
bituminous concrete may be laid in one course of 2 inch compacted depth.
      (4)   Vibratory compactors will only be permitted upon approval of the
engineering department.
   (L)   Protecting bituminous concrete work. The contractor shall protect the
work during the construction by suitable barricades to protect the public and
from damage from any and all causes. Traffic shall be excluded for at least 6
hours or until the work has properly hardened by cooling. Barricades shall not
be permitted for more than 48 hours without consent of the engineering
department and if not removed upon notice to do so will be removed forthwith at
expense of owner or contractor.
   (M)   Sealing bituminous concrete sidewalks. Where the owner has selected to
use bituminous concrete material for sidewalk surface, an approved blacktop
sealer shall be applied in 2 coats within one month of the completion of the
sidewalk.
('66 Code, § 59-12)
§ 96.14 Resurfacing cement concrete sidewalks with bituminous concrete.
   (A)   Foundations
      (1)   Where old cement concrete sidewalks exist in acceptable condition
as a base and where the present elevation is satisfactory grade so that a
topping of at least one inch compacted thickness of bituminous concrete can be
placed thereon, the old cement concrete sidewalk may be acceptable in place of
the gravel base as previously described.
      (2)   Where old cement concrete sidewalks have heaved appreciably such
slabs which have heaved must be thoroughly broken up with no pieces larger than
3 inches in any dimension. The material shall then be brought to proper grade
with interstices filled with gravel and used in place of the 4 inch gravel base
as previously described. In such cases a bituminous concrete top of 2 inches
shall be required.
   (B)   Bituminous concrete. The same specifications shall apply as noted
under "bituminous concrete sidewalks" with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Foundation as noted above under resurfacing.
      (2)   Thickness of bituminous concrete to be not less than one inch
compacted thickness.
      (3)   Bituminous concrete to be compacted by a roller weighing not less
than 500 pounds nor more than 1,000 pounds.
('66 Code, § 59-13)
§ 96.15 Driveway aprons.
   (A)   Driveway aprons shall be constructed of cement concrete or bituminous
concrete and in accordance with specifications pertaining to cement concrete
sidewalks and bituminous concrete sidewalks except as to their width, which
must be approved, and the depth of the pavement shall be increased by one inch
thickness of cement concrete making a total thickness of 5 inches or increased
by 2 inch thickness of bituminous concrete making a total thickness of 4
inches. In the latter case this shall constitute an additional course and be
laid accordingly. The foundation of gravel, cinders or other approved material
shall be increased from 4 inches' compacted thickness to 6 inches' compacted
thickness.
   (B)   Sidewalks across driveways shall be constructed to the specifications
for driveway aprons.
('66 Code, § 59-14)
§ 96.16 Curbs, general.
   (A)   No curbs shall be placed except cement concrete, granite, flagstone or
bituminous concrete.
   (B)   Bituminous concrete curbs will only be permitted at such locations as
approved by the legislative council.
   (C)    All curbs shall conform to the specifications, design and
construction as specified for the specific type.
('66 Code, § 59-15)
§ 96.17 Cement concrete curbs.
   (A)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the
subgrade or base upon which the curbing is to be set shall be compacted to a
firm, even surface.
   (B)   Dimension of curbs. Concrete curbs shall be not less than 18 inches
deep, 6 inches wide at the top and 9 inches wide at the bottom, battered on
pavement side. The 2 top edges shall be rounded off in a suitable manner.
   (C)   Forms. Either 1 1/2 inch plank or approved steel forms must be used on
both sides of the curb for the entire depth. The forms shall be smooth and
clean, well oiled and perfectly tight, and special precautions shall be taken
to prevent leaking at the ends of forms.
   (D)   Mixture. All references to mixture under §
96.12 of this chapter, shall apply here. Also refer to the latest revision of §
6.01, Class "A" Concrete, Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and
Incidental Construction, state highway department.
   (E)   Placing of cement concrete:
      (1)   Cement concrete shall be placed only on a moist subgrade. Cement
concrete shall not be placed on a soft, muddy or frozen subgrade.
      (2)   The cement concrete shall be placed in the forms, struck off with a
template, compacted by approved means and finished to a smooth, even surface.
Care should be taken to spade well along the forms to prevent honeycombing.
      (3)   The cement concrete curbing shall be constructed in sections having
a uniform length of approximately 10 feet, unless otherwise directed. No
section less than 6 feet shall be permitted.
      (4)   All sections shall be separated by a standard 1/2 inch specially
prepared asphaltic joint filler.
   (F)   Curing and protection. After the surface of the cement concrete curb
has been given its final finish, it shall be protected by completely covering
it with moist mats of size and quality as approved by the engineering
department or by use of burlap. The mats and the burlap must be kept saturated
for a minimum of 10 days in June, July, August or a minimum of 7 days in other
months.
   (G)   Removal of forms. Forms shall not be removed from freshly placed
cement concrete until it has set for at least 12 hours. They shall be carefully
removed and in such manner that no damage shall be done to the curb or adjacent
pavement. Immediately after the forms have been removed the joints shall be
thoroughly cleaned and all honeycombed areas pointed up.
   (H)   Back filling. No material shall be placed against the curb until such
time as it can be tamped thoroughly without injury to the curb, after which
time the material shall be deposited in thin layers and thoroughly compacted.
No large pieces of stone or gravel shall be within 2 inches of the curb.
('66 Code, § 59-16)
§ 96.18 Granite or flagstone curb.
   (A)   Size. Stones shall not be less than 4 feet long, 16 inches wide and 4
inches thick. The stone shall be fine-grained and free from seams. The top face
and front face to a depth of 10 inches shall be dressed. The top shall be 4
inches wide and on a batter such that the inner edge shall be 1/4 inch above
the outer edge. The ends shall be square and trimmed to lie with closed joints.
The bottoms of the stones shall be flat and of full width as no sharp wedge-
shape stones will be permitted.
   (B)   Finish. The quality and finish shall be satisfactory to the
engineering department.
   (C)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to a depth necessary to obtain a
suitable base below the finished grade of the top of the curb. After the curb
is set to line arid grade, the space on both sides of curb shall be filled with
suitable material and thoroughly tamped.
('66 Code, § 59.17)
§ 96.19 Bituminous curb.
   (A)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth of curb,
including depth for suitable base under the curb, and the subbase under the
base shall be compacted to a firm, even surface.
   (B)   Base course. This curb shall only be installed on a constructed base
of a minimum of 4 inches crushed trap rock, with the interstices filled with
approved sand and a minimum of 2 inches of bituminous concrete material. This
width shall be wide enough to accommodate the wheels of the laying machine. In
no case shall this dimension be less than 3 feet. Below this construction shall
be a suitable material
   (C)   Materials for the bituminous curb. Materials for this work shall
conform .to materials as specified for bituminous concrete walks.
   (D)   Construction of curb:
      (1)   The dimension and details of the curb shall conform with existing
standards on file in the engineering department.
      (2)   This curb, except for sections under 20 feet in length, shall be
installed by utilizing an approved mechanical spreader and screeder machine,
and the operator of the machine shall be experienced in this type of work.
      (3)   Prior to arrival of the mixture on the work, the surface of the
pavement or the prepared foundation where the bituminous concrete lip curbing
is to be installed shall have been cleaned of all loose and foreign material.
The surface shall be perfectly dry and clean at the time the mix is placed and
shall be coated with an RC-2 or other approved bitumen just before arrival of
the mixture.
      (4)   Upon arrival at the site, the mixture shall be deposited directly
in place or on platforms outside the area on which it is to be spread and shall
then be immediately distributed into place by suitable means. The mixture shall
be kept clean and free from dirt and foreign materials at all times. It shall
be compacted to the required cross section by the use of suitable iron tampers
weighing not less than 12 pounds and having a bearing area not exceeding 50
square inches, or by means of a roller weighing not less than 150 pounds per
foot of tread. The surface of the lip curbing shall be tested with a 10 foot
straight edge laid parallel with the center line of the road and any variations
from a true profile exceeding 1/4 inch shall be satisfactorily corrected.
      (5)   After the completion of the lip curbing, traffic shall be kept at a
safe distance for a period of not less than 24 hours and until the curbing has
set sufficiently to prevent injury to the work.
(66 Code. § 59.18)
§ 96.20 Curb cuts to accommodate the physically handicapped.
   All curbs constructed or replaced on or after August 3, 1976 shall be
designed with cuts at all pedestrian crosswalks to provide adequate and
reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically
handicapped persons. Such cuts shall meet the following specifications: the cut
shall be at least 36 inches wide; the cut shall have a surface that is textured
and non-slip; and the cut shall have a slope not greater than 4 degrees 50
minutes and shall be beveled at the bottom.
(Adopted 8-3-76)
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 96.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "PERSON RESPONSIBLE." The owner, tenant, occupant or other entity, either
corporate or personal, who is responsible under the law for maintenance of the
premises.
   "POLICE CHIEF." The Hamden Chief of Police or any person authorized to act
as a representative of the Chief of Police.
   "PREMISES." Any lot or part thereof or parcel of land or plot of land,
either occupied or unoccupied, by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure.
   "SIDEWALK." Any walk or path along the side of a street or public facility
which is reserved by custom for the use of pedestrians.
   "TOWN ENGINEER." The Hamden Town Engineer or any person authorized to act as
a representative of the Town Engineer.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.26 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   All snow, ice and sleet shall be removed from the sidewalks of the
town by the person responsible for the premises adjoining and fronting every
such sidewalk within 24 hours after the cessation of any storm during which
such snow, ice and sleet was precipitated.
   (B)   In the event that such snow, ice and sleet cannot be removed after
reasonable effort, the person responsible shall, within 24 hours after the
cessation of any storm during which such snow, ice and sleet was precipitated,
cause an abrasive substance, such as sand, to be spread on such sidewalk at
intervals of time frequent enough and in quantities sufficient to ensure that
such sidewalk is safe for pedestrian travel.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.27 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any individual who wishes to file a complaint alleging a violation of
§
96.26 shall contact the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall inspect the
premises and if warranted, shall cause to be left written notice that a
violation of §
96.26 has occurred and that any further delay in compliance shall result in a
penalty. Such notice may be attached in a conspicuous place on any such
premises where the sidewalk or adjacent sidewalk has been found to be in
violation of §
96.26 or delivered either by hand or certified mail.
   (B)   Not more than 24 hours (excluding weekends and holidays) after a
notice of violation is delivered as set forth in division (A) hereof, the Town
Engineer shall inspect such sidewalk and if warranted, shall contact the Police
Chief who shall cause to be left written notice that a violation has occurred
and that a penalty has been incurred.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.28 REMOVAL BY TOWN; COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   (A)   If after notice as set forth in §
96.27 hereof, the Town Engineer determines that the person responsible for a
premises adjoining and fronting a sidewalk has neglected to either remove said
accumulation or otherwise restore said sidewalk to a safe condition as required
under §
96.26, the Mayor may cause the accumulation to be removed or abrasive material
to be spread by employees of the town in order to return the sidewalk to a safe
condition, at the expense of the owner of the premises.
   (B)   Notice of the actions described in division (A) hereof and a bill for
the expense of materials and services rendered shall be delivered by hand or
certified mail from the Town Attorney's Office to the person responsible within
ten business days of the actions. Payment, in the form of a certified check or
money order made payable to "Treasurer, Town of Hamden," shall be made in
person or remitted by mail to the Finance Department, Memorial Town Hall,
Hamden, CT 06518.
   (C)   Any unpaid expenses shall become a lien upon the premises adjoining
and fronting such sidewalk upon the filing of a certificate of lien to be
recorded in the Town Clerk's Office within 60 days from the date upon which the
letter by the Town Attorney's Office is delivered to the owner of the premises.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.29 PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES.
   (A)   Any person responsible for a premises adjoining and fronting any
sidewalk which is found to be in violation of §
96.26, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $100.
Each 24 hour period that said sidewalks are not cleared or in a safe condition
for public travel shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Payments for said fines in the form of a certified check or money
order made payable to the "Treasurer, Town of Hamden," may be made in person or
remitted by mail to the Finance Department, Memorial Town Hall, 2372 Whitney
Avenue, Hamden, CT 06518.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.30 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The Legislative Council may adopt regulations consistent with this
subchapter which thereafter shall have the effect of an ordinance.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.31 SNOW AND ICE, PUBLIC SIDEWALKS; LIABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes are
hereby adopted, and are set forth in divisions (B) and (D) hereof.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 13a-149 of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any other General Statute or Special Act, the Town of Hamden shall
not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the
presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the town is the owner or
person in possession and control of the land abutting such sidewalk, other than
land used as highway or street, provided that the Town of Hamden shall be
liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
   (C)   The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence
of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his
property as the town had prior to the effective date of this section adopted,
pursuant to the provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes, and
shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said
duty is the proximate cause of said injury.
   (D)   No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who
owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall
be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first
sustained.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
§ 96.32 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other
than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct
the hearings authorized by this section.
   (B)   The Town Attorney, at any time within twelve months from the
expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties,
costs or fees for any citation issued under this subchapter, shall send notice
to the property owner. Such notice shall inform the owner and other person
cited:
      (1)   Of the allegations against him/her and the amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees due;
      (2)   That he/she may contest his/her liability before a citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten days of
the date thereof;
      (3)   That if he/she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him/her; and
      (4)   That such judgment may issue without further notice.
   (C)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division (B) of this
section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the
town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal,
to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any
person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten
days of the date of the first notice provided for in division (B) of this
section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated town
official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for herein and shall follow the procedures set forth in
division (E) of this section.
   (D)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided
the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
any interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing town official
shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall be deemed to be a business
record within the scope of § 52-180 of the Connecticut General Statutes and
evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official
shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests in writing at least
48 hours prior to hearing. A person wishing to contest his/her liability shall
appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his/her behalf. A designated
municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on
behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer
may enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice
and liability under the applicable provision(s) of this subchapter. The hearing
officer may accept from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and
citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine
thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer
shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof
as he deems fair and appropriate. Rules of the Superior Court regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce
his/her decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is
not liable, he/she shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in
writing accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he/she shall forthwith enter ,and assess the fines, penalties, costs
or fees against such person as provided by this subchapter and provide the
person with a written determination at the hearing.
   (E)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk
of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street,
Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The certified copy
of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within
such 12-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and
filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the
amount of such record of assessment and appropriate court costs against such
person in favor of the town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General
Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment,
shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.
   (F)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing
a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to § 52-259 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, with the Clerk of the Superior Court,
Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall
entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of
the superior court.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)
OBSTRUCTING
§ 96.35 PROHIBITED.
   No person shall plow, plant or cultivate within the fence lines of any of
the streets of the town so as to in any way fill up or obstruct the drains or
gutters of the streets. Nor shall any person place or leave any obstruction in
any of the streets of the town or in or upon any footpath or sidewalk along the
streets, except as hereinbefore provided.
('66 Code, § 59-25) Penalty, see §
96.99(B)
§ 96.36 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation, knowingly or willfully, shall violate any
provision of §
96.35.
('66 Code, § 59-26) Penalty, see §
96.99(B)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of§§
96.01,
96.05 or
96.08 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense. Each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Adopted 4-24-68)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of§§
96.35 or
96.36 shall forfeit and be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each
offense.
('66 Code, § 59-26)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a345e8b4e85fcdc43bd56cd2b99f2b4a75466906/
IMAGES/0-0-0-24.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a345e8b4e85fcdc43bd56cd2b99f2b4a75466906/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a345e8b4e85fcdc43bd56cd2b99f2b4a75466906/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a345e8b4e85fcdc43bd56cd2b99f2b4a75466906/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 97: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
Excavations
   
97.01   Permits required
   
97.01b   Excavation permit fees; notice required
   
97.02   Insurance/bond
   
97.03   Excavations
   
97.04   Restoration; temporary patching
   
97.04A   Restoration; permanent patching
   
97.05   Maintenance of temporary patch
   
97.06   Protection of
   
97.07   Violation of regulations prohibited
   
97.08   Interpretations
   
97.09   Abandonment prohibited; notice to fill; lien
   
97.10   Violation prohibited
Construction of Wells
   
97.15   Permit required
   
97.16   Contents of application
   
97.17   Final report
   
97.18   Use of water
   
97.19   Permit fee
   
97.20   Supplementary rules and regulations
   
97.21   Violation prohibited
Construction Contracts
   
97.35   Wages to be stated in contract
 
   
97.99   Penalty
EXCAVATIONS
§ 97.01 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall make any opening, excavation or perform
construction work of any kind within or through any street or roadway or
adjacent to streets and roadways that significantly alter the conditions and
appearances of streets and roadways in the town, except under the control and
direction of the Town Engineer and after a receipt of a permit issued by the
Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall have the authority to grant the permits
on the terms and conditions for the excavation and backfilling of the
excavations in any street or highway, and for the replacement of pavements
removed as hereinafter provided. Permits shall be issued in compliance with the
terms hereof, and a fee as set by the Legislative Council will be charged for
each permit, according to §
97.01b.
('66 Code, § 22-1; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.01b EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES; NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Town Engineer will collect a permit fee for excavation work based
on the following schedule:
      (1)   For each excavation up to 200 square feet: $95.
      (2)   For each excavation in excess of 200 square feet, and up to one
block in length: $150.
      (3)   For each additional block or part of an additional block: $150.
   (B)   In addition, at least 24 hours prior to beginning any excavation work,
the permittee shall contact the Town Engineer's office at (203) 287-7040 to
inform of the specific date when excavation will begin and its expected
duration on any street or roadway in town.
(Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 463, passed 6- 3-02)
§ 97.02 INSURANCE/BOND.
   (A)   No permit for excavating in any street or highway in the town shall be
granted until the applicant files with the Town Engineer evidence of general
liability insurance coverage, including property damage, of not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 in the aggregate and a performance bond in
the minimum amount of $10,000. The amount of such performance bond may be
increased on larger projects as required by the Town Engineer and shall require
that the applicant fill all excavations and restore the street or highway to a
condition as approved by the Town Engineer as hereinafter specified. The
insurance coverage and performance bond shall further require that the
applicant save and indemnify the town from any and all liability, damages and
costs that may in any manner be incurred by the applicant's excavation work and
the backfilling thereof, as well as the applicant's replacement of the paving
thereafter. All performance bonds required by this chapter shall be for the
period of the calendar year, and renewals shall be filed with the Town Engineer
before January 1 of each year. All insurance coverage shall be for the expected
duration of the excavation, backfilling and replacement paving work, plus for
such additional time as required by the Town Engineer, which shall be no less
than 90 days after completion of the applicant's work.
   (B)   Contractors and public service corporations may dispense with the
filing of a separate bond for each excavation by filing annually with the Town
Engineer the proper evidence of insurance coverage hereinbefore provided for,
conditioned, however, that an application must be made for a permit for each
separate excavation. Evidence of insurance coverage and performance bond
satisfactory to the Town Engineer shall be presented, and the performance bond
shall be in the amount approved by the Town Engineer.
('66 Code, § 22-2; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 589, passed 6-7-10)
§ 97.03 EXCAVATIONS.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to excavations and all other
construction work and repairs on public streets that restricts roadway traffic,
including work performed adjacent to public streets.
   (A)   The use of power machinery for excavation shall be allowed only by
special permission, in writing, of the director of public works. The contractor
shall, at all times, take all proper precautions to safeguard any sewer lines,
water mains, electrical conduits, telephone conduits, gas mains, gas lines or
other appurtenances encountered in excavation and shall properly maintain the
installations so as to provide uninterrupted service of the same. In locations
where the use of power equipment will endanger such installations the work of
excavation must be provided by hand labor.
   (B)   Excavations must be made in open cut and no tunneling will be allowed
except by special written permission from the director of public works.
Trenches shall be braced and sheeted when and as ordered by the department of
public works.
   (C)   The use of a uniformed police officer(s) shall be required for all
excavations, construction work and repairs on public streets, road closures and
work performed adjacent to roadways that significantly restrict said roadway to
traffic and create a traffic hazard, or when construction is performed upon any
part of town or state roadways, when deemed a hazard by the Chief of Police or
his/her designee, due to the effect on traffic patterns and flow at the time of
the work, for the purpose of traffic control and public safety. Such officer(s)
shall be authorized by the Police Department and the cost of same be charged
directly to the permittee or company performing such work. Where such officer
(s) provides services to more than one permittee, each permittee shall be
responsible proportionately for such expense.
   (D)   (1)   Police officer instructions/duties, responsibilities at job
sites shall be issued by the patrol bureau commander of the Police Department,
with the approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
      (2)   When on duty, all police officers shall wear orange safety coats or
traffic vests, and shall utilize appropriate equipment, including but not
limited to flags and flashlights in executing their responsibilities.
   (E)   Public utilities or other entities responding to emergency situations
that may threaten public safety may utilize a traffic control person until a
police officer arrives at the location of the emergency. If the on-duty shift
commander determines a uniformed police officer should be assigned to the
location for the purpose of traffic control and public safety, the public
utility company or other entity shall bear the cost of such traffic control.
   (F)   No excavations shall be made in a street that has been reconstructed
or resurfaced within the last five years. When excavations are deemed
unavoidable by the Director of Public Works or his designee, they will be
subject to special restoration requirements according to standard detail
regulations as established and promulgated by the Director of Public Works,
with the advice of the Town Engineer as needed.
('66 Code, § 22-3; Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.04 RESTORATION; TEMPORARY PATCHING.
   (A)   All excavations made under permit, within the street lines, provided
for in §§
97.01 to
97.10, inclusive, shall be backfilled with bank-run gravel as approved by the
Director of Public Works. All excavations shall be backfilled and compacted or
suitably covered to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or his
designee at the end of each workday, unless suitable alternatives have been
previously approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee. The
contractor shall be responsible for the cost of repairs due to settlement or
use of improper backfill material. Improper backfill shall be re-excavated and
temporarily patched in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. In
the event of the failure of a temporary patch, the contractor will be notified
and will repair the same within 24 hours of notification. Upon failure to
comply with this provision or for emergency situations when the public is at
risk, the Director of Public Works or his designee may direct the repair to be
done and will bill the contractor. The contractor shall be liable for the full
expense of such work, with such expense to be paid within 45 days of billing.
Delinquent payments will be charged against the performance bond.
   (B)   Material removed from the excavations may be used for backfill upon
written permission of the Director of Public Works or his designee. In all
cases when the material used for backfill is that which was excavated from the
trench, the backfilling must be done in properly compacted layers of two feet
for the entire depth of the trench. All muck, clay, frozen earth or other
deleterious material shall be replaced with bank-run gravel. When bank-run
gravel is used for backfilling, all materials removed from the excavation shall
be removed from the site and properly disposed of by the contractor. All
ditches within the travelway of any street or highway shall be sealed
immediately by the contractor with a suitable patching material approved by the
Department of Public Works.
   (C)   For utility companies or those companies that have a full permanent
paving schedule as determined by the Town Engineer, the trench shall be placed
in kind as a minimum. The trench shall be properly backfilled and sealed with a
temporary patch for a period not to exceed 180 days. Pavement shall be restored
to conform to Section 4.01 "Bituminous Concrete" of Form 814A - State of
Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges and Incidental Construction, as may be amended from time to time. For
those streets or roadways having a concrete base or surface, the trench shall
be temporarily backfilled as specified above. The backfill shall be brought to
a level to allow for the replacement of the concrete to the thickness of the
original contract or as directed by the Director of Public Works or the State
of Connecticut, as applicable.
   (D)   Concrete placed in any trench shall be allowed to cure for not less
than 72 hours. During the curing period, all excavations shall be properly
protected by barricades and warning lights furnished and maintained by the
contractor. If the concrete is a base material, the top surface shall be of
bituminous concrete or other paving material approved by the Department of
Public Works, with a minimum compacted thickness of three inches, properly
joined and sealed to the existing pavement. The sides of all excavations and
patches shall be cut in a straight line where joined to the old pavement. If
the concrete is the finished paving material, the concrete shall be screened
and rubbed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
   (E)   In case of any question, Section 4.01 "Concrete Pavement" of Form 814A
- State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications
for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, as may be amended from time to
time, may govern.
('66 Code, § 22-4; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.04A RESTORATION: PERMANENT PATCHING.
   (A)   Only utility companies or those companies that have a permanent paving
schedule as determined by the Town Engineer shall be exempt from this section.
   (B)   After a proper settling period, beyond the maintenance period
established pursuant to §
97.05, all temporary patches shall be made permanent by the town or its
contract designee as directed by the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   The Town Engineer shall establish and collect permanent patch
restoration fees to cover all costs associated with restoring and maintaining
sections of the streets and roadways that were excavated and temporarily
patched, consistent with this chapter. The fee shall be collected at the time
of the application for a permit issued under this chapter. The town shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section when it performs its own work.
      (1)   The permanent patch restoration fee for each excavation shall be a
minimum cash deposit in the amount of $1,000 plus $11 per square foot on a
local road and $15 per square foot on collector or arterial roads, in the form
of cash, money order or certified check to cover the cost of all repairs
relating to permanent patching made by the town or a contractor engaged by the
town. This deposit shall also cover the cost of any repairs which might occur
because of settlement of the trench after the period in which the contractor is
responsible pursuant to §
97.05. The Town Engineer may require an amount in excess of the minimum
required if he/she deems it necessary to cover a larger project or several
anticipated excavations.
      (2)   The Town Engineer may also adjust the restoration fee amount to
include a surcharge for administration and inspections.
      (3)   The monies collected shall be deposited in a special account and
utilized to cover expenses incurred by the town for restoration work caused by
the issuance of permits under this chapter and for similar pavement repairs.
   (D)   The permittee shall also reimburse the town for any and all costs the
town may incur in replacement or repair of traffic controls or pavement
markings disrupted, damaged or removed by work performed under an excavation
permit.
   (E)   The permittee and persons liable under §
97.06 may be billed by the town for all patching items and protection measures
not done by the permittee. If billed by the town, there will be an additional
percentage charge for administration and handling costs.
   (F)   All invoices shall be paid no later than 45 days from the date of
billing. A monthly service charge of $25 will be imposed on accounts 45 days
past due.
   (G)   When a permittee under this section excavates 50% or more of the width
of the existing paved surface of a street, the Director of Public Works or his
designee may direct that the entire area of the existing pavement be milled
and/or resurfaced.
   (H)   The expense of restoration work performed by the town or its agents
shall be drawn from the restoration fee or, if the restoration fee is
insufficient, collected from the permittee or its surety by any proper action.
(Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 462, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 736, passed 3-
6-23)
§ 97.05 MAINTENANCE OF TEMPORARY PATCH.
   The contractor shall guarantee to maintain the repaired excavation for a
period of 180 days after its acceptance by the town, and in the event that it
is necessary to make any repairs to the excavation or restoration of the
pavement during this 180-day period, this guarantee shall be extended to
include a period of 30 days from the date of the repair work.
('66 Code, § 22-5; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.06 PROTECTION OF.
   All excavations shall be properly protected by barricades, danger warning
signs, and during the night season by proper flares or red warning lights. It
shall be one of the conditions of the permit and the duty of the contractor to
maintain these warning signs and lights at all times that the excavation is
open or as hereinbefore specified. In the event that it is necessary to
excavate across the entire width of any street or highway, only 1/2 of the
street or highway must be excavated at one time and the same shall be properly
restored for the safe passage of vehicular traffic before the remaining 1/2 of
the street is excavated. In the event of the above, it shall be one of the
conditions of the permit and the duty of the contractor to maintain proper
safety facilities to safely regulate both pedestrian and vehicular traffic at
the site, which procedure must be approved by the public works department and
the police department. In the event of an emergency when it shall be necessary
to close the entire street or highway, the department of public works, the
police department and the fire department shall be notified at once of the
action to close the street or highway.
('66 Code, § 22-6)
§ 97.07 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   If any person, firm or corporation does not abide by all of the
provisions of this chapter, the town, by action of the Town Engineer, has the
authority to refuse the contractor any permits for excavation work for any
length of time deemed necessary.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each such offense. Each day that
the violation of these regulations continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense for the purpose of the penalty.
   (C)   The cancellation of the bond or insurance shall automatically void any
permit which has been issued.
   (D)   In the case of an emergency, if the contractor or any of his
representatives are not available, the town has the right to repair any defect
to eliminate any hazard or remove any emergency condition which it may deem
necessary, and the contractor shall reimburse the town for any costs incurred
in the completion of the same.
('66 Code, § 22-7; Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the event of any question as to the interpretation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the use of police officers,
which is in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the
decision of the Town Engineer or the Department of Public Works, as applicable,
shall be final.
('66 Code, § 22-8) (Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)
§ 97.09 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; NOTICE TO FILL; LIEN.
   The abandonment by the owner or the person, firm, or corporation having
control of any parcel of land situated in the town, of any cesspool, well, dry
well, spring or excavation located on the land that is or that may become a
hazard to life and limb is prohibited. If any owner or the person, firm, or
corporation having the control of any such parcel of land shall fail or neglect
to cover or fill in and grade the abandoned cesspool, well, dry well, spring or
excavation within 48 hours of the receipt of notice to do so from the
Legislative Council or its agent, then the Legislative Council shall cause the
abandoned cesspool, well, dry well, spring or excavation to be covered or
filled in and graded, and the expense so incurred shall be a lien in favor of
the town upon such property until paid, and the amount of the expense may be
recovered in an action in the name of the town.
('66 Code, § 22-12)
§ 97.10 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of §
97.09.
('66 Code, § 22-13) Penalty, see §
97.99 (A)
CONSTRUCTION OF WELLS
§ 97.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, dig,
drive, or drill a well or cause to be constructed, dug, driven, or drilled a
well in the town without first obtaining a written permit from the director of
health or his duly appointed inspector.
('66 Code, § 70-1) Penalty, see §
97.99(B)
§ 97.16 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for a permit shall be in writing, shall be in the name of the
owner of the premises where the well is to be constructed, or his agent, and
shall contain the information as may be required by the director of health on a
form provided by the town health department.
('66 Code, § 70-2)
§ 97.17 FINAL REPORT.
   Within 10 days after the completion of construction of any well, the owner
or his agent shall file a final report with the town health department giving
the depth and size of the well, pumping facilities, and other pertinent
information that may be required by the director of health or his duly
appointed inspector.
('66 Code, § 70-3)
§ 97.18 USE OF WATER.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall use or permit to be used any water
from any well for any purpose other than that set forth in the application,
without written permission of the director of health or his duly appointed
inspector.
('66 Code, § 70-4) Penalty, see §
97.99 (B)
§ 97.19 PERMIT FEE.
   For every permit issued hereunder there shall be paid to the town health
department, for the use of the town, a permit fee in the amount of $5.
('66 Code, § 70-5; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)
§ 97.20 SUPPLEMENTARY RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director of health shall be authorized from time to time to make such
additional or supplementary rules and regulations relating to the construction
of new wells as it may deem necessary.
('66 Code, § 70-6)
§ 97.21 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any provisions of §§
97.15 to
97.21, inclusive.
('66 Code, § 70-7) Penalty, see §
97.99 (B)
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
§ 97.35 WAGES TO BE STATED IN CONTRACT.
   (A)   The advertised specification for every public works project by the
Town of Hamden that is 90% or more of the amount set forth by the Connecticut
General Statues, as may be amended, for new construction and/or that is 90% or
more of the amount set forth by the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be
amended, for remodeling, refinishing, refurbishing, rehabilitation, alteration
or repair work, and which requires or involves the employment of mechanics,
laborers or workmen employed upon the work contracted to be done, shall contain
a provision stating the minimum wages to be paid various classes of laborers,
mechanics and workman shall be based upon the wages established by the State
through its Department of Labor to be prevailing for the corresponding classes
of mechanics, laborers or workmen employed on projects of a character similar
to the contract work in the town.
   (B)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall contain a
stipulation that the contractor or his subcontractor shall pay all mechanics,
laborers or workmen employed directly upon the site of the work,
unconditionally and not less often than once a week, and without subsequent
deduction or rebate on any account, the full amount accrued at time of payment,
computed at wage rates not less than those stated in the advertised
specifications, regardless of any contractual relationship which may be alleged
to exist between the contractor or subcontractor and such laborers, mechanics
and workmen, and that the scale of wages to be paid shall be posted by the
contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of the work.
   (C)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall further stipulate
that there may be withheld from the contractor so much of accrued payments as
may be considered necessary by the town to pay to laborers, mechanics and
workmen employed by the contractor or any subcontractor on the work difference
between the rates of wages required by the contract to be paid laborers,
mechanics or workmen on the work and the rates of wages received by such
laborers, mechanics or workmen and not refunded to the contractor,
subcontractor or other agents.
   (D)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall contain the
further provision that in the event it is found by the town that any laborer,
mechanic or workmen employed by the contractor or any subcontractor directly on
the site of the work covered by the contract has been or is being paid a rate
of wages less than the rate of wages required by the contract or be paid as
aforesaid the town may, by written notice to the contractor, terminate the
contract, terminate the contractor's right to proceed with the work or such
part of the work as to which there has been a failure to pay said required
wages and to prosecute the work to completion by contract or otherwise, and the
contractor and his sureties shall be liable to the town for any excess cost
occasioned the town thereby.
(Ord. 295, passed 6-5-89; Am. Ord. 602, passed 3-7-11)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §
97.10 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
('66 Code, § 22-13)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §
97.15,
97.18 or
97.21 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50.
('66 Code, § 70-7)
CHAPTER 98: SCENIC ROADS
Section
   
98.01   Statement of purpose
   
98.02   Designation of scenic road
   
98.03   Designation procedure
   
98.04   Treatment of scenic roads
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to help preserve the town's natural beauty
and rural character by enabling the Legislative Council, with the consent of
abutting property owners, to preserve scenic, rural roads.
(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)
§ 98.02 DESIGNATION OF SCENIC ROAD.
   (A)   The Legislative Council shall consider only those town roads which
meet the criteria for scenic road status set forth at Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-
149a. Each must be a town road which is free from intensive commercial
development and intensive vehicular traffic and meet at least one of the
following criteria:
      (1)   It is unpaved,
      (2)   It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls,
      (3)   The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width,
      (4)   It offers scenic views,
      (5)   It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain, or
      (6)   It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
   (B)   Additionally, it must be nominated for scenic road status by a
petition signed by owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the road or
portion of the road.
(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)
§ 98.03 DESIGNATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When a highway or road is to be considered for designation as a scenic
road the Legislative Council shall schedule a public hearing on the proposal.
Hearing notices and deadlines shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
by-laws of the Council. Additionally, the Council shall notify the Public Works
Director and owners of lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of a
highway, of the proposed designation and the scheduled public hearing.
   (B)   Following the Public Hearing, the Legislative Council shall vote on
the proposed designation. The designation shall become effective upon the
approval of the Legislative Council and upon the filing of the petition, signed
by a majority of abutting landowners (§
98.02 above), with the Town Clerk.
   (C)   The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the Legislative
Council by using the same procedures and by having the written concurrence of
the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway. In the event
that the designation can be shown to create a threat to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the citizens of the town, then the designation may be
rescinded without the concurrence of abutting property owners.
   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a designation of a highway or road or portion
of a highway or road as a scenic road pursuant to this chapter may appeal such
designation in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review provided
for appeals in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-28.
(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)
§ 98.04 TREATMENT OF SCENIC ROADS.
   (A)   No highway or road which has been designated as a scenic road under
this chapter shall be altered or improved, including but not limited to,
widening of the right-of-way or of the traveled portion of the highway, paving,
changes of grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and removal of mature
trees, except for good cause as determined by the Legislative Council. The
Council shall state the reasons for such future alterations and improvements in
its minutes.
   (B)   Any highway or portion of any highway designated as a scenic road
shall be maintained by the town, in good and sufficient repair and in passable
condition. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning
or occupying land abutting a scenic road from maintaining and repairing the
land which abuts the scenic road if such maintenance or repair occurs on land
not within the right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road.
(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of §
98.04 shall be fined the sum of $90 each day said violation continues such
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 281, passed 11-14-88)
CHAPTER 99: FAIR HOUSING; HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
Section
Fair Housing
   
99.01   Statement of policy
   
99.02   Fair Housing Officer; goals and objectives
   
99.03   Equal opportunity and fair housing review criteria
   
99.04   Review for equal opportunity
   
99.05   Fair housing review criteria
   
99.06   Actions to use minority and women's business firms
Housing Partnership
   
99.15   Housing Partnership created
   
99.16   Responsibilities of town
   
99.17   Duties of Partnership
   
99.18   Expenses of Partnership
FAIR HOUSING
§ 99.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the town to affirmatively promote maximum choice in the
purchase or rental of public or private housing without regard for race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or mental handicap, marital
status, family characteristics, or economic status; to eliminate or
substantially mitigate any practices or activities, public or private,
intentional or accidental, which restrict access to housing through
discriminatory means; and to encourage the deconcentration of racial, ethnic,
and economic groups throughout the town and region.
(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.02 FAIR HOUSING OFFICER; GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Fair Housing Officer appointed. In order to carry out the fair housing
policy of the town, the Mayor shall appoint a Fair Housing Officer. The Fair
Housing Officer shall be assigned to the Office of Housing and Community
Development (OHCD) and shall report to the Community Resources Development
Director or his designee. The Fair Housing Officer shall prepare and carry out
an annual plan in accordance with the goals and objectives set forth in
division (B) below. At least annual by the Fair Housing Officer shall report to
the Mayor and the Legislative Council on his progress in meeting the goals and
objectives. The annual report shall include recommended actions by municipal
departments that would lead to increased compliance with the Fair Housing
Program.
   (B)   Goals and objectives.
      (1)   Education. Education goals and objectives shall be as follows:
         (a)   To provide educational, counseling, information, and referral
services from a centralized location;
         (b)   To develop written materials for all segments of the housing
market, that is financial and insurance institutions, real estate agents,
landlords/owners, and tenants/purchasers;
         (c)   To secure and disseminate affirmative marketing agreements with
banks, real estate agents, landlords, and management companies;
         (d)   To provide counseling and referral services for all housing-
related matters;
         (e)   To publish an annual survey of housing assistance and resources;
         (f)   To promote regional and local fair housing initiatives such as
the creation of a Community Housing Resource Board;
         (g)   To counsel all owners of multi-family housing who receive any
governmental assistance;
         (h)   To do outreach in cooperation with schools, civic and religious
organizations, and the media; and
         (i)   To conduct workshops for all segments of the housing markets.
      (2)   Planning and analysis. Planning and analysis goals and objectives
shall be follows:
         (a)   In accordance with 24 CFR Section 570.904(c)(1), to conduct an
annual review of impediments to Fair Housing choice is reflected in: the sale
or rental of dwellings; the provision of housing brokerage services; the
provision of financing and insurance; public policies and actions affecting the
approval of sites and other building requirements; and administrative policies
concerning community development and housing activities. There has been a
finding of housing discrimination by a court, HUD, or CHRO, the analysis shall
include steps which the own shall take to assist in remedying the
discriminatory condition;
         (b)   In conjunction with HUD and CHRO, to develop mechanism for
reporting discrimination complaints and discriminatory practices;
         (c)   To review existing state and federal laws to determine need for
town ordinances and town support of additional state or federal legislation;
and
         (d)   Through organizations such as the Fair Housing Association of
Connecticut and the Connecticut Housing Coalition to monitor fair housing,
landlord-tenant, and housing production developments on the regional, state and
national level.
      (3)   Monitoring and enforcement. Monitoring and enforcement goals and
objectives shall be as follows:
         (a)   To monitor throughout town and region discriminatory practices
including, but not limited to refusal to deal; imposition of discriminatory
terms and conditions; discriminatory advertising; institutional disinvestment
or redlining; blockbusting or racial steering; and discrimination against
minority real estate agents.
         (b)   To investigate complaints of discriminatory practices in the
town, refer complaints to appropriate agencies, and assist complainants in
obtaining satisfactory relief.
         (c)   To, in conjunction with HUD or CHRO, conduct investigations or
testing where discrimination is suspected.
(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.03 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND FAIR HOUSING REVIEW CRITERIA.
   Where the criteria in this section are met, the Department will presume that
the recipient has carried out its CDBG-funded program in accordance with civil
rights certifications and civil rights requirements of the act relating to
equal employment opportunity, equal opportunity in services, benefits, and
participation, and is affirmatively furthering fair housing unless:
   (A)   There is evidence which shows, or from which it is reasonable to
infer, that the recipient, motivated by considerations of race, color, religion
where applicable, sex, national origin, age, or handicap, has treated some
persons less favorably than others;
   (B)   There is evidence that a policy, practice, standard, or method of
administration, although neutral on its face, operates to deny or affect
adversely in a significantly disparate way the provision of employment or
services, benefits or participation to persons of a particular race, color,
religion where applicable, sex, national origin, age, or handicap, or fair
housing to persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin; or
   (C)   Where the Secretary required a further assurance pursuant to CFR
Section 570.304 in order to accept the recipient's prior civil rights
certification, the recipient has failed to meet any such assurance.
§ 99.04 REVIEW FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY.
   CFR Section 570.601(d) sets forth the general requirements for title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 570.602 sets forth the general requirements
for Section 109 of the act. Together these provisions prohibit discrimination
in any program or activity funded in whole or in part with funds made available
under this part.
   (A)   Review for equal employment opportunity. The Department will presume
that a recipient's hiring and employment practices have been carried out in
compliance with its equal opportunity certifications and requirements of the
act. This presumption may be rebutted where, based on the totality of
circumstances, there has been a deprivation of employment, promotion, or
training opportunities by a recipient to any person within the meaning of
Section 109 of the act. The event to which persons of a particular race, gender
or ethnic background are represented in the workforce may in certain
circumstances be considered, together with complaints, performance reviews, and
other information.
   (B)   Review of equal opportunity in services, benefits and participation.
The Department will presume a recipient is carrying out its programs and
activities in accordance with the civil rights certifications and requirements
of the act. This presumption may be rebutted where, based on the totality of
circum stances, there has been a deprivation of services, benefits, or
participation in any program or activity funded in whole or in part with block
grant funds by a recipient to any person within the meaning of Section 109 of
the act. The extent of which persons of a particular race, gender, or ethnic
background participate in a program or activity may in certain circumstances be
considered, together with complaints, performance reviews, and other
information.
(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.05 FAIR HOUSING REVIEW CRITERIA.
   Section 570.601(b) sets the general requirements for Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 and the grantee's certification that it will affirmatively
further fair housing. In reviewing a recipient's actions in carrying out its
housing and community development activities in a manner to affirmatively
further fair housing in the private and public housing sectors, absent
independent evidence to the contrary, the Department will consider that a
recipient has taken such actions in accordance with its certification if the
recipient meets the following review criteria:
   (A)   The recipient has conducted an analysis to determine the impediments
to fair housing choice in its housing and community development program and
activities. The term "FAIR HOUSING CHOICE" means the ability of persons,
regardless of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, of similar income
levels to have available to them the same housing choices. This analysis shall
include a review for impediments to fair housing choice in the following areas:
      (1)   The sale or rental of dwellings;
      (2)   The provision of housing brokerage services;
      (3)   The provision of financing assistance for dwellings;
      (4)   Public policies and actions affecting the approval of sites and
other building requirements used in the approval process for the construction
of publicly assisted housing;
      (5)   The administrative policies concerning community development and
housing activities, such as urban homesteading, multi-family rehabilitation,
and activities causing displacement, which affect opportunities of minority
households to select housing inside or outside areas of minority concentration;
and
      (6)   Where there is a determination of unlawful segregation or other
housing discrimination by a court or a finding of noncompliance by HUD
regarding assisted housing within a recipient's jurisdiction, an analysis of
the actions which could be taken by the recipient to help remedy the
discriminatory condition, including actions involving the expenditure of funds
made available under this part.
   (B)   Based upon the conclusions of the analysis in division (A) above, the
recipient has taken lawful steps, consistent with this part, relating to
housing and community development to overcome the effects of conditions that
limit fair housing choice within the recipient's jurisdiction. Such actions may
include:
      (1)   Enactment and enforcement of an ordinance providing for fair
housing consistent with the federal fair housing law;
      (2)   Support of the administration and enforcement of state fair housing
laws providing for fair housing consistent with federal fair housing law;
      (3)   Participation in voluntary partnerships developed with public and
private organizations to promote the achievement of the goal of fair housing
choice (including implementation of a locally developed and HUD-approved New
Horizons comprehensive fair housing plan);
      (4)   Contracting with private organizations, including private fair
housing organizations, where such support will bring about actions consistent
with Titles VI and VIII, to address the impediments identified in the analysis
described in division (A) above;
      (5)   Activities which assist in remedying findings or determinations of
unlawful segregation or other discrimination involving assisted housing within
the recipient's jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Other actions consistent with law determined to be appropriate
based upon the conclusions of the analysis.
(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.06 ACTIONS TO USE MINORITY AND WOMEN'S BUSINESS FIRMS.
   The Department will review a recipient's performance to determine if it has
administered its activities funded with assistance under this part in a manner
to encourage use of minority and women's business enterprises described in
Executive Orders 11625, 12432, and 12138, and 24 CFR 85.36(e). In making this
review, the Department will determine if the grantee has taken actions required
under 24 CFR 85.36(e), and will review the effectiveness of those actions in
accomplishing the objectives of 24 CFR 85.36(e) and the Executive Orders. No
recipient; is required by this section to attain or maintain any particular
statistical level of participation in its contractor's activities by race,
ethnicity, or gender of the contractor's owners or managers.
(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
§ 99.15 HOUSING PARTNERSHIP CREATED.
   There is hereby created the Hamden Housing Partnership, appointed by the
chief elected official of the municipality. The Partnership shall consist of
the following members:
   (A)   The chief elected official of the town:
   (B)   Representatives of the Planning Commission, Zoning Commission, Inland
Wetlands Commission, Housing Authority, and any local community development
agency, not to exceed three in number;
   (C)   Representatives of the local business community, such as local
bankers, realtors, and developers, not to exceed three in number;
   (D)   Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates,
members of the clergy, members of local civic groups and representatives of
local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed three in number; and
   (E)   Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to
exceed three in number.
(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.16 RESPONSIBILITIES OF TOWN.
   The responsibilities of the municipality, in order to receive initial
designation under the State Housing Partnership program, shall include the
following:
   (A)   Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Town Housing
Partnership has been formed in accordance with P.A. 88-305; and
   (B)   Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local
resources have been committed to the Town Housing Partnership.
(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.17 DUTIES OF PARTNERSHIP.
   Duties of the Town Housing Partnership, in order to receive development
designation under the State Housing Partnership Program, shall include the
following:
   (A)   To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the
community;
   (B)   To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that
is suitable for the development of affordable housing;
   (C)   To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such
regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the community;
   (D)   To identify any necessary changes to such regulations;
   (E)   To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet
identified housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing
needs;
   (F)   To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to
achieve such priorities in accordance with said plan; and
   (G)   To start an activity, development or project designed to create
additional affordable housing in the town.
(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)
§ 99.18 EXPENSES OF PARTNERSHIP.
   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the
municipality in carrying out any Partnership activities authorized by this
resolution without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any person
have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or otherwise
without a prior specific approval of the legislative body.
(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)
CHAPTER 100: EMERGENCY ALARMS
Section
   
100.01   Intent; purpose
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Requirements
   
100.04   Exceptions
   
100.05   Notification of fine; suspension
   
100.06   Promulgation of regulations
   
100.07   Disclaimer of liability
   
100.08   Appeal; hearing procedure for citations
   
100.09   Enforcement
 
   
100.98   Severability
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 INTENT; PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide minimum standards
and regulations applicable to users and installers of residential and
commercial burglar, fire, hold-up, medical, and automatic dialer systems within
the town, to promote the responsible use of alarm systems to prevent
unnecessary emergency response to false alarms and thereby protect the
emergency response capacity of the town from misuse.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ALARM SYSTEM." An assembly of equipment and devices (or a single device,
such as a solid state unit, which may operate from a 110 volt AC line) arranged
to signal the presence of a hazard requiring the urgent attention of and to
which the Hamden Police and/or Fire Department personnel and equipment are
expected to respond. This includes, but shall not be limited to, all burglar
alarms, fire alarms, hold-up alarms, medical alarms and automatic telephone
dialing devices. This does not include any alarm systems or smoke detectors
which do not signal outside an alarmed premise or an alarm system on motor
vehicles.
   "ALARM USER." Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind which owns, controls or occupies any
building, dwelling, structure, property or facility wherein an alarm system is
maintained.
   "AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE." An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
   "BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM." An alarm system signaling the entry or attempted
entry into the area protected by the system.
   "CENTRAL COMMUNICATIONS CENTER." The police and fire communications area,
other facilities which have communications equipment and the Police/Fire
Department dispatchers.
   "FALSE ALARM."
      (1)   An alarm system activated in the absence of an emergency, whether
willfully or by inadvertence, negligence, or an unintentional act, including
the malfunction of the alarm system to which the Police Department and/or the
Fire Department responds. The definition excludes alarm(s) caused by the
Central Communications Center receiving equipment if the alarm is directly
connected to the alarm board; testing or repairing of telephone or electrical
lines or equipment outside the protected premises; acts of God, such as
earthquake, flood, windstorm, thunder, lightning or violent weather conditions;
or an attempted illegal entry where there is visible evidence of a crime in
progress, or in the case or an emergency medical alarm, an actual medical
emergency requiring police, fire and/or medical personnel. If doubt exists as
to the cause of the false alarm, the Police Chief and in cases of fire and/or
medical alarms, the Fire Chief shall have the final decision regarding the
circumstances of the activation.
      (2)   Multiple alarms received by the Police and/or Fire Department
before the systems can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time.
      (3)   This definition also includes the intentional activation of a hold-
up alarm for other than a hold-up in progress, the intentional activation of a
burglar alarm for other than a burglary, the intentional activation of a
medical alarm for other than a medical emergency, or the intentional activation
of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard. Circumstances in which the
activator reasonably believed that an emergency situation existed shall not
constitute a false alarm. False fire alarms shall not mean alarms transmitted
because of a water main break or similar cause that occurs outside of the
protected property.
   "FIRE ALARM SYSTEM." A signal or message from a person or other device
indicating the existence of a fire or other emergency which requires Fire
Department action.
   "FIRE CHIEF." The Fire Chief for the Town of Hamden or a designated
representative.
   "HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEM." An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
   "MEDICAL ALARM SYSTEM." An alarm system signaling a medical or other
emergency which requires Police or Fire Department action.
   "POLICE CHIEF." The Chief of Police for the Town of Hamden or a designated
representative.
   "PROTECTED PREMISES." The structure, dwelling or property on which an alarm
system is located.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-
3-10)
§ 100.03 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any alarm user installing an alarm system within the Town of Hamden
shall register with the Hamden Police Department or in cases of a fire and/or
medical alarm system the Hamden Fire Department at least 60 days after the
installation date of the alarm system.
   (B)   All existing alarm systems shall be registered with the Hamden Police
Department or in cases of a fire and/or medical alarm system, the Hamden Fire
Department, within 60 days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 584.
   (C)   At the time of registration, an alarm user shall be informed and
execute a consent, in such a form as may be prescribed by the town, that the
registration of an alarm user's system may be suspended and that the alarm user
shall pay to the town for false alarms as described below.
   (D)   At the time of registration, the Police Department or in the case of a
fire and/or medical alarm system, the Fire Department shall be furnished, in
writing the following information: name, address and telephone number of the
alarm user; other person(s) authorized in an emergency to gain access to the
protected area; and the alarm company who installed the system, is maintaining
the system, or who monitors the system. It shall be the responsibility of each
alarm user to notify, in writing, the Police Department or in the case or a
fire and/or medical alarm system, the Fire Department, with any changes.
   (E)   The registration of an alarm user's alarm system may be suspended by
the Police Chief during any one calendar year if the system has generated 12 or
more false alarms and no verifiable effort has been made by the alarm user to
eliminate the false alarm.
   (F)   No person, firm or corporation shall install an automatic telephone
dialing device used with an alarm system within the town, terminating at the
Town of Hamden Central Communications Center, after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 584.
   (G)   Automatic telephone dialing devices in existence as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 584 shall be programmed to a special telephone number,
which shall be designated by the Police Chief or in the case of a fire and/or
medical alarm system, by the Fire Chief, within 60 days of the effective date
of this chapter.
   (H)   All alarm systems, as defined in this chapter, which sound an audible
signal which may be heard outside of the protected premises, shall be equipped
with a device which shall limit the duration of the audible signal to not more
than 30 minutes in accordance with Section 22a-69-5.1 of the Administrative
Regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of
Connecticut.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to alarm systems owned or controlled by any
federal, state or local government.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.05 NOTIFICATION OF FINE; SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall notify the alarm user by mail of any false
alarm fine or suspension of registration. Within 15 days of mailing the notice,
the alarm user may file a written appeal of the charge with the Police Chief.
The notice of appeal shall contain information to show that the alarm giving
rise to the fine or suspension of registration was not a false alarm within the
meaning of this chapter. The notice of appeal shall also contain a return
address to which the Police Chief shall send notice of his/her decision.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall consider the information filed by the alarm
user, reaffirm or rescind the false alarm charge and, within 15 days of receipt
of the appeal, notify the subscriber of the decision by mail.
   (C)   The Police Chief may designate one or more subordinates to perform the
duties under divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   Any alarm user may appeal the decision of the Police Chief in
accordance with §
100.08.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.06 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The Police Chief may promulgate rules and regulations to implement this
chapter.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.07 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The Town of Hamden shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any
signal line system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon
receipt of an alarm from such source, for any failure or neglect of any person
in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or removal of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of such signals
or messages.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.08 APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other
than police officers, employees, or persons who issue citations, to conduct the
hearings authorized by this section.
   (B)   If any alarm user who is sent notice pursuant to §
100.05 wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person
or by mail, to an official designated by the town. The payment shall be
inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of
the person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver
or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the notice
provided for in §
100.05 shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated town
official shall certify the person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for herein.
   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided
the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
an interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing town official or
police officer shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall be deemed to
be a business record within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and
evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official
or police officer shall be required at the hearing if the person so requests. A
person wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence on his/her behalf. A designated municipal officer, other than
the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the
person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default
against him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the
applicable provision(s) of this chapter. The hearing officer may accept from
the person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports, and
other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance
of the person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof, as he/she deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be
strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the hearing.
If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall dismiss the
matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If he/she
determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall forthwith
enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as
provided by this chapter.
   (D)   If the assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk
of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street,
Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The certified copy
of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within the
12-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed
as one record of assessment.
   The clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of the record of assessment and
appropriate court costs against the person in favor of the town.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the hearing
officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a
civil money judgment and a levy of execution on the judgment may issue without
further notice to the person.
   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of the assessment by
filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount
equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §
52-259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court, Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall entitle the person to a hearing in
accordance with the judges of the Superior Court (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-152c).
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-
3-10)
§ 100.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement and administration of this chapter shall be the function
of the Police Chief.
   (B)   A maximum of two false alarms from any one protected property per
calendar year shall be permitted.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the third false alarm from any one protected property
and for each false alarm thereafter during the calendar year, the Police Chief
shall assess a fee against the alarm user. Any police officer or firefighter
responding to an alarm which is determined to be false shall promptly notify
the Police Chief in writing, and shall leave written notification of the false
alarm at the scene of the alarm.
   (D)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing by the Police Chief after
the first false alarm recorded during any one calendar year so that corrective
steps may be taken to eliminate the false alarm signals.
   (E)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing for failure to register an
alarm system as required by §
100.03 so that corrective steps may be taken to register the alarm system.
   (F)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing by the Police chief after
the second false alarm recorded during any one calendar year that any further
issuance of false alarms will incur a penalty and that the alarm system should
be inspected by a properly licensed alarm company.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-
3-10) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.98 SEVERABILITY.
   All provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed and if for any reason any word, clause or paragraph or section
of this chapter shall be held to make the same unconstitutional, this chapter
shall not be hereby invalidated and the remainder of this chapter shall
continue in effect. Any provision herein, which is in conflict with the
Connecticut General Statutes, is hereby repealed, it being understood that the
said General Statutes shall take precedence over this chapter.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any alarm user shall be fined $50 for the third false alarm, $75 for
the fourth false alarm, $100 for the fifth false alarm, $100 for the sixth
false alarm, $150 for the seventh false alarm, $200 for the eighth false alarm
and $250 for the ninth and each subsequent false alarm thereafter transmitted
from any one protected property within any one calendar year. Such fine may be
waived or suspended by the Police Chief if the cause of the false alarm is
beyond the control of the alarm user and/or if the alarm user demonstrates a
cooperative effort to resolve a recurring problem of indeterminate cause;
provided, however, that the waiver or suspension of fine does not preclude
suspension as provided in §
100.03(E), if such recurring false alarms continue to present a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Any alarm user shall be fined $100 for each of the following
violations:
      (1)   Failure to register an alarm system after written notification as
provided for in §
100.09(E);
      (2)   Use of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system in violation of
§§
100.03(F) and (G);
      (3)   Use of an exterior audible alarm system in violation of §
100.03(H); and
      (4)   Failure to disconnect an alarm system upon suspension of the
system's registration.
   (C)   Fees and fines may be paid in person or remitted by mail in the form
of a check or money order made payable to "Treasurer, Town of Hamden," and
delivered to the Hamden Police Department, 2900 Dixwell Avenue, Hamden, CT
within ten business days of receipt of the bill from the town.
(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-
3-10)
CHAPTER 101: NOISE
Section
   
101.01   Definitions
   
101.02   Classifications of noise zones and districts
   
101.03   Noise standards
   
101.04   Exclusions
   
101.05   Exemptions
   
101.06   Equipment and measurement
   
101.07   Appeal
   
101.08   Enforcement
 
   
101.99   Penalty
§ 101.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, Where terms
are not defined under the provisions of this chapter and are defined in the
noise regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection,
they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in those regulations.
Otherwise, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings
or such meaning as the context herein may imply.
   "ANSI." The American National Standards Institute or its successor body. Any
ANSI standard referred to in this chapter shall be deemed to incorporate
further revisions by reference.
   "CONSTRUCTION." Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition for or of public
or private structures, utilities, rights-of-way or similar property.
   "DAYTIME HOURS." The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., weekdays and
Saturday, and the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   "EMERGENCY." Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.
   "EMERGENCY SOUND SIGNAL." An audible electronic or mechanical siren or
signal device attached to an authorized emergency vehicle or within or attached
to a building pole or other structure for the purpose of sounding or testing an
alarm relating to fire or emergency management.
   "EMITTER." An individual or entity who is the owner or occupant of the
premises from which noise commences.
   "EXCESSIVE NOISE." Emitter noise zone levels from noise sources exceeding
the standards set forth in §
101.03 beyond the boundary of the emitter's noise zones.
   "IMPULSE NOISE." Noise of short duration (generally less than one second),
especially of high intensity, abrupt onset and rapid decay, and often rapidly
changing spectral composition.
   "MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT." All engine or motor-powered garden or maintenance
tools intended for repetitive use, including but not limited to lawnmowers,
riding tractors, blowers, and including equipment intended for infrequent
service work, including but not limited to chain saws, log chippers or paving
rollers.
   "MOBILE SOURCES OF NOISE." Shall include, but are not limited to such
sources as automobiles, trucks and other vehicles used to transport individuals
or items along public rights-of-way.
   "NIGHTTIME HOURS." The hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and
Saturday, and the hours after 9:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. on Sunday.
   "NOISE ZONE." An individual unit of land or a group of contiguous parcels
under the same ownership as indicated by public land records and, as relates to
noise emitters, includes contiguous publicly-dedicated streets and highway
rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, water bodies and waters of the state.
   "RECEPTOR." An individual or entity who is the owner or occupant of premises
affected by or receiving noise.
   "SITE." The area bounded by a property line on or in which a source of noise
exists.
   "SOUND LEVEL METER." An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound
levels. The sound level meter shall conform to ANSI Specifications for Sound
Level Meters S1.4-1984 (1997).
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
§ 101.02 CLASSIFICATION OF NOISE ZONES AND DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Noise zone classifications. Noise zone classifications shall be based
on the designated use of any parcel or tract, based on the zoning district in
which a parcel is located as described on the Zoning Map and in the Zoning
Regulations of the town as amended from time to time; provided that any parcel
whose use is lawfully nonconforming to its district at the time this chapter is
enacted shall be classified for noise emission purposes according to the
district appropriate for the nonconforming use. The current designation shall
be the determining factor, and any change in the zoning map or zoning
regulations will also represent a change in the Noise District.
   (B)   Noise Districts.
      (1)   Residential Noise District. Lands or noise zones contained within
residential districts by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town shall
be designated as Residential Noise Districts, and shall be subject to the noise
standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.
      (2)   Business Noise District. Lands contained within business districts
by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town shall be designated as
Business Noise Districts, and shall be subject to the noise standards
prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.
      (3)   Manufacturing Noise District. Lands contained within manufacturing
districts by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town shall be
designated as Manufacturing Noise Districts, and shall be subject to the noise
standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.
      (4)   Mixed Use Noise District; (referred to as Controlled Development
Districts or CDD). Lands contained within mixed used districts by the Planning
and Zoning Regulations of the town shall be designated as Business Noise
Districts for purposes of this chapter and shall be subject to the noise
standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.
   (C)   Emitter's nose zone. Within a noise district, the Emitter's noise zone
is defined as his/her individual unit of land or group of contiguous parcels
under the same ownership as indicated by the public land records. The emitter's
noise zone also includes contiguous street and highway rights-of-way, railroad
rights-of-way and water.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
§ 101.03 NOISE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Excessive noise prohibited. No person shall cause or allow the
emission of excessive noise as defined herein beyond the boundaries of his/her
noise district or noise zone as measured at any point on a receptor's tract or
parcel of land, so as to exceed the levels stated herein. The source of noise
measured shall be the responsibility of the emitter.
   (B)   Impulse noise.
      (1)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in
excess of 80 dB peak sound pressure level during the nighttime.
      (2)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in
excess of 100 dB peak sound pressure at any time to any noise district or noise
zone.
   (C)   Noise district and noise zone standards.
      (1)   (a)   No person in a manufacturing noise district shall emit noise
exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the receptor's noise
districts and noise zones:
 
                         RECEPTOR
                         Manufacturing Business Residential
                                                Day    Night
Manufacturing Emitter to 70 dBA        66 dBA   61 dBA 51 dBA
 
         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed above shall be
considered excessive and unnecessary noise.
      (2)   (a)   No person in a business noise district shall emit noise
exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the receptor's noise
districts and noise zones:
 
                    RECEPTOR
                    Manufacturing Business Residential
                                           Day    Night
Business Emitter to 62 dBA        62 dBA   55 dBA 45 dBA
 
         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed above shall be
considered excessive and unnecessary noise.
      (3)   (a)   No person in a mixed use district ("CDD") shall emit noise
exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the receptor's noise
districts and noise zones:
 
                     RECEPTOR
                     Manufacturing Business Residential
                                            Day    Night
Mixed Use Emitter to 62 dBA        62 dBA   55 dBA 45 dBA
 
         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed above shall be
considered excessive and unnecessary noise.
      (4)   (a)   No person in a residential noise district shall emit noise
exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the receptor's noise
districts and noise zones:
 
                       RECEPTOR
                       Manufacturing Business Residential
                                              Day    Night
Residential Emitter to 62 dBA        55 dBA   55 dBA 45 dBA
 
         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed above shall be
considered excessive and unnecessary noise.
   (D)   Motor vehicle noise.
      (1)   All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the town shall be
subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as set forth in the
Regulations of the State of Connecticut, Department of Motor Vehicles, Title
14, Sec. 14-80a-1 through 14-8-a-18, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   No sound amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit
noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in this division.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
101.99
§ 101.04 EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to noise or sound emitted by
or related to:
   (A)   Natural phenomena;
   (B)   The unamplified sound of the human voice;
   (C)   The unamplified sound made by any wild or domestic animal;
   (D)   Bells, carillons, or chimes associated with specific religious
observances and/or organizations;
   (E)   A public emergency sound signal attached to an authorized emergency
vehicle in the immediate act of responding to an emergency, or located within
or attached to a building, pole or other structure for the purpose of sounding
or testing an alarm relating to fire or emergency management;
   (F)   Snow removal equipment, provided the equipment is maintained in good
repair so as to minimize noise and that noise discharged from exhausts shall be
adequately muffled to prevent loud and/or explosive noises therefrom;
   (G)   Farming equipment or farming activity.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 570, passed 1-5-09)
§ 101.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from this chapter, subject to the special
conditions as specified:
   (A)   Noise created by any construction activity which is conducted during
daytime hours;
   (B)   Noise created by recreational activities that are authorized by the
town, including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts and
fireworks displays;
   (C)   Noise created by the operation of public facility maintenance
equipment or private property maintenance equipment during daytime hours; and
   (D)   Noise created by blasting, other than that conducted in connection
with construction activities, provided that the blasting is conducted between
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., at specified hours previously announced to the public,
and provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from local
authorities.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
§ 101.06 EQUIPMENT AND MEASUREMENT.
   For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter,
the following guidelines shall be applicable:
   (A)   A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained in the
techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and instrumentation.
   (B)   Instruments used to determine noise levels shall be of standard
design, maintained in calibration and good working order, and instrument
manufacturer's instructions for use of the instruments shall be followed.
   (C)   Measurements taken to determine compliance with this chapter, in
particular §
101.03, shall be taken at any elevation and at any point beyond the boundary of
the emitter's noise district or noise zone and within the receptor's noise
district or noise zone.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00) Penalty, see §
101.99
§ 101.07 APPEAL.
   (A)   Whenever a fine is imposed under this chapter, the person fined may,
within ten days from the date of the noise ticket, appeal by filing a written
notice of appeal to the town's Hearing Officer. The filing of an appeal shall
stay any fine imposed until such time as a decision is rendered on the appeal.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation and hearing
as permitted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152(c).
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
§ 101.08 ENFORCEMENT. 
   The Hamden Police Department shall be responsible for enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. All notices and fines required or permitted by this
chapter shall emanate from the Police Department. Fines shall be paid to the
Department of Police Services.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
§ 101.99 PENALTY.
   Any person in violation of any section of any provision of this chapter may
be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 per violation. Each day a violation
continues after the time for correction of the violation has been given in an
order shall constitute a continuing violation, and the amount of the fine shall
be doubled for each day said violation continues, said fine not to exceed $400
dollars per day.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)
CHAPTER 102: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
102.01   Definitions
   
102.02   The use of any tobacco product is banned in designated places
   
102.03   Signage
   
102.04   Enforcement
 
   
102.99   Penalty
§ 102.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
   “ENFORCEMENT.” All law enforcement officers of the Town of Hamden.
   “PARK OR RECREATIONAL PROPERTY.” Property owned or operated by the Town of
Hamden and used in connection with recreational programs or purposes,
including, but not limited to, sports or athletic fields and facilities, parks,
pocket parks, playgrounds, bike or walking paths, dog parks, bleachers,
gardens, passive recreation areas, trails and other areas where people may
assemble for recreational purposes, including markets, fairs, parades, and any
community, recreation or building located on park or recreation property. Park
or recreational property shall not include school grounds.
   “PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS.” A parcel of land or portion thereof used for school
purposes and operated by the Town of Hamden Board of Education.
   “TOBACCO PRODUCT.” The use of any substance containing tobacco or any
tobacco product in all of its forms, including but not limited to a lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device, such as all electronic cigarettes
(e-cig, e-hookah, vape pen, electronic nicotine delivery system), as well as
chew tobacco, snus and snuff as well as any product of formulation of matter
containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold
or offered for sale or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the
product or matter will be introduced into the human body but does not include
any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.
(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)
§ 102.02 THE USE OF ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT IS BANNED IN DESIGNATED PLACES.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited, at all times, for an individual to smoke and/
or use any tobacco product in any form while at a town park or recreational
property, on public school grounds, or on any other specified sections of town
owned property.
   (B)   The use of tobacco products while at a town park or recreational
property or town owned property may be permitted in areas designated by the
Mayor or his/her designee in consultation with the Parks and Recreation
Commission.
(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)
§ 102.03 SIGNAGE.
   Town parks or recreational properties, public school grounds and other
specified sections of town owned property where smoking and/or tobacco use has
been banned pursuant to this chapter shall be so designated by signs posted
that give notice to those areas of prohibition. The town shall post a sign or
signs on such properties stating that they are a "Tobacco Free Zone" to
indicate that said property is subject to this chapter. Said signs shall
identify this chapter by number and shall state the penalty amount for
violations.
(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)
§ 102.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Members of the Town of Hamden's Police Department shall be charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. Such officer of the department shall inform the
violator of this chapter and take enforcement action when a violation has
occurred.
(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)
§ 102.99 PENALTY.
   Law enforcement officers may issue a citation for violation of this chapter.
Persons receiving said citations shall be fined $100 for each violation of any
provision of this chapter. Appeals may be made pursuant to
Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations of the Town of Hamden
Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)
CHAPTER 103: HAZARDOUS WASTE
Section
   
103.01   Storage, disposal or use of oil and gas drilling and extraction
prohibited
§ 103.01 STORAGE, DISPOSAL OR USE OF OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND EXTRACTION
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phases
and words shall have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated by the
context.
   “APPLICATION.” The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas waste or
oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of Hamden.
   “HYDRAULIC FRACTURING.” The fracturing of underground rock formations,
including shale and non-shale formations, by manmade fluid-driven techniques
for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other subsurface
hydrocarbon production.
   “NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES.” All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas, including, but not
limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
   “NATURAL GAS WASTE.”
      (1)   Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as
a result of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water,
brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
      (2)   Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction
activities;
      (3)   Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
the underground storage of natural gas;
      (4)   Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and
      (5)   Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment,
processing, or modification of any of the above wastes.
   “OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES.” All geologic or geophysical activities related
to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited, to,
core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
   “OIL WASTE.”
      (1)   Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as
a result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or other
contaminants;
      (2)   Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction
activities; and
      (3)   Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment,
processing, or modification of any of the above wastes.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not
such waste has received Beneficial Use Determination or other approval for use
by the DEEP (Department of Energy and Environmental Protection) or any other
regulatory body, on any road or real property located within the Town of Hamden
for any purpose is prohibited.
      (2)   The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any
wastewater treatment facility within or operated by the Town of Hamden is
prohibited.
      (3)   The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid
waste management facility within or operated by the Town of Hamden is
prohibited.
      (4)   The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, transfer, handling,
treatment and/or processing of waste from natural gas or oil extraction is
prohibited within the Town of Hamden.
   (C)   Provision to be included in bids and contracts related to the
construction or maintenance of publicly owned and/or maintained roads or real
property within the Town of Hamden.
      (1)   All bids and contracts related to the retention of services to
construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real
property within the Town of Hamden shall include a provision stating that no
materials containing natural gas or oil waste shall be utilized in providing
such a service.
      (2)   All bids and contracts related to the purchase or acquisition of
materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or
maintained road or real property within the Town of Hamden shall include a
provision stating that no materials containing natural gas
or oil waste shall be provided to the Town of Hamden.
      (3)   The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under
penalty of perjury, shall be included in all bids related to the purchase or
acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned
and or maintained road or real property within the Town of Hamden and all bids
related to the retention of services to construct or maintain any publicly
owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town of Hamden: "We
               hereby submit a bid for materials, equipment and/or labor for
the Town of Hamden. The bid is for bid documents titled       . We hereby
certify under penalty of perjury that no natural gas waste or oil waste will be
used by the undersigned bidder or any contractor, sub-contractor, agent or
vendor agent in connection with the bid; nor will the undersigned bidder or any
sub-contractor, agent or vendor agent thereof apply any natural gas waste or
oil waste to any road or real property within the Town of Hamden as a result of
the submittal of this bid if selected."
   (D)   Penalties. In response to a violation of this section, the Town of
Hamden may require remediation of any damage done to any land, road, building,
aquifer, well, watercourse, air quality or other asset, be it public or
private, within the Town of Hamden. The town may also impose fines in the
amount of $250 per violation per day for any violation of this section and any
other remedies allowable under the law.
   (E)   Transportation. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to ban
the transportation of any product or byproduct described herein on any roadway
or real property within the Town of Hamden.
(Ord. 698, passed 2-26-18)
CHAPTER 104: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 105: FACIAL RECOGNITION
Section
   
105.01   Definitions
   
105.02   Ban of town use of facial recognition
   
105.03   Enforcement
§ 105.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated by the context.
   "FACIAL RECOGNITION." An automated or semi-automated process that assists in
identifying an individual, capturing information about an individual, based on
the physical characteristics of any individual's face.
   "FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM." Any computer software or application that
performs facial recognition.
   "HAMDEN." Any department, agency, or division of the Town of Hamden, CT.
   "HAMDEN OFFICIAL." Any person or entity acting on behalf of the town,
including any officer, employee, agent, contractor, subcontractor or vendor.
(Ord. 723, passed 9-20-21)
§ 105.02 BAN ON TOWN USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited for the town or any town official acting in
their official capacity, to obtain, retain, access or use:
      (1)   Any facial recognition system; or
      (2)   Any information obtained from a facial recognition system.
(Ord. 723, passed 9-20-21)
§ 105.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No data collected or derived from any use of facial recognition in
violation of this chapter and no evidence derived therefrom may be received in
evidence in any hearing or other proceeding in or before any department,
officer, agency, committee, board, commission or other authority under the
jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   Training. The town will address alleged violations of this chapter in
accordance with applicable law and contractual obligations.
(Ord. 723, passed 9-20-21)
CHAPTER 106: PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY SERVICES RECORDS
Section
   
106.01   Definitions
   
106.02   Preservation of records
   
106.03   Notice prior to destruction
   
106.04   Development of policy
§ 106.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “CASE INVESTIGATION RECORDS.” Those records referenced in items M7-430
through M7-510, inclusive, of the Public Safety and Emergency Services Records
Retention Schedule.
   “DESTRUCTION HOLD.” A designation given to a record indicating that it may
not be destroyed if there is pending or active litigation; investigations;
audits; Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests; or other cases, claims, or
actions.
   “INVESTIGATION FILES.” Consist of investigations of civilian and/or
departmental complaints, whether conducted by an internal or external
investigator(s).
   “RECORDING, AUDIO/VIDEO.” Those records referenced in items M7-640 and M7-
650 of the Public Safety and Emergency Services Records Retention Schedule.
   “RECORDS.” Consist of any recorded data or information relating to the
conduct of the public's business prepared, owned, used, received, retained by a
public agency, or to which a public agency is entitled to receive a copy by law
or contract under C.G.S. § 1-218, whether such data or information be
handwritten, typed, tape-recorded, printed, photostated, photographed or
recorded by any other method.
   “RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE.” The comprehensive list of record series
created by the State of Connecticut Office of the Public Records Administrator,
which indicates for each series the length of time it is to be maintained until
it is reviewed for destruction or archival retention. It is also indicates
retention in active and inactive storage areas.
(Ord. 733, passed 11-28-22; Am. Ord. 740, passed 8-28-23)
§ 106.02 PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   The Police and Fire Departments shall retain copies of all records
pertaining to investigations as follows:
      (1)   For investigation files that result in discipline or action greater
than a letter of reprimand or supervisory counseling, the Department(s) must
retain the record(s) for the duration of the employee(s) employment plus 30
years.
      (2)   For investigation files that result in no discipline or action
greater than a letter of reprimand or supervisor counseling, without the
presence of active litigation, the Department(s) must retain the record(s) for
a period no less than two years more than the minimum required by the
applicable Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended
from time to time, from the date the case is closed.
      (3)   For investigation files that result in a finding of
unsubstantiated, the Department(s) must retain the records for a period no less
than the current year in which the result was determined plus no less than two
years more than the minimum required by the applicable Records Retention
Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The Police and Fire Departments shall retain copies of all records
pertaining to case investigation records as follows:
      (1)   Case investigations: death. Case investigations that involve death,
including but not limited to, fatal accidents (motor vehicle, airplane,
boating, and all other accidents), capital felonies, homicides, unsolved
missing persons, suicides and unidentified bodies, must be retained
permanently.
      (2)   Case investigation records: intelligence files. Case investigations
that involve intelligence files, including investigations on individuals,
groups, or organizations suspected of participating in illegal activities, must
be retained for a period of no less than two years more than the minimum
required by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as
may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Case investigation records: no death. Case investigations that do
not involve death, including, but not limited to, non-fatal accidents (motor
vehicle, airplane, boating, and all other accidents), felonies, infractions,
misdemeanors, solved missing persons, and stolen motor vehicles or license
plates must be retained for a period of no less than two years more than the
minimum retention required by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for
Municipalities, as may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Case investigation records: sex crimes, convicted. Case
investigations of sex crimes other than those against a minor must be retained
for a period of no less than two years more than the minimum retention required
by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as may be
amended from time to time.
      (5)   Case investigation records: sex crimes, not convicted. Case
investigations of sex crimes, where the defendant was not convicted, shall be
retained for a period of no less than two years more than the minimum retention
required by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as
may be amended from time to time.
      (6)   Case investigation records: sex crimes, unsolved. Case
investigations of offenses involving sexual assault where DNA (deoxyribonucleic
acid) evidence is available, and the victim notified the police or state's
attorney of the crime, must be retained permanently.
      (7)   Case investigation records: sexual abuse of a minor. Case
investigations of sexual abuse of a minor must be retained for a period not
less than two years more than the minimum retention required by the applicable
Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended from time to
time.
      (8)   Case investigation records: uncorroborated allegations. Case
investigations of alleged criminal activity that have not been supported by
additional and confirming facts or evidence must be retained for a period not
less than two years more than the minimum retention required by the applicable
Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended from time to
time.
      (9)   Case investigation records: violations, decriminalized. Case
investigations of an offense that was a crime, but was later decriminalized by
state statute, must be retained for a period not less than two years more than
the minimum retention required by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for
Municipalities, as may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The Police Department and the Fire Department shall retain copies of
recordings, audio/video as follows:
      (1)   Recording, audio/video. Consists of audio/video records, regardless
of format, unless part of another records series, including, but not limited
to: cruiser video recording systems, street cameras, or prisoner recordings.
Must be retained for a period not less than 60 days more than the minimum
retention required by the applicable Records Retention Schedule for
Municipalities, as may be amended from time to time, unless notice of pending
action has been filed or determined to be evidence in a case. If determined to
be evidence, it must be held pursuant to standard procedures and retention
requirements as required by this chapter and the applicable Records Retention
Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Records, driving under the influence (DUI). Consists of audio/video
recordings, regardless of format, including, but not limited to: cruiser video
recording systems, street cameras, or prisoner recordings. Must be retained for
a period not less than two years more than the minimum retention required by
the applicable Records Retention Schedule for Municipalities, as may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 733, passed 11-28-22; Am. Ord. 740, passed 8-28-23)
§ 106.03 NOTICE PRIOR TO DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   The Chief of the Police Department must provide the Police Commission
with two months written notice prior to the submission of the Records
Disposition Authorization form to Connecticut Office of the Public Records
Administrator of plans to destroy any records covered by this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department must provide the Fire Commission with
two months written notice prior to the submission of the Records Disposition
Authorization form to the Connecticut Office of the Public Records
Administrator of plans to destroy any records covered by this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 11-28-22; Am. Ord. 740, passed 8-28-23)
§ 106.04 DEVELOPMENT OF POLICY.
   The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall develop policies and procedures
related to destruction holds to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 11-28-22; Am. Ord. 740, passed 8-28-23)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH TOWN
         
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
112.   AMUSEMENTS
         
113.   AUCTIONS
         
114.   JUNK DEALERS
         
115.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS; MASSAGE THERAPISTS
         
116.   MEAT AND MILK
         
117.   VENDING, HAWKING AND PEDDLING
         
118.   STANDARD MEASURES
         
119.   [RESERVED]
         
120.   ITINERANT VENDORS
         
121.   BAZAARS, RAFFLES AND BINGO
         
122.   UNIFORM PACKAGING PRACTICES
         
123.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE POLICY
         
124.   DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FROM BIDDING
         
125.   EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORES
         
126.   REGULATION OF CERTAIN PLASTIC BAGS
         
127.   REGULATION OF SINGLE-USE STRAWS
         128.   NONRESIDENT LANDLORD REGISTRATION
 
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH TOWN
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Unfair employment practices
   
110.03   Fair employment standards; certification of
   
110.04   Notification of complaints; recording
   
110.05   Cancellation or termination of transactions
   
110.06   Circumstances for waiver
   
110.07   Violation prohibited
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:
   (A)   "Public-fund transaction." Any offer to furnish, or furnishing of,
goods or services, or combination of goods and services, to or for the benefit
of the town, or any agent or agency thereof (intending to include any private
organization supported or assisted by any amount of tax funds of the town), in
which the consideration for the furnishing is or would be constituted in whole
or in part by public funds of the town, or any agency thereof.
   (B)   "Unfair employment practice." Shall have the meaning assigned by Conn.
Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, and the meaning assigned by Title VII, Public Law 88-352,
and reference to such statutes shall include such amendments thereof as may be
made from time to time.
   (C)   "Vendor." Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity, or
combination of entities, engaged in, or seeking to become engaged in, or
offering a bid to become engaged in, a public-fund transaction with any
department, office, commission, board, agency or other representative acting
for the town.
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.02 Unfair employment practices.
   Public funds of the town shall not knowingly be paid to, nor expended, so as
to benefit or futher any interest of any vendor engaging in any unfair
employment practice. It is declared to be the public policy of the town that
vendors who engage in, or permit, unfair employment practices in their
business, trade or industry, shall not knowingly be allowed to transact
business with, perform services for, or furnish supplies to, the town. The
office of the purchasing agent, and all other departments, offices,
commissions, boards and other agencies, of the town, from time to time engaged
in the procurement of goods or services for the public purposes of this
community, shall not knowingly enter into any public-fund transaction with a
vendor engaging in an unfair employment practice.
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.03 Fair employment standards; certification of.
   (A)   The fair employment standards of the state and federal statutes
referred to in §
110.01 of this chapter are made a condition of, and specification of, all
contracts for public-fund transactions of the town.
   (B)   Each contract document, purchase order or invoice relating to a
public-fund transaction shall contain a certification substantially as follows:
The contractor agrees and warrants that in the performance of this contract, he
will not discriminate or permit discrimination against any person or group of
persons on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in any
manner prohibited by the laws of the United States or this state, and further
agrees to comply with all provisions of "An Ordinance Relating to Doing
Business with the Town of Hamden."
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.04 Notification of complaints; recording.
   (A)   Every vendor shall promptly notify the purchasing agent of any
complaint or unfair employment practice filed against the vendor with the
responsible state commission under Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, and shall
promptly notify the purchasing agent of the final disposition by the commission
of any such complaint. All notices shall be in writing, and in the form and
contain the information as the purchasing agent may require. Willful failure to
comply with this section shall render any vendor ineligible, in the discretion
of the purchasing agent, to engage in, or submit a bid to engage in, a public-
fund transaction in the towr.
   (B)   The purchasing agent shall maintain a record of all vendors against
whom a final order has been entered by the responsible state commission finding
that the vendor is engaging in, or has engaged in, an unfair employment
practice.
   (C)   No vendor listed by the purchasing agent, as provided in paragraph (B)
of this section, shall be eligible to engage in, or submit a bid to engage in,
a public-fund transaction, until the vendor shall file with the purchasing
agent written evidence, verified by the responsible state commission, that the
vendor has corrected, satisfactory to the commission, the unfair employment
practice found to exist by the final order.
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.05 Cancellation or termination of transactions.
   Upon notice of entry of a final order by the responsible state commission
under Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, which order determined the existence of an
unfair employment practice by any vendor, the purchasing agent shall cancel or
terminate any public-fund transaction involving the vendor; provided that the
purchasing agent may permit the vendor a reasonable period of time, not
exceeding 10 days, in which the vendor may obtain and file with the purchasing
agent the written evidence provided for by §
110.04 (C) of this chapter, upon receipt of which the purchasing agent is
authorized to waive the foregoing provision for cancellation or termination of
the public-fund transaction.
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.06 Circumstances for waiver.
   If, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, cancellation or termination of a
public-fund transaction, as provided for by §
110.05 of this chapter, would work to the detriment of, or would be contrary to
the best interests of, the town, he may waive the cancellation or termination
of a partially completed or unfulfilled public-fund transaction, upon notation
of his reasons therefor in writing on the particular contract documents in the
files of the town, but waiver of the cancellation or termination shall not
operate to exempt the vendor from the provisions of §
110.04 of this chapter with respect to any future or subsequent public-fund
transaction.
(Effective 8-1-68)
§ 110.07 Violation prohibited.
   (A)   No person shall file, or offer for file, a materially false statement,
required to be filed, or permitted to be filed, by this chapter.
   (B)   Any person convicted under this section, in addition to the penalty
provided in §
110.99 of this chapter, shall be ineligible to engage in, or submit a bid to
engage in, a public-funds transaction for a period of 5 years from such
conviction.
(Effective 8-1-68) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of §
110.07 shall be fined not more than $100.
(Effective 8-1-68)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Distances between outlets
   
111.03   Moving existing place of business
   
111.04   Exceptions
   
111.05   Discontinuance of business
   
111.06   Effect upon existing applications
   
111.07   Sunday sales permitted
   
111.08   Possession of alcohol
   
111.09   Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on school property
prohibited
   
111.10   Municipal notices of alcoholic liquor permit renewals
Consumption and Possession in Public Highways, Public Areas, and Parking Areas
   
111.15   Definitions
   
111.16   Prohibited acts
   
111.17   Exception
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:
   (A)   "ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR." As defined by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 30-1.
   (B)   "PACKAGE STORE PERMIT." As defined by Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 30-15 and
30-20, pertaining to the Liquor Control Act.
('66 Code, § 6-3)
§ 111.02 DISTANCES BETWEEN OUTLETS.
   No building or premises, which prior to 5-12-49, is not the site or location
of a business where alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is sold at retail for
consumption off the premises, under a package store permit, shall thereafter be
used in whole or part for the sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer or ale,
under any package store permit which may be issued by the liquor control
commission of this state, if the main customer entrance to the building or
premises shall be within a 1,500 foot radius from the main customer entrance to
the main customer entrance of any other building which shall be used for the
sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer or ale, under any package store permit.
(‘66 Code, § 6-2) (Am. Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 111.03 MOVING EXISTING PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   These regulations shall permit any permittee using any building or premises
for the sale of alcoholic liquors under a package store permit issued by the
liquor store permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of this state to
move the place of business to another building or premises within the 1,500
foot radius above described, provided the main customer entrance of the other
building is not more than 800 feet from the main customer entrance of the
building formerly occupied by the permittee as a place for the sale, under a
package store permit, of alcoholic liquor; provided that the removal shall be
in accordance with the Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations of the
Liquor Control Act; and provided that the main customer entrance of the new
place of business is more than 500 feet from the main customer entrance of any
other building which shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer
or ale, under any package store permit.
(‘66 Code, § 6-5) (Am. Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13; Am. Ord. 676, passed 6-20-16)
§ 111.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   These regulations shall not apply to a restaurant permit, tavern permit,
manufacturing permit, club permit, druggist permit and a temporary permit as
described by the Liquor Control Act.
('66 Code, § 6-6)
§ 111.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS.
   If any building or premises within the 1,500 foot radius area above
described, which shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor under an all-
alcoholic liquor package store permit, shall cease to be actually so used under
any such permit, the premises shall not again be used for the sale of alcoholic
liquors under a package store permit, unless within 30 days after the premises
shall have ceased to be so used, it shall again be occupied and actually used
for the sale of alcoholic liquor under a package store permit issued by the
liquor control commission.
('66 Code, § 6-7)
§ 111.06 EFFECT UPON EXISTING APPLICATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny to any applicant who has
duly applied for a package store permit to the liquor control commission before
5-12-49 from thereafter receiving the permit pursuant to the application for
any premises in the town. Premises used pursuant to a permit applied for and
received as stated in this section shall be subject to all regulations of this
chapter in the same manner as if they had been in use under the permit on 5-12-
49.
('66 Code, § 6-9)
§ 111.07 SUNDAY SALES PERMITTED.
   The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted on Sunday within the bounds
of the town in accordance with the laws of this state in relation thereto.
('66 Code, § 6-1)
§ 111.08 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL.
   (A)   Possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 is
prohibited and shall be punished by a fine of $100 for each offense.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A person who possesses alcoholic liquor while accompanied by a
parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age of 21;
      (2)   A person who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a licensed
and practicing physician; or
      (3)   A person who is an employee of a permit holder under Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 30-90a, and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course of his or her
employment or business.
   (C)   No person shall host an event or gathering at which the host knowingly
allows alcoholic liquor to be consumed by or dispensed to any person under the
age of 21 unless each said minor is accompanied by or in the presence of his or
her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age of 21. This restriction
shall apply to any event or gathering within the town, whether on public or
private property. Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a
fine of $100 for each offense.
   (D)   All fines imposed under this article shall be made payable to the
Treasurer of the town, and shall be received by the Police Department within
ten business days from receipt of the citation. All fines collected by the
Police Department shall be directed to the Town Treasurer.
   (E)   The hearing procedure shall be as set forth in
Chapter 12 of this code.
   (F)   Miscellaneous.
      (1)   The penalties established by this section shall not be exclusive of
any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by any state and/or federal
statute or regulation.
      (2)   In construing this section, feminine or neutral pronouns shall be
substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.
(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83; Am. Ord. 513, passed
3-7-05) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person
within the boundaries of any school property to consume or have in his
possession or control, intoxicating liquors of any kind.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, school property shall include all
property under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education including an outdoor
area as well as school buildings.
   (C)   The Board of Education may upon application authorize the consumption
of alcoholic liquors on any school property within the town under such
conditions as the Board shall deem appropriate for the protection of the
public.
(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.10 MUNICIPAL NOTICES OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PERMIT RENEWALS.
   (A)   Each person who files an application pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §
30-39, for renewal of a liquor permit that allows on-premises serving or
consumption of alcoholic liquor in the town, shall simultaneously give written
notice of such liquor permit renewal application to the Chief of Police or his/
her designee.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee may respond in writing, not
later than 15 days after receipt of such notice, to the Commissioner of
Consumer Protection, with comments regarding the renewal application that is
the subject of such notice.
(Ord. 648, passed 7-7-14)
CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION IN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, PUBLIC AREAS, AND PARKING AREAS
§ 111.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR" has the same meaning as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. §
30-1.
   "OPEN CONTAINER." Any open bottle; any bottle which was sealed by a liquor
tax stamp, which seal has been broken, whether or not stopped; any can which
has been opened in any way; any keg or dispensing device which is set up to
dispense; or any glass, cup, jar, or other vessel.
   "PARKED VEHICLE" has the same meaning as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-
1.
   "PARKING AREA." Lots, areas, or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without
charge.
   "PUBLIC AREA." Any park, plaza, mall, arena, stadium, cemetery, or other
publicly-owned place which is open to the public.
   "PUBLIC HIGHWAY." A highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, or other way
within and upon the control of the town and open public use, including the
sidewalks of any such highway.
(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)
§ 111.16 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Except as permitted in §
111.17, no person shall consume any alcoholic liquor, or possess any open
container of alcoholic liquor upon or within the limits of any public highway,
public area, or parking area within the town. For purposes of this section,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic
liquor or the possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor in vehicles
within or upon parking areas or a public highway or sidewalk is a violation
hereof.
(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)
§ 111.17 EXCEPTION.
   Consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession of an open container of
alcoholic liquor is permitted during any function, festival, event, or
celebration conducted on or within a public highway, public area, or parking
area pursuant to any law, statute, ordinance, resolution, or permit authorizing
sale and consumption of liquor in or upon such public highway, public area, or
parking area.
(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A) Any person violating the provisions of §
111.09 shall be fined $75 for each offense.
(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83)
   (B) Any person violating the provisions of §§
111.15 through
111.17 shall be fined $75 for each offense.
(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
111.08 shall be fined $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 514, passed 3-7-05)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   License required, when
   
112.02   Time for obtaining license
   
112.03   License fees
   
112.04   Revocation of license; effect
   
112.05   Location requirements for circuses and carnivals
   
112.06    Inspection and report by fire marshal
   
112.07   Police and fire protection; cost; exception
   
112.08    Duty of police chief
   
112.09   Violation prohibited
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 License required, when.
   No person, firm or corporation, as owner or proprietor, shall exhibit,
conduct or operate or cause or permit to be exhibited, conducted or operated
upon his premises any public dance, play or show, theatrical performance,
motion picture exhibition, athletic exhibition by professionals or any circus,
carnival or bazaar in the town unless a license therefor, as herinafter
provided, has been obtained from the police chief or his representatives.
('66 Code, § 7-1) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.02 Time for obtaining license.
   The owner or proprietor shall, not less than 15 days before exhibiting any
circus or carnival and not less than 5 days before exhibiting any public dance,
play or show, theatrical performance, motion picture exhibition or athletic
exhibition, obtain a license from the police chief.
('66 Code, § 7-2) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 License fees.
   (A)   The following fees shall be paid to the police chief upon the issuance
of a license therefor:
      (1)   Public dance, play or show, $5 for each day;
      (2)   Theatrical performance, $5 for each day;
      (3)   Motion picture exhibition, $1 for each day;
      (4)   Athletic exhibition, $10 for each day;
      (5)   Circus, $500 for the first day and $250 for each succeeding day;
      (6)   Carnival, $100 for the first day and $50 for each succeeding day.
   (B)   Provided, however, that in lieu of the foregoing daily license fee,
the license fee for any motion picture exhibition of any motion picture house
with a seating capacity of 200 or less for the period of one month shall be
$2.50, and the license fee of any motion picture house with a seating capacity
of more than 200 shall be $5 per month; and provided further that the police
chief may waive the payment of all or any portion of the license fee for any
public dance, play or show, theatrical performance, motion picture exhibition,
athletic exhibition or carnival whenever the same shall be exhibited, conducted
or operated by any religious, educational or charitable organization, by any
volunteer fire department or veteran's organization of the town, or if the
proceeds thereof are to be used entirely for the benefit of any religious,
educational, charitable, or veteran's organization located in the town.
('66 Code, § 7-7)
§ 112.04 Revocation of license; effect.
   The police chief may at any time revoke any license issued under the
provisions hereof for any breach of the terms and conditions thereof or the
violation of any statute relating thereto, and from the time of notice of any
revocation given to the person to whom such license was issued, any act done
under color of such license shall subject the person doing or suffering it to
be done to the same penalty as if he had done such act without such license.
('66 Code, § 7-6)
§ 112.05 Location requirements for circuses and carnivals.
   No license shall be issued by the police chief for any circus oi carnival
unless there has been filed with the police chief an amusement license
therefor, issued by the commissioner of state police, pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., §§ 29-129 to 29-143, inclusive and § 14-164A; and, provided further,
that the proposed location for any circus shall have a frontage on a public
highway within the town of not less than 250 feet and the proposed location for
any carnival shall have a frontage on a public highway within the town of not
less than 100 feet and that the area of the proposed location shall be deemed
sufficient by the police chief for the intended use thereof without danger to
the public, and provided the fire marshal of the town shall file a written
report with the police chief certifying that in his opinion the proposed
location is provided with sufficient and adequate means of ingress and egress
necessary for the reasonable safety of the public.
('66 Code, § 7-3)
§ 112.06 Inspection and report by fire marshal.
   The fire marshal shall inspect the place of public assembly or location to
be used for any of the events noted in §
112.01 of this chapter, and if, in his opinion, the place of public assembly or
location is not adequate for the event for which the license is required, he
shall file a written report with the owner or proprietor that the place of
public assembly or location is not adequate or suitable for this purpose and a
copy of his report will be filed with the police chief.
('66 Code, § 7-4)
§ 112.07 Police and fire protection; cost; exception.
   (A)   The police chief and the fire chief may assign constables, policemen
or firemen as they may deem necessary for the adequate protection of the public
at any public dance, play or show, theatrical performance, motion picture
exhibition, athletic exhibition or any circus or carnival. In addition to the
required license fees hereinafter provided, there shall be paid to the police
chief and the fire chief for each constable, policeman and fireman so assigned
to duty at any such event, a sum to be determined by the police chief and fire
chief, which sum is to be the prevailing hourly rate of the policeman and
fireman at the time the license is issued, based on the number of hours of duty
required. However, the minimum rate for each policeman and fireman assigned to
duty at the event shall be a flat sum of not less than 5 hours' pay at the
prevailing hourly rate.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to motion picture
theaters duly licensed by the commissioner of state police.
('66 Code, § 7-5)
§ 112.08 Duty of police chief.
   It shall be the duty of the police chief to determine what functions fall
within the scope of this chapter. The judgment of the police chief, or, if he
is unavailable, a representative, shall be final.
('66 Code, § 7-9)
§ 112.09 Violation prohibited.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any order or
regulation made pursuant thereunder.
('66 Code, § 7-8) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be funded not more than $100.
('66 Code, § 7-8)
CHAPTER 113: AUCTIONS
Section
   
113.01   Permit required
   
113.02   Fee
   
113.03   Contents of application
   
113.04   Police and fire protection
   
113.05   Proof of character; revocation of permit
   
113.06   Exceptions to application of chapter
 
   
113.99   Penalty.
§ 113.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall expose or offer for sale by
competitive bidding or at public auction any used motor vehicles, merchandise,
goods, or articles of personal property, within the limits of the town without
having applied to and obtained from the chief of police a permit therefor as
herein provided.
('66 Code, § 10-1; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80) Penalty, see
113.99
§ 113.02 FEE.
   The fee for a permit shall be $25 and shall expire within 60 days following
the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked, as herein provided.
('66 Code, § 10-2; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
§ 113.03 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each applicant for the permit shall make application therefor in
writing to the chief of police and file the same with the chief of police at
least three days before the issue thereof, stating thereon the name, age, and
street address of the applicant, the owner or owners of the goods to be offered
for sale, and a description of the kind and quality of the goods and the state
and town or city in which he or they reside and the location of the place
within this town where, and the hours when, such auction will be conducted.
Each applicant for a permit for sale at auction of gold or gold plated ware,
silver or silver plated ware, platinum ware, watches, jewelry, precious stones,
cut glass, or chinaware shall furnish satisfactory proof that he has obtained
an auctioneer's license from the commissioner of consumer protection, pursuant
to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-3.
   (B)   In the event the applicant intends to allow the sale or consumption of
food in connection with the auction, he or they shall provide to the health
director of the town a written statement as to the manner in which food is to
be dispensed at the auction. In such case he shall obtain, prior to the
submission of the permit application to the chief of police, a statement from
the health director of the town approving of the manner in which food is to be
dispensed at the auction.
('66 Code, § 10-3; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
§ 113.04 POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION.
   The chief of police shall examine the contents of any auction permit
application and determine whether any additional police and fire protection is
required for the conduct of the proposed auction. In the event the chief of
police determines that additional police or fire protection is required, he
shall so advise the applicant who shall make arrangements with the appropriate
town departments for the obtaining of such additional police and fire
protection. The chief of police shall not issue the permit unless he, in his
discretion, determines that the arrangements made for police and fire
protection are adequate.
(Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
§ 113.05 PROOF OF CHARACTER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Each applicant shall furnish in the application satisfactory proof that he
is a suitable person to hold the permit. Upon approval of the application by
the chief of police, he shall forthwith pay the required permit fee to the
chief of police before the permit shall be issued. The chief of police shall
have the power to revoke the same at any time after issuance for cause or if,
in his judgment, it shall be for the public interest so to do.
('66 Code, § 10-4; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
§ 113.06 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sale authorized by law
or conducted in pursuance of an order or under the authority of any court or to
an auction of household goods or of personal effects held under the direction
of the owner thereof, nor shall any permit fee be required of any person
expressly exempted therefrom by law.
('66 Code, § 10-6; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 for each violation.
('66 Code, § 10-5; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)
CHAPTER 114: JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
114.01   License required; duration
   
114.02    License fee
   
114.03   Plate or sign to be displayed
   
114.04    Violation prohibited
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 License required; duration.
   (A)   All dealers and traders in secondhand bicycles, junk, old metals, old
rags and other secondhand articles, conducting such business or trade within
the limits of the town must first obtain a license therefor from the police
department.
   (B)   The license shall continue for one year from date of issue unless
sooner revoked.
('66 Code, § 33-1 amended 2-3-69) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.02 License fee.
   There shall be paid to the police department, for the use of the town, the
sum of $10 for each license issued.
('66 Code, § 33-1; amended 2-3-69)
§ 114.03 Plate or sign to be displayed.
   All such licensed dealers and traders shall while conducting such business
in the town display a plate or sign upon the wagon or vehicle used, reading
"Town of Hamden License" in the manner and place that it may be plainly seen
and read from the sidewalk.
('66 Code, § 33-2) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 Violation prohibited.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall knowingly or wilfully violate any of
the provisions of this chapter. Upon such violation, such person, firm or
corporation shall forfeit such license, in addition to the penalty provided in
§
114.99.
('66 Code, § 33-3) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for
each offense.
('66 Code, § 33-3)
CHAPTER 115: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS; MASSAGE THERAPISTS
Section
   
115.01   Policy
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Transfer of permit
   
115.04   Permit to operate massage establishment; application; fee; issuance
   
115.05   Denial, revocation or suspension of massage establishment permit;
hearings
   
115.06   Hearing on denial of permit, revocation or suspension of permit
   
115.07   Facilities necessary
   
115.08   Operating requirements
   
115.09   Daily register
   
115.10   Inspections
   
115.11   Applicability of regulations to existing businesses
   
115.12   Massage therapist permit required
   
115.13   Application for massage therapist permit
   
115.14   Issuance of massage therapist permit
   
115.15   Conditional permits
   
115.16   Denial, revocation or suspension of massage therapist permit
   
115.17   Notification; hearing
   
115.18   Hearing on denial, revocation or suspension of massage therapist
permit
   
115.19   Exceptions
   
115.20   Violation prohibited
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 POLICY.
   It is declared that the business of operating massage establishments and the
practice of massage or massage therapy as defined herein is a business
effecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:
   (A)   “EMPLOYEE.” Any and all persons, other than a massage therapist, who
renders any service to the permittee, and who has no physical contact with
customers and clients.
   (B)   “MASSAGE THERAPY” or “MASSAGE.” Any method of pressure on, or friction
against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or
stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the
aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without any
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice. “MASSAGE” or “MASSAGE THERAPY” does not encompass
diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint
manipulations, or any other service or procedure for which a license to
practice medicine, chiropractic, naturopathy, physical therapy, or podiatry is
required by law. No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage
therapy unless the person has obtained a license from the Connecticut
Department of Public Health pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes as may
be amended.
   (C)   “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.” Any establish-ment, by whatever name, having
a fixed business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in
or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   “RECOGNIZED SCHOOL.” Any school or institution of learning which has
for its purpose the teaching of the theory, the method, profession or work of
massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than 500
hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student
shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school
or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course
of study or learning.
   (E)   “MASSAGE THERAPIST.” A person who is licensed to practice massage
therapy under the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes as may be
amended. No person shall use the title “MASSAGE THERAPIST”, “LICENSED MASSAGE
THERAPIST”, “MASSAGE PRACTITIONER”, “MASSAGIST”, “MASSEUR” or “MASSEUSE”,
unless the person holds a license issued in accordance with this section or
other applicable law.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.03 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the Chief
of Police or his/her designee and the approval of the Director of Health.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 PERMIT TO OPERATE MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT; APPLICATION; FEE; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in,
conduct, or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in
or upon any premise in the town, the operation of a massage establishment, as
herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from the Chief of
Police. Such permit shall be in addition to any permits, licenses or
requirements of the State Department of Public Health or the local Health
Department.
   (B)   Application. Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or
conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the Chief of
Police or his/her designee and pay a filing fee of $125 which shall not be
refundable. Such application shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant, and shall set forth:
      (1)   The exact nature of the massage to be administered, proposed place
of business and facilities therein, and the name and address of each applicant;
      (2)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
      (3)   Two portrait photographs of at least two inches by two inches and a
complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints which shall be taken by the Chief
of Police or his/her authorized representative;
      (4)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of the application;
      (5)   Massage or similar business license history of the applicant,
whether such person has previously operated in this or in another city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor,
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation;
      (6)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations; and
      (7)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for the Chief
of Police or his/her designee to make any determination required by this
chapter.
   (C)   Issuance of massage establishment permit. The Chief of Police or his/
her designee issue a permit to operate a massage establishment upon finding:
      (1)   All requirements concerning the operation and facilities described
in this chapter are met as of the effective date of the permit.
      (2)   Compliance with all local and state statutes, codes, chapters rules
and regulations, including, health, housing, planning, zoning, building, fire
and safety requirements as well as terms and conditions as the State
Commissioner of Public Health or the local health director finds necessary and
proper as of the effective date of the permit.
      (3)   That the nature of the massage administered will not endanger the
health or safety of patrons of the massage establishment.
      (4)   That the applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged
in the management and operation of a massage establishment has not been
convicted of a felony, an offense involving the unauthorized practice of the
healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or residing in
a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution,
pandering or human trafficking and has not had a permit to operate a massage
establishment or massage permit suspended or revoked in this town or any other
town or state; or that such conviction, suspension or revocation occurred at
least three years prior to the date of the application.
      (5)   The applicant must furnish authorization to the Chief of Police or
his/her authorized representatives, to seek information and conduct an
investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and
the qualifications of the applicant for permit. The Chief of Police may
require, and the applicant must furnish any other identification and
information to discover the truth of the matter hereinbefore specified as
required to be set forth in the application.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.05 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT;
HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may deny, revoke or suspend any massage
establishment permit if it is found:
      (1)   That the applicant or holder of a permit has knowingly or
negligently made any false or misleading statement in applying for the permit;
      (2)   That the applicant, holder of the permit or any person directly
engaged in the operation or management of the massage establishment has been
convicted of any offense stated above in §
115.04(C)(4), and/or has had a permit to operate a massage establishment or
massage therapist permit suspended or revoked in this or any other state;
      (3)   That such conviction, suspension or revocation occurred less than
three years prior to the date of the application;
      (4)   That the applicant, holder of a permit or any person engaged in the
operation or management of the massage establishment has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter; or
      (5)   That the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly
authorized police officer or health inspector of the town to inspect the
premises or the operation therein.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall not deny, revoke or suspend any permit
issued under this chapter without notifying the applicant or holder of the
permit, in writing, of the facts and other specific section or sections of this
chapter upon which a determination was made, and of the applicant or holder’s
right to request a hearing before the Chief of Police and to present evidence
or argument on all facts or issues involved.
   (C)   A request for a hearing shall stay any revocation or suspension until
such time as a hearing has been held and a decision rendered thereon, provided
however, that if the Chief of Police finds that the public health, safety and
welfare requires emergency action and incorporates a finding to that effect in
his/her notice, the permit may be summarily suspended, pending a hearing
thereon, which hearing shall be promptly instituted and all facts and issues
shall be promptly determined.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.06 HEARING ON DENIAL OF PERMIT, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a massage
establishment or any renewals required, or the suspension or revocation of a
permit to operate a massage establishment, may request, in writing, a hearing
before the Chief of Police, at which hearing such person shall be afforded the
opportunity to present evidence.
   (B)   Such request must be received within ten business days of receipt of
notice of such denial, revocation or suspension and shall be sent to the Office
of the Police Chief.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall schedule a hearing within a reasonable
number of days and all facts and issues shall be promptly determined.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.07 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   (A)   No permit for a massage establishment shall be issued by the Chief of
Police unless an inspection by the Director of Health or his/her authorized
representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and
showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials;
      (2)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at
the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water
closet per section is provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that
sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water
closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated
as to the sex accommodated therein; and
      (3)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running
water should be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or
wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
   (B)   The Director of Health shall certify that the proposed massage
establishment complies with all the requirements of this section and shall give
or send such written certification to the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.08 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliance,
apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
   (B)   All employees and massage therapists shall be clean and wear clean
outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. Provision
for a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises
with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall
open inward and shall be self-closing.
   (C)   All employees and massage therapists must be modestly attired.
Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form-fitting or tight clothing is prohibited.
Clothing must cover the employees or massage therapists’ chest at all times.
   (D)   Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or
undergarments when in the presence of any employee or massage therapist. Any
contact with a patron’s genital area is strictly prohibited.
   (E)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in an approved sanitary manner.
   (F)   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be
thoroughly cleansed after each use.
   (G)   No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions of this
chapter shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed, published,
or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human
body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are
available other than those services as described in §
115.02 of this chapter, or that employees or massage therapists are dressed in
any manner other than described in division (C) of this section; nor shall any
massage establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any
services are available other than those services described in §
115.02 of this chapter.
   (H)   Services enumerated in §
115.02(B) of this chapter must be carried on in one cubicle, room, booth or
area within the massage establishment. No service enumerated in §
115.02(B) of this chapter may be carried on in any cubicle, room, booth or area
except where such cubicle, room, booth or area has doors or walls so that all
activity within a cubicle, room, booth or area is visible from outside the
same. No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle,
room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a
door capable of being locked.
   (I)   No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicant shall be displayed, served,
ingested or sold on the premises of the massage establishment.
   (J)   A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place
within the massage parlor in a manner as to come to the attention of all
patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for specified services are
to be allowed with the patron being notified of the full cost prior to the
rendering of any service.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.09 DAILY REGISTER.
   Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall keep a
daily register, approved as to form by the Chief of Police or his/her designee,
of all patrons with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if applicable,
the rooms or cubicles assigned. The daily register shall at all times during
business hours be subject to inspection by Health Department officials, by the
Police Department and shall be kept on file for one year.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.10 INSPECTIONS.
   The Police Department and the Health Department shall from time to time,
perform an inspection for each massage establishment in the town for the
purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
The inspections shall be made at a reasonable time, in a reasonable manner. It
shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow the inspection officer
access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.11 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   Holders of any existing massage establishment permits heretofore issued
under any provision of law are required to comply with all provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.12 MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage therapy
unless he or she has obtained a current license from the State of Connecticut
Department of Public Health to practice massage therapy as defined within the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and is a licensed massage therapist.
   (B)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage therapy
in the town without first having obtained a massage therapist permit from the
Chief of Police.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.13 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.
   Each applicant for a massage therapist permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police or his/her designee and pay a filing fee of $125 which
shall not be refundable. Such application shall be in writing, signed and sworn
to by the applicant, and shall set forth:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   Written documentation that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
   (C)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for the Chief of
Police to make any determination required by this chapter;
   (D)   Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches and a complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints which shall be taken
by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative;
   (E)   Identification. Each applicant shall provide sufficient identification
to establish the applicant’s identity;
   (F)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations; and
   (G)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for the Chief of
Police or his/her designee to make any determination required by this chapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.14 ISSUANCE OF MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall issue a massage therapist
permit upon finding:
   (A)   That the applicant has a current massage therapist’s license issued by
the State of Connecticut.
   (B)   That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, an offense
involving the unauthorized practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with
minors, obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of
a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution, pandering or human trafficking, and has
not had a massage establishment or massage therapist’s permit denied, suspended
or revoked in this or any other town or state.
   (C)   The applicant must furnish authorization to the Chief of Police, or
his/her authorized representatives, to seek information and conduct an
investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and
the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. The Chief of Police may
require, and the applicant must furnish, any other identification and
information necessary to discover the truth of the matter hereinbefore
specified as required to be set forth in the application.
   (D)   Permits shall be issued for one calendar year and shall be renewed
annually upon payment of a $25 fee and proof of a current massage therapist
license issued by the State of Connecticut.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.15 CONDITIONAL PERMITS.
   An applicant who completes the requirements of §
115.13 above, and submits all of the necessary information required by that
section, may obtain a conditional massage therapist permit pending the outcome
of the fingerprint check and subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The conditional permit shall only be issued if the applicant has made
a prima facie showing that he/she meets all of the requirements for a permit.
   (B)   The conditional permit shall only be effective until Chief of Police
or his/her authorized representatives have had an opportunity to investigate
the applicant’s qualifications to hold a permit pursuant to this chapter and to
notify the applicant that his/her application for a massage therapist permit
has been granted or denied.
   (C)   If the applicant provides false or misleading information to the Chief
of Police, the Chief may automatically terminate the conditional permit. If the
Chief of Police automatically terminates a conditional permit, he/she shall
notify the holder of his/her decision by certified mail or personal service.
   (D)   In no event shall such conditional permit be in effect for more than
12 months after the date of its issuance.
   (E)   A conditional permit shall not be renewed.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.16 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police may deny, revoke or suspend any massage therapist’s
permit if it is found:
   (A)   That the applicant for the permit has knowingly or negligently made
any false or misleading statement in applying for the permit;
   (B)   That the applicant or the holder of the permit has been convicted of
any offense stated above is §
115.14(B); or
   (C)   That the applicant or holder of the permit has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.17 NOTIFICATION; HEARING.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall not deny, revoke or suspend any permit
issued under this chapter without notifying the applicant or the holder of the
permit, in writing, of the facts and other specific section or sections of this
chapter upon which a determination was made, and of the holder’s right to
request a hearing before the Chief of Police and to present evidence or
argument on all facts or issues involved.
   (B)   A request for a hearing under this chapter shall stay any revocation
or suspension until such time as a hearing has been held and a decision
rendered thereon, provided however, that if the Chief of Police finds that the
public health, safety and welfare requires emergency action and incorporates a
finding to that effect in his/her notice, the permit may be summarily
suspended, pending a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be promptly
instituted and all facts and issues shall be promptly determined.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.18 HEARING ON DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST
PERMIT.
   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a massage
establishment or a massage therapist’s permit or any renewals required, may
request, in writing, a hearing before the Chief of Police, at which hearing
such person shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.19 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to schools, hospitals, nursing homes,
sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing
arts under the laws of this state, or to persons working under the direction of
any such person or in any such establishment.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.20 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this chapter,
whether acting as individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or
employee of operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who
performs massage or massage therapy or conducts a massage establishment without
first obtaining a permit and paying a fee to the town or shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined $100.
(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)
CHAPTER 116: MEAT AND MILK
Section
Sale of Meat
   
116.01   Inspection required
   
116.02   Violation prohibited
Sale of Milk; Pasteurization
   
116.05   Definitions
   
116.06   Registration of sellers required; exception
   
116.07   Application for registration; certificate
   
116.08   Certificate number required on vehicles
   
116.09   Pasteurization required; exception
   
116.10   Violation prohibited
 
   
116.99   Penalty
SALE OF MEAT
§ 116.01 Inspection required.
   No meat shall be sold for human food or offered for sale or held with the
intention of selling the same in any market or store in the town unless the
animal furnishing the meat has been examined and approved by the director of
health, except such animals or carcasses as have been inspected and approved by
the United States Government or inspectors of this state.
('66 Code, § 40-1) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.02 Violation prohibited.
   No person shall violate any provision of §
116.01.
('66 Code, § 40.2) Penalty, see §
116.99
SALE OF MILK; PASTEURIZATION
§ 116.05 Definitions.
   For the purpose of §§
116.05 to
116.10, inclusive, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
   (A)   "Cream." That portion of milk which contains not less than 16% milk
fat.
   (B)    "Dealer." Any person who receives milk from producers at a plant
where it is weighed, tested, pasteurized, bottled, canned or packaged and then
sold or delivered to any consumer or store in the town.
   (C)   "Milk:"
      (1)   For the purpose of §
116.09. The lacteal secretions obtained by complete milking of cows or goats.
      (2)   For the purpose of §§
116.05 to
116.08, inclusive. Whole fluid milk.
   (D)   "Milk products." Any product made by the addition of any substance to
milk or cream and designated as a milk product by the milk regulation board of
this state.
   (E)   "Pasteurization, pasteurized, etc." The process of heating every
particle of milk to at least 143ºF. and holding at such temperature for at
least 15 seconds, in approved and properly operated equipment; provided that
nothing contained in this definition shall be construed as debarring any other
process which has been demonstrated to be equally efficient and is approved by
the dairy and food commission and milk regulation board of this state.
   (F)   "Producer." Any person who owns or controls one or more cows or goats,
a part of all the milk from which is sold or offered for sale.
   (G)   "Store." A grocery, restaurant, drugstore or any mercantile
establishment which sells milk.
('66 Code, §§ 40-7 and 40-11)
§ 116.06 Registration of sellers required; exception.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, producer or dealer to have in his
possession with intent to sell, offer or expose for sale or sell, deliver for
sale or consumption within the town any milk without first registering with the
director of health and receiving a certificate as hereinafter specified.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to sales of milk in stores or sales of
milk from a producer to a dealer.
('66 Code, § 40-3) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07 Application for registration.
   (A)   An application for registration under §§
116.05 to
116.10, inclusive, shall be made on forms prepared by the director of health
and filed with the director of health. All applications shall contain the name,
residence, place of business of this applicant and the average daily number of
quarts of raw milk and the average daily number of quarts of pasteurized milk
sold by the applicant.
   (B)   The director of health after an inspection of the premises shall grant
or renew a certificate without charge to an applicant qualifying under and
complying with all provisions of §§
116.05 to
116.10, inclusive.
   (C)   The registration period shall be from January 1 to December 31,
inclusive, and certificates are to be renewed each January 1
   (D)   Certificates issued hereunder shall not be assignable.
   (E)   The director of health may refuse to grant or renew a certificate or
may suspend or revoke a certificate, after the director of health has
determined that the registrant has either failed to maintain a sanitary
establishment or to comply with any provision of §§
116.05 to
116.10, inclusive, or has made a false statement in his application.
   (F)   Before refusing to grant or renew or before suspending or revoking a
certificate, the director of health shall afford the applicant or registrant an
opportunity to be heard before the director of health. A notice shall be
directed to such applicant or registrant by registered mail to his last known
address, giving at least 3 days' notice of the hearing and a statement of the
matter complained of.
('66 Code, § 40-4)
§ 116.08 Certificate number required on vehicles.
   Before carrying or transporting in vehicles on the public highway milk for
sale in the town, each dealer shall cause the number of his certificate to be
legiby placed and kept in a conspicuous place on each side of the outer side of
all carriages, wagons, carts, sleighs or other vehicles used by him in the
conveyance and sale of milk,
('66 Code, § 40-5) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.09 Pasteurization required; exception.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, producer or dealer to sell, offer
or expose for sale, deliver for sale or consumption within the town any milk,
cream or milk products which are not pasteurized.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to sales of milk from a producer to a
dealer or from one dealer to another dealer.
('66 Code, § 40-9) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.10 Violation prohibited.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter.
('66 Code, §§ 40-2, 40-6 and 40-10) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
('66 Code, §§ 40-2, 40-6 and 40-10)
CHAPTER 117: VENDING, HAWKING AND PEDDLING
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Permit required
   
117.03   Permit fee; issuance; expiration
   
117.04   Limited permits
   
117.05   Permit requirements
   
117.06   Badges and vehicle signs required
   
117.07   Issuance of permit; appeal
   
117.08   Exceptions; exemptions
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "HAWKER" or "PEDDLER." Any person whether principal or agent who goes from
town to town selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing
therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any animal or
vehicle.
   "VEND" or "VENDING." To sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, solicit
offers to purchase or to barter; or to require someone to pay a fee or to set,
negotiate or establish a fee before providing goods or services.
(Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09)
§ 117.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person except those exempted by the state statute, or the provisions of
this chapter, shall engage in vending, hawking or peddling upon any of the
public streets of the Town of Hamden, or upon any state highway, except limited
access highways within Hamden, or any land abutting such streets or highways,
of any goods, wares or other merchandise, at any public or private sale or
auction, or shall vend, hawk or peddle these articles of merchandise from house
to house within the limits of the Town of Hamden without first obtaining a
permit from the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37) ('66 Code, § 48-1)(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09)
Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.03 PERMIT FEE; ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The fee
for a permit issued under this chapter shall be $200 each year in all cases
except as set forth in §
117.04 or §
117.08 of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon submission of an application for a permit under this chapter, the
applicant shall submit proper identification and payment of the fee as set
forth above.
('66 Code, § 48.2; amended 2-3-69) (Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.04 LIMITED PERMITS.
   Vendors or peddlers of popcorn, peanuts, balloons, banners, toys and other
similar activities may obtain from the Chief of Police or his/her designee, a
limited and restricted permit for the above-enumerated goods and merchandise on
a carnival, fair, festival, circus day only upon the streets within a radius of
one-half mile only of the grounds on which such event is located, upon payment
of a permit fee of $25. The permit shall be for one day and shall be subject to
the same requirements as other permits issued under this chapter.
('66 Code, § 48-3; amended 2-3-69) (Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, §
117.99
§ 117.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person desiring to secure a permit under this chapter shall apply in
writing over his/her signature to the Police Department on forms provided by
that Department. Such application shall include information required by the
Police Chief including but not limited to the following:
   (A)   The name, permanent home address of the applicant and, if any, any
local address of the applicant;
   (B)   A physical description of the applicant, including age, height,
weight, hair color, eye color;
   (C)   Applicant's State of Connecticut taxation number;
   (D)   Name and address of the applicant's employer or person to whom or
through whom orders are to be solicited;
   (E)   Length of time employed;
   (F)   Place of residence and nature of the employment of the applicant
during the last preceding year;
   (G)   A description of the nature or character of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant;
   (H)   Where applicable, the name and address of manufacturer, publisher,
distributor or parent company;
   (I)   Where such goods or products are located at the time that the
application is filed with the Police Department and the proposed method and
estimated delivery of said goods;
   (J)   The make, model, color and registration number of the vehicle, if any,
to be used by the applicant, whether or not such vehicle is to be used for
purposes of this permit;
   (K)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense and the
penalty, if any;
   (L)   Two photographs of the applicant, which shall be approximately two and
one-half inches by two and one-half inches in size showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
   (M)   The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting to be taken by the Police
Department.
(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.06 BADGES AND VEHICLE SIGNS REQUIRED.
   All persons permitted by the Chief of Police under this chapter, shall be
issued a suitable badge bearing the words "licensed/permitted vendor" and the
date of the permit and its expiration along with a photograph of the person.
While engaged in business under this chapter, all persons shall, conspicuously
display such badge on his/her person. Each person so permitted shall when
using, for the purpose for which he/she is permitted, a wagon, cart or vehicle
shall have plainly displayed on both sides of such wagon, cart or vehicle a
sign designated and furnished by the Police Department bearing the number of
the permit, the date of the permit and its expiration and the words "permitted
or licensed vendor" in bold letters, such badge and sign to be furnished by the
Police Department without additional expense to the person so permitted. The
Police Department, upon the request of any person who is exempted from taking
out a permit by statute, may furnish to such person, a badge, without charge.
('66 Code, § 48-4)(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.07 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPEAL.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall not be required to issue permits to applicants
who have violated any provision of this chapter or convicted of a felony. Any
party aggrieved by this determination shall have a right of appeal to the
Legislative Council.
   (B)   Permits shall be non-transferable and shall entitle the holder to
conduct business for the purpose and time so indicated.
(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.08 EXCEPTIONS; EXEMPTIONS.
(A)   The Police Chief may waive the permit fee (permit still required) for a
non-profit organization exempt from federal income taxation by Section 501 of
the Internal Revenue Code, or any subsequent corresponding internal revenue
code of the United States, as from time amended, or a charitable organization.
(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37)
   (B)   No permit fee (permits still required) shall be required from any
resident of this state who has resided within the state for a period of two
years next preceding the date of application for a permit, who is (1) a veteran
who served in time of war, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-103; and (2) a
hawker or peddler as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-36; and (3) a principal
pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-36.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners of the
produce of their farms, gardens, and greenhouses, including fruit, vegetables,
and flowers or to the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees,
spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods, to sales on approval, to
conditional; sales of merchandise, or to the taking of orders for merchandise
for future delivery when full payment is not required at the time of the
solicitation.
(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37)
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to the home delivery of newspapers.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit persons having
an established place of business in the Town of Hamden from using the area
adjacent to their business for the display of their goods, wares or merchandise
not shall any permit be required for same.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any manner the
Commissioner of Transportation's statutory authority concerning state highways.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as empowering the Town of Hamden to
prohibit, regulate, control or impose a fee on any person operating any
business on any state highway or land abutting any sate highway pursuant to a
contract with the state.
(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 7-6-09)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who engages in the business of a vendor, peddler or hawker
without complying with the provision of this chapter shall be fined $199 for
each offense.
(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-38) ('66 Code, § 48-5) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 7-6-09)
CHAPTER 118: STANDARD MEASURES
Section
   
118.01   Standard measures required; tests
   
118.02   Violation prohibited
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 Standard measures required; tests.
   Every person, firm, and corporation, either by himself, itself, agent or
agents, using gasoline pumps or other automatic liquid-measuring devices for
the sale of gasoline and other volatile, inflammable fluids, shall provide
himself, itself or themselves with proper standard measures, duly sealed by the
sealer of weights and measures of the town, in capacities of one gallon and 5
gallons, for the purpose of making tests to ascertain whether the measuring
device used is delivering the correct quantity of liquid. Tests of each pump or
other measuring device must be made by the seller or sellers before he or they
make the first sale each day, and also before commencing to dispense any new
supply of liquid.
('66 Code, § 62-1) Penalty, see §
118.99
Cross-reference:
   Sealer of weights and measures, see
Ch. 35, §
35.01.
§ 118.02 Violation prohibited.
   No person, firm, or corporation, either by himself, itself, agent or agents,
shall fail to provide himself or itself with such standard measures, or shall
fail to test the gasoline pump or other automatic measuring device as provided
in §
118.01 of this chapter.
('66 Code, § 62-2) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
('66 Code, § 62-2)
CHAPTER 119: [RESERVED]
 
CHAPTER 120: ITINERANT VENDORS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Scope
   
120.03   License required; exemptions
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ITINERANT VENDOR." Any person, whether principal or agent, who engages in a
temporary or transient business, either in one locality or traveling from place
to place, selling goods, wares, and merchandise, and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business, hires, leases, or occupies any building or structure
for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise.
   "MANAGING ITINERANT VENDOR." Any person who conducts, manages or organizes a
show of itinerant vendors for purposes of exhibition and sale at any location
which is open to the general public and at which goods, wares or merchandise
are on display and offered for sale by any vendors.
   "TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS." Any exhibition and sale of goods, wares,
or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building, or other
structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours
for a period of at least nine months in each year.
(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 578, passed 7-6-09)
§ 120.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in
the usual course of business;
      (2)   Bona fide sales of goods, wares, and merchandise by sample for
future delivery;
      (3)   Hawkers on the streets or peddlers from vehicles;
      (4)   Any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise on the grounds of any
incorporated agricultural society during the continuance of any annual fair
held by such society;
      (5)   Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar held or sponsored by an
ecclesiastical society, church corporation, governmental entity or any
corporation which is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code or any subsequent corresponding section of the Internal
Revenue Code of the United States as from time to time may be amended;
      (6)   Tag sales or garage sales on premises devoted to residential use
and where permitted by local law.
   (B)   No itinerant vendor shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions
and requirements of this chapter by reason of associating himself/herself
temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or merchant, or by
conducting any temporary or transient business in connection with or in the
name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or merchant.
(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 248, adopted 9-4-85; Am. Ord. 578, passed
7-6-09)
§ 120.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Before selling within the Town of Hamden, under a state license, each
itinerant vendor shall make application for a municipal license to the Mayor or
his/her designee and make payment of $250. Upon payment of this fee, the Town
Clerk shall issue the license which may not continue for a period longer than
the unexpired period of the state license under which the municipal license is
issued. The municipal license shall remain in force as long as the licensee
continuously keeps and exposes for sale in the Town of Hamden such stock of
goods, wares and merchandise, but not later than the first day of October
following its date.
   (B)   Upon payment of the license fee and proof of payment of all other
license fees, if any, chargeable upon local sales, the Town Clerk shall record
the state license of the transient vendor in full, shall endorse thereon the
words "local license fees paid" and shall affix thereto his/her official
signature and the date of the endorsement.
   (C)   No license fee shall be required from any resident of Connecticut who
has resided in Connecticut for a period of two years next proceeding the date
of application for the license and who is a veteran who served in time of war
as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-103, for the privilege of buying, selling
or vending goods, wares or merchandise within its limits; provided lapel pins,
buttons, flowers, small flags and similar novelties and books and magazines
shall not be construed to be goods, wares, or merchandise within the meaning of
this chapter. The Town of Hamden may defer issuance of such license for a
period of not to exceed seven days for the purpose of investigation. Each
veteran engaged in any of those occupations shall produce his/her discharge,
certificate of honorable discharge from the service or a copy thereof certified
by the Town Clerk from the records of the town where such discharge or
certificate of discharge is recorded as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-93,
for inspection, together with a certificate from the Town Clerk that the
applicant is a resident of the state, upon such demand of any proper officer of
the town and if he/she fails to do so, he/she shall not be entitled to any
privilege under this section. Any person who makes a false representation for
the purpose of availing him/herself of the privilege of this section shall be
fined $25.00
(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 248, adopted 9-4-85; Am. Ord. 578, passed
7-6-09) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   Any itinerant vendor or managing itinerant vendor who sells or exposes for
sale at public auction or private sale any goods, wares or merchandise without
state and local licenses issued as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 21-28 and
21-29 shall be fined $50.
(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 584, passed 7-6-09)
CHAPTER 121: BAZAARS, RAFFLES AND BINGO
Section
   
121.01   State provisions adopted
§ 121.01 STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Legislative Council, in accordance with Section 7-171 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, hereby adopts the provisions of Sections 7-171 to
7-186, inclusive.
   (B)   No bazaar or raffle shall be promoted, operated, or conducted in the
town after the adoption of this section, unless said bazaar or raffle shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 7-171 or 7-186,
inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes.
   (C)   The playing of Bingo in the Town of Hamden, as provided in Connecticut
General Statutes Section 7-169, as may be amended, shall be permitted.
(Ord. 277, adopted 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 665, adopted 10-5-15)
CHAPTER 122: UNIFORM PACKAGING PRACTICES
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Packaging requirements; utensils and containers to be of polystyrene
   
122.03   Health Director to promulgate regulations
   
122.04   Exemptions
   
122.05   Abatement of violations
   
122.06   Preemption by state law
   
122.07   Effective date
 
   
122.99   Penalty
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BIODEGRADABLE PACKAGING." Packaging made of cellulose-based or other
substances that are capable of being readily attacked, decomposed, assimilated,
and otherwise completely oxidized or broken down by bacteria or other natural
biological organisms into carbonaceous soil material or water and carbon
dioxide.
   "PACKAGING." All food-related wrappings, adhesives, cords, bindings,
strings, bags, boxes, containers and disposable or non-reusable plates, cups,
or drinking utensils intended for use within Hamden.
   "RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT." Any restaurant, food operation, or any other
place, other than a private residence, where food and drink is prepared or
served, with or without charge, for consumption on or off the premises,
including any catering establishment or any eating place, whether fixed or
mobile, restaurant, bar, café, cafeteria, industrial establishment, public or
private school, private club, coffee shop, tea room, short order café, sandwich
stand or any other type of food service operation and any person, firm or
corporation which sells, offers or keeps for sale any groceries,
confectioneries, meats, fish, vegetables or fruits, all sales outlets, stores,
shops or other places of business located within the town, which operate
primarily to sell or convey foods directly to the ultimate consumer which foods
are predominantly contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. "RETAIL FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT" shall include, but not be limited to, any place where food is
prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled,
stored, manufactured, and sold or offered for sale including, but not limited
to, any fixed or mobile restaurant; drive-in; coffee shop; cafeteria; short
order café; delicatessen; luncheonette; grill; sandwich shop; soda fountain;
tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; take-out prepared food
place; industrial feeding establishment; catering kitchen, commissary; grocery
store; public food market; food stand; or similar place in which food or drink
is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other
establishment or operation, including homes, where food is processed, prepared,
stored, served, or provided for the public for charge.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
§ 122.02 PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS; UTENSILS AND CONTAINERS TO BE OF POLYSTYRENE.
   (A)   No retail food establishment located and doing business within the
town shall sell or convey food directly to ultimate consumers within the town
unless such food is placed, wrapped, or packed in biodegradable packaging at
the conclusion of a sales transaction for the purchase of such food, which
takes place on the premises of such a retail food establishment at or near a
sales counter or equivalent customer purchasing station but prior to removal of
such food from the premises of such retail food establishment.
   (B)   No retail food establishment located and doing business within the
town shall sell, give, or provide eating utensils or food containers to any
consumers within the town if such eating utensil or food container is composed
of polystyrene.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.03 HEALTH DIRECTOR TO PROMULGATE REGULATIONS.
   The Town Health Director or any entity serving as such may issue and
promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement and
carry out the provisions of this law.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
§ 122.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   Section
122.02 shall not apply to the following items:
   (A)   Any flexible transparent covering for uncooked or raw meat, poultry,
raw fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit and vegetable produce, baked goods, or
bread;
   (B)   Any food packaging used at hospitals or nursing homes;
   (C)   Any paper or other cellulose based packaging that is coated with
polyethylene plastic on only one side;
   (D)   Any plastic covers, covering material, food containers, lids, eating
utensils, or straws that are not made of polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride.
   (E)   Any cup lid which is not environmentally acceptable, but for which
there is not a commercially available alternative determined by the town health
director or any entity serving as such may be exempted by rule created under §
122.05(B) provided that the town health director or any entity serving as such
or its designee shall report in writing on or before April 30, 1990 and
quarterly thereafter to the legislative council on the status of any item
exempted under this provision. Upon determination that the item is commercially
available, notification will be published and the effective date of the
prohibition shall be 90 days from the publication date.
   (F)   In determining whether there are commercially available alternatives,
the town health director or any entity serving as such shall consider the
following:
      (1)   The availability of environmentally acceptable packaging for
affected projects;
      (2)   The economic consequences to manufacturers, suppliers, retailers,
and other vendors of requiring environmentally acceptable packaging when
available; and
      (3)   The competitive effects on manufacturers, suppliers, retailers and
other vendors involved in the sale of product brands or labels available only
in packaging that is not environmentally acceptable packaging.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89; Am. Ord. 307, passed 2-26-90)
§ 122.05 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Town Health Director or any entity serving as such or his
authorized agent or a sanitarian employed by such Health Director or any
authorized agent of such entity or any sanitarian employed by such entity may
enter any retail food establishment in the town where there is just cause to
suspect the use of any packaging prohibited by this chapter and abate or cause
to be abated such use.
   (B)   For the purposes of abating the use of such prohibited packaging the
Town Health Director or any entity serving as such, shall have the same power
and authority granted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-206
(b) and (c).
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
§ 122.06 PREEMPTION BY STATE LAW.
   This law shall be null and void on the day that Statewide legislation goes
into effect, incorporating either the same or substantially similar provisions
as are contained in this law, or in the event that a pertinent State or Federal
administrative agency issues and promulgates regulations preempting such action
by the town. The Town Legislature may determine via mere resolution whether or
not identical or substantially similar statewide legislation has been enacted
for the purposes of triggering the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
§ 122.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on March 1, 1990.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with §
122.02 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each day such
violation continues to exist and imprisonment of not more than three months, or
both.
(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)
CHAPTER 123: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE POLICY
Section
   
123.01   Goals and objectives
   
123.02   Eligibility
   
123.03   Term of policy
   
123.04   Application and review process
   
123.05   Evaluation process and criteria
   
123.06   Delinquent tax issues
   
123.07   Types of incentives; use of multiple incentives by any one applicant
   
123.08   Real property tax incentives
   
123.09   Real property tax incentives for rehabilitation areas
   
123.10   Personal property tax incentives
   
123.11   Contaminated sites; remediation tax incentives
   
123.12   Property improvement incentives
   
123.13   Waiver of building permit fees
   
123.14   Miscellaneous
§ 123.01 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The goal of this economic development incentive policy is to
strengthen Hamden's manufacturing, technology and commercial tax base and
produce a viable tax revenue stream.
   (B)   The objectives of this policy are as follows:
      (1)   To ensure that Hamden remains a competitive business location in
both the state and the region;
      (2)   To encourage the retention and expansion of existing businesses;
      (3)   To aid in the location of new businesses to Hamden;
      (4)   To encourage the redevelopment and adaptive reuse of obsolete or
distressed properties which pose special development problems because of their
age, configuration and location;
      (5)   To assist in the redemption and redevelopment of contaminated
industrial and commercial sites;
      (6)   To support the economic development of Hamden's Enterprise Zone and
encourage the location and expansion of manufacturing and warehouse/
distribution businesses throughout town in conjunction with the town's state
designation as a targeted investment community;
      (7)   To support economic development in Hamden's Neighborhood
Revitalization Zones; and
      (8)   To aid major new industrial or commercial developments, which,
through the extension and improvement of public infrastructure, will create
parcels suitable for, industrial, commercial or mixed use development projects
where town participation makes the project both feasible and competitive, or
where the town's contribution creates new industrial parks or businesses.
(Ord. 384, passed 10-19-08; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.02 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Real property incentives may be available to any party owning or
proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town of Hamden, or any
party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air space in the town, or
with any party who is the lessee of, or who proposes to be the lessee of, air
space in the town in such a manner that the air space leased or proposed to be
leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-64,
fixing the assessment of the real property or air space which is the subject of
the agreement, and all improvements thereon or therein and to be constructed
thereon or therein subject to the provisions set for the below provided that
the improvements shall be for one of the following: 1) office use; 2) retail
use; 3) permanent residential use; 4) transient residential use; 5)
manufacturing; 6) warehouse, storage or distribution use; 7) structured multi-
leveled parking use necessary in connection with a mass transit system; 8)
information technology; 9) recreational facilities; or 10) transportation
facilities and which meet the eligibility criteria listed below.
   (B)   Personal property incentives may be available to any party owning or
proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town of Hamden, or
with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air space in the
town, or with any party who is the lessee of, or who proposes to be the lessee
of, air space in the town in such a manner that the air space leased or
proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-64, upon which is located or proposed to be located a manufacturing
facility, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(72) and which meet the
edibility as listed below.
   (C)   Real property incentives may be available to the owner of any real
property located in Neighborhood Revitalization Zones (Highwood and State
Street neighborhoods have been designated by the town as Neighborhood
Revitalization Zones) who agrees to rehabilitate such property or construct new
multi-family rental housing or cooperative housing on such property and which
meet the eligibility criteria listed below.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.03 TERM OF POLICY.
   This incentive policy shall remain in effect until December 31, 2024.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 426, passed 11-6-00; Am. Ord. 440, passed
7-2-01; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord.
556, passed 2-4-08; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 609, passed 7-5-11;
Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15; Am. Ord. 661, passed
7-6-15; Am. Ord. 704, passed 6-4-18; Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-17-18; Am. Ord.
724, passed 1-18-22)
§ 123.04 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Applications for tax deferral incentives on real property.
Applications for tax deferral incentives as set forth in §§
123.08 and
123.09 of this chapter for a project consisting of eligible improvements must
be submitted to the Economic and Community Development Office prior to the
project’s application for a building permit. Such application shall be reviewed
by a committee composed of the Mayor; the Economic and Community Development
Director, the Finance Director; the Assessor; the Tax Collector; the chair of
the Economic Development Commission (EDC); a member of the Economic Development
Commission who shall be appointed by the chair of the Economic Development
Commission; and two members (one Democrat and one Republican) of the
Legislative Council who shall be appointed by the Legislative Council
President. The committee will review and initially determine an applicant’s
eligibility based on the evaluation criteria as set below in §
123.05; negotiate and provide tentative incentive offers to such applicants;
and provide a letter of intent outlining the town’s incentive offer to the
applicant. The letter will state that final approval of the terms is contingent
on EDC and Legislative Council approval as well as the execution of a formal
legal agreement. The Legislative Council shall give final approval to the
agreement and authorize its execution.
   (B)   Applications for tax deferral incentives on personal property.
Applications for tax deferral incentives as set forth in §
123.10 of this chapter on personal property shall be submitted to the Economic
and Community Development Office. Such applications shall be reviewed and
processed as set forth above in division (A) of this section and in accordance
with the criteria as set forth below in §
123.05.
   (C)   Applications for contaminated sites tax incentives. Applications for
tax incentives on contaminated sites as set forth in §
123.11 of this chapter shall be submitted to the Economic and Community
Development Office. Such applications shall be reviewed and processed as set
forth in division (A) of this section in accordance with the criteria as set
forth below in §
123.05.
   (D)   Local building permit fee waivers. Applications for local building
permit waivers as set forth in §
123.13 of this chapter shall be submitted to the Economic and Community
Development Office. Such applications shall be reviewed and processed as set
forth below in division (A) of this section in accordance with the criteria set
forth below in §
123.05. If approved, the Building Official shall waive local building permit
fees in accordance with §
123.13.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.05 EVALUATION PROCESS AND CRITERIA.
   The levels of incentives presented in §§
123.08,
123.09,
123.10,
123.11 and
123.12 are maximum benefit levels. The committee may recommend a level lower
than the maximum or recommend that the applicant not receive any incentive
based upon the following criteria:
   (A)   The extent to which the final assistance aids in the expansion and
retention of existing firms in Hamden or aids in the location of new firms in
Hamden;
   (B)   The short and long term increase in real and personal property tax
base associated in the project;
   (C)   The extent to which the town's participation through incentives
eliminates a blighted property and puts that property to productive reuse;
   (D)   The extent to which the town's incentive will contribute toward
environmental remediation and the redevelopment of contaminated sites;
   (E)   The extent to which the incentives will aid in an identified property
of district rehabilitation and revitalization efforts as articulated in the
town's plan of development, neighborhood and revitalization zone plans,
enterprise zone policies, or projects identified by the Economic Development
Commission or the Legislative Council;
   (F)   The extent to which a new development project serves to create
opportunities for commercial and industrial development, extend public
infrastructure, and provide for industrial and commercial growth; and
   (G)   The extent to which a project positively contributes to the creation
of jobs and that it contributes to Hamden's quality of life.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.06 DELINQUENT TAX ISSUES.
With the exception of a site identified as environmentally impacted pursuant to
§
123.11 of this chapter, any applicant delinquent in taxes to the town shall not
be considered for incentives unless the applicant has made arrangements to pay
these taxes with the tax collector. If a business receiving incentives becomes
delinquent at any time during the incentive period and does not make an
acceptable repayment arrangement with the tax collector, the incentive program
shall cease and that business shall be liable for paying all taxes deferred or
abated to the date of delinquency.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.07 TYPES OF INCENTIVES; USE OF MULTIPLE INCENTIVES BY ANY ONE APPLICANT.
   (A)   The specifics of the following incentives are limited by state laws:
assessment deferrals on real property improvements, Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-65b
and 12-65g; assessment deferrals on personal property, (located in
manufacturing facilities) Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h; abatement of real
property taxes during periods of environmental remediation, PA 98-253; and
forgiveness of back real property taxes to benefit prospective purchasers of
vacant hazardous sites if they remediate that site, PA 98-253.
   (B)   The Economic Development Commission recognizes that the town offers
incentives that are not included in this chapter. These are: Enterprise Zone
(EZ), Railroad Depot Zone (RRDZ) and real and personal property tax abatements;
Targeted Investment Community (TIC) real and personal property tax abatements;
assessment deferrals for real property improvements in the Enterprise Zone
(1989 ordinance); tax abatements on new machinery and equipment used in
manufacturing processes. Any applicant who qualified for EZ, RRDZ or TIC tax
abatements for real or personal property must use those and shall not be
eligible for the town’s real and personal property tax incentives under this
chapter.
   (C)   Applicants for town or EZ/TIC incentives may also apply for
remediation incentives, building permit fee waivers and property improvement
and incentives.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.08 REAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES.
   (A)   (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65b). Subsequent to an affirmative vote of the
Legislative Council, the town (through the Mayor) may enter into a written
agreement with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real
property in the Town of Hamden, or with any party owning or proposing to
acquire an interest in air space in the town, or with any party who is the
lessee of, or who proposes to be the lessee of, air space in the town in such a
manner that the air space leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to
the lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-64, subject to the provisions set
forth below.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall only apply if the
improvements are for at least one of the following: 1) office use; 2) retain
use; 3) permanent residential use; 4) transient residential use; 5)
manufacturing; 6) warehouse, storage or distribution use; 7) structured multi-
leveled parking use necessary in connection with a mass transit system; 8)
information technology; 9) recreational facilities; or 10) transportation
facilities.
   (C)   Based on the cost of improvements, the Assessor shall determine the
net increase in assessed value. The increased value shall be the basis of the
amount of the deferral.
   (D)   Payback period. If the owner or lessee receiving the incentive
substantially reduces its operations on its real property, attempts to assign
its rights under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers the real
estate during the relevant payback period noted above, the town may terminate
the incentive program and may require full pay back of all deferred taxes. In
order to maintain eligibility the town may require property owners or lessees
to submit eligibility affidavits annually.
   (E)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall be
recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.
   (F)   Effective date for deferrals. Assessment deferrals on real property
made under this section shall commence on the October 1 Grand List following
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the Building Department.
 
COST OF IMPROVEMENTS      PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE TIME PERIOD PAY BACK PERIOD
                          INCREASED ASSESSMENT
(for businesses not
located or locating in a
Neighborhood
Revitalization Zone)
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 2 - to maximum of
                          60%
                          year 3 - to maximum of
                          50%
Over $15 million          year 4 - to maximum of  7 years     10 years
                          40%
                          year 5 - to maximum of
                          30%
                          year 6 - to maximum of
                          20%
                          year 7 - to maximum of
                          10%
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 2 - to maximum of
                          60%
                          year 3 - to maximum of
$3 million to $15 million 50%                     6 years     10 years
                          year 4 - to maximum of
                          40%
                          year 5 - to maximum of
                          30%
                          year 6 - to maximum of
                          20%
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          70%
$500,000 to $2,999,999    year 2 - to maximum of  2 years     5 years
                          60%
                          year 3 - to maximum of
                          50%
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          50%
$25,000 to $499,999       year 2 - to maximum of  3 years     5 years
                          40%
                          year 3 - to maximum of
                          30%
 
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65b
§ 123.09 REAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES FOR REHABILITATION AREAS.
 
COST OF IMPROVEMENTS    PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE    TIME PERIOD PAY BACK PERIOD
                        INCREASED ASSESSMENT
(for businesses located
or locating in a
Neighborhood
Revitalization Zone)
                        year 1 - to maximum of 70%
                        year 2 - to maximum of 70%
Over $3 million         year 3 - to maximum of 70% 5 years     10 years
                        year 4 - to maximum of 70%
                        year 5 - to maximum of 70%
                        year 1 - to maximum of
$500,000 to             100%                       2 years     5 years
$2,999,999              year 2 - to maximum of
                        100%
                        year 1 - to maximum of 50%
$50,000 to $499,999     year 2 - to maximum of 50% 3 years     5 years
                        year 3 - to maximum of 50%
 
   (A)   Payback period. If the owner receiving the incentive substantially
reduces its operations on its real property, attempts to assign its rights
under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers the real estate during
the relevant payback period noted above, the town may terminate the incentive
program and may require full pay back of all deferred taxes. In order to
maintain eligibility the town may require property owners to submit eligibility
affidavits annually.
   (B)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall be
recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.
   (C)   Effective date for deferrals. Assessment deferrals on real property
made under this section shall commence on the October 1 Grand List following
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the Building Department.
(Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65e
§ 123.10 PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES.
   (A)   (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h). Subsequent to an affirmative vote of the
Legislative Council, the town (through the Mayor) may enter into a written
agreement with any party that owns or proposes to acquire an interest in real
property, or with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air
space in the town, or with any party who is the lessee of, or who proses to be
the lessee of, air space in the town in such a manner that the airspace leased
or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-64, in an appropriately zoned area, upon which is located or
proposed to be located a manufacturing facility, as defined in Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81(72), fixing the assessment of the personal property located
within the facility which is the subject of the agreement. The increased
portion of the assessment of personal property in that facility may be deferred
depending on the net increase in personal property.
 
AMOUNT OF NET INCREASE IN PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE
ASSESSED VALUE OF         INCREASED PORTION OF THE TIME PERIOD PAY BACK PERIOD
PERSONAL PROPERTY         ASSESSMENT
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 2 - to maximum of
                          70%
$3 million plus           year 3 - to maximum of   5 years     10 years
                          70%
                          year 4 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 5 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 1 - to maximum of
$500,000 to               70%                      2 years     5 years
$3,000,000                year 2 - to maximum of
                          70%
                          year 1 - to maximum of
                          50%
$25,000 to                year 2 - to maximum of   3 years     5 years
$499,999                  50%
                          year 3 - to maximum of
                          50%
 
   (B)   Payback period. If an owner or lessee receiving the incentive
substantially reduces its operations on its real property, attempts to assign
its rights under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers the real
estate during the relevant payback period noted above, the town may terminate
the incentive program and may require full pay back of all deferred taxes. In
order to maintain eligibility, the town may require property owners to submit
eligibility annually.
   (C)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall be
recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.
   (D)   Effective date of deferral. Deferrals for increased assessments on
personal property granted under this section shall commence on October 1 of the
year following the purchase and declaration to the Assessor of such personal
property.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h
§ 123.11 CONTAMINATED SITES; REMEDIATION TAX INCENTIVES.
   (A)   (Public Act 97-109 as amended by Public Act 98-253). The town may:
      (1)   Enter into an agreement with the owner of any real property to
abate the property tax due as of the date of the agreement for a period of time
not to exceed seven years if the property has been subject to a spill as
defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-452c, and the owner agrees to conduct any
environmental site assessment, demolition and remediation of the spill
necessary to redevelop the property. Any such tax abatement shall be only for
the period of remediation and redevelopment and shall be contingent upon the
continuation and completion of the remediation and redevelopment process with
the respect to purposes specified in the agreement. The abatement shall cease
upon the sale or transfer of the property for any other purpose unless the town
consents to its continuation. The town may also establish a recapture provision
in the event of sale provided such recapture shall not exceed the original
amount of taxes abated and may not go back further than the date of the
agreement; or
      (2)   Forgive all or a portion of the principal balance and interest due
on delinquent property taxes for the benefit of any prospective purchaser who
has obtained an environmental investigation or remediation plan approved by the
Commission of Environmental Protection or a licensed environmental professional
under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-133w, § 22a-133x, as amended by § 13 of Public
Act 98-253, or § 22a-133y and completes such remediation plan for an
establishment, as defined in § 22a-134, as amended by § 2 of Public Act 98-253,
deemed by the town to be abandoned.
   (B)   Any abatement or forgiveness of taxes under division (A) of this
section shall be approved by a vote of the Legislative Council and shall be
contingent upon any conditions deemed appropriate by such body.
   (C)   The town shall notify the Commissioner of Environmental Protection,
the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development and the Secretary of
Policy and Management not later than 30 days after granting any abatement or
forgiveness of taxes under division (A) of this section. Such notice shall
provide the owner of purchaser’s name, as the case may be, and the address of
the property.
   (D)   The Town of Hamden may offer up to a 100% real property tax abatement
to owners during the period of time that they remediate their property or for
seven years whichever is shorter as specified in divisions (A) and (C) of this
section. The town will seek the professional review of an environmental
engineer of the town’s engineering department to assess the maximum time that
should be allowed for remediation work and thus for the abatement period. The
owner shall provide the town with phase one and two environmental assessments
and a redevelopment plan for vacant and abandoned sites. The town will decide
on pay back/recapture requirements on a case-by-case basis.
   (E)   The Town of Hamden may consider forgiving all or a portion of back
taxes and interest owed for the benefit of purchasers of vacant environmentally
hazardous sites as specified in divisions (A) and (B) of this section. A
redevelopment plan and environmental assessments shall be provided to the town
as part of the application.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.12 PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVES.
   (A)   The Town of Hamden may, as its option, offer property incentives for
improvements for commercial, retail, office, service, manu- facturing, storage,
warehousing and distribution developments that it deems would significantly
increase the town’s tax base or be of significant benefit to the town.
   (B)   Property improvements shall be granted in accordance with the process
set forth in §
123.04(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   Property improvements include all site work including paving, curbing,
landscaping, fencing, utilities and drainage. It also includes all improvements
to buildings such as structural (foundation, wall sections, roof) and
electrical, mechanical, HVAC, telecommunication improvements, and the like, all
of which will be fixed improvements, not removal by the occupant.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.13 WAIVER OF BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Commercial, retail, office, service, manufacturing, storage,
warehousing and distribution businesses that own or propose to own real
property anywhere in town and that newly construct or make improvements to such
real property shall receive local building permit fee waivers according to the
improvements cost levels listed below. Any owner or lessee granted a permit
waiver shall still be required to pay the educational fee required by the State
of Connecticut.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter local building permits shall not include
HVAC, plumbing and electrical permits.
 
COST OF IMPROVEMENTS  TOWN BUILDING PERMIT FEE LOCATION OF BUSINESS
                      WAIVER
Under $100,000        100% of fee waived       businesses that do not own or
$100,000 - $500,000   50% of fee waived        propose to own property within
$500,000 - $3 million 25% of fee waived        the Neighborhood Revitalization
Above $3 million      No waiver                Zone
Under $100,000        100% of fee waived       businesses that own or propose
$100,000 - $500,000   100% of fee waived       to own property within the
$500,000 - $3 million 100% of fee waived       Neighborhood
Above $3 million      No waiver                Revitalization Zone
 
(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 529, passed 8-1-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7- 08; Am. Ord.
613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15)
§ 123.14 MISCELLANEOUS.
   Applicant's awarded incentives under this policy must be prepared to
demonstrate best efforts to achieve the following:
   (A)   10% Resident Workforce Hours for on-site construction labor.
   (B)   6.9% Female Workforce Hours for on-site construction labor.
   (C)   17% Minority Male Workforce Hours for construction labor.
   (D)   10% Hamden Business Enterprises for construction services.
   (E)   6.25% Minority or Woman-owned Business Enterprises (MWBE) for
construction services.
   (F)   20% Affordable Housing Units.
   Said evidence shall include but not be limited to certified payroll records
and other such information as the Commission deems necessary.
(Ord. 724, passed 1-18-22)
CHAPTER 124: DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FROM BIDDING
Section
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Causes for disqualification
   
124.03   Disqualification; exceptions
   
124.04   Notice of hearing; hearing procedure
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "CONTRACT" or "CONTRACTING." Any relationship or arrangement with the town
whereby a contractor seeks or obtains the right to supply, or supplies goods,
supplies, services or equipment to the town directly, or indirectly through a
relationship with any other contractor such as by being an agent,
subcontractor, joint venture, supplier and the like.
   "CONTRACTOR." Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, including
professional consultants, which has contracted or seeks to contract with the
town or to participate in such a contract in connection with any public works
of the town.
   "DISQUALIFICATION." The prohibition of any contractor from bidding on,
applying for, or participating as a subcontractor on, town contracts in
response to an invitation to bid or from being considered for the awarding of
any town contract or purchase order.
   "HEARING OFFICER." The person appointed by the Mayor to hear and decide
allegations that any contractor should be disqualified pursuant to this
chapter, except that no hearing officer shall be appointed who has personally
carried out the function of investigator in any contested issue before that
hearing officer.
   "PUBLIC WORKS." The use of federal, state or local funds for a project that
serves the interest of the general public.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)
§ 124.02 CAUSES FOR DISQUALIFICATION.
   (A)   Causes for disqualification from bidding on, applying for or
participating in contracts shall include the following:
      (1)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for or
admission to the commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining
or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the
performance of such contract or subcontract;
      (2)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or
admission to the violation of any state or federal law for embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which affects responsibility as a municipal contractor;
      (3)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or
admission to a violation of state or federal antitrust, collusion or conspiracy
law arising out of the submission of bids or proposals on a public or private
contract or subcontract;
      (4)   A willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one or
more public contracts, agreements or transactions;
      (5)   A history of failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one
or more public contracts, agreements or transactions; or
      (6)   A willful violation of a statutory or regulatory provision or
requirement applicable to a public contract, agreement or transaction.
   (B)   For purposes of a disqualification proceeding under this chapter,
conduct may be imputed as follows:
      (1)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct of any
officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee or other individual
associated with a contractor may be imputed to the contractor when the conduct
occurred in connection with the individual's performance of duties for or on
behalf of the contractor and the contractor knew of or had reason to know of
such conduct. The term "other seriously improper conduct" does not include
advice from an attorney, accountant or other paid consultant if it was
reasonable for the contractor to rely on such advice.
      (2)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct of a
contractor may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, partner,
employee or other individual associated with the contractor who participated
in, knew of or had reason to know of the contractor's conduct.
      (3)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct of one
contractor participating in a joint venture or similar arrangement may be
imputed to other participating contractors if the conduct occurred for or on
behalf of the joint venture or similar arrangement and these contractors knew
of or had reason to know of such conduct.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)
§ 124.03 DISQUALIFICATION; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any contractor may be disqualified for a period not to exceed two
years from bidding on, applying for, or participating as a subcontractor under,
contracts with the town for one or more causes set forth in division (B) of
this section.
   (B)   The town may reduce the period or extent of disqualification, upon the
contractor's request, supported by documentation, for the following reasons:
      (1)   Newly discovered material evidence;
      (2)   Reversal of the conviction upon which the disqualification was
based;
      (3)   Bona fide change in ownership or management;
      (4)   Elimination of other causes for which the disqualification was
imposed; or
      (5)   Other reasons the municipality deems appropriate.
   (C)   The town may grant an exception permitting a disqualified contractor
to participate in a particular contract or subcontract upon a written
determination by the Purchasing Agent that there is good cause, in the interest
of the public, for such action.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)
§ 124.04 NOTICE OF HEARING; HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Subsequent to the determination that there exists one or more causes
for disqualification of any contractor, the Purchasing Agent shall recommend
disqualification of said contractor to the Mayor. Upon review of the
recommendation, the Mayor may assign a hearing officer to determine whether
there exists, pursuant to §
124.02(B) above, one or more causes for disqualifying a contractor from bidding
on, applying for or participating in an award of town contracts.
   (B)   The town, through the Purchasing Agent, shall give written notice to
the contractor of the town's intent to commence a hearing to determine whether
the contractor should be disqualified under this chapter. The notice shall
include a statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing. Copies of the
notice shall be sent to the affected department and the Town Attorney.
   (C)   The hearing shall be held in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 4-
176e through § 4-181a, as may be amended. The Hearing Officer shall issue a
written decision within 90 days of the last date of such hearing and state in
the decision the reasons for the action taken and, if the contractor is
disqualified, the period of such disqualification. The existence of a cause for
disqualification shall not be the sole factor to be considered in determining
whether the contractor shall be disqualified. In determining whether to
disqualify a contractor, the hearing officer shall consider the seriousness of
the contractor's acts or omissions and any mitigating factors. The hearing
officer shall send the decision to the contractor by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)
CHAPTER 125: EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORES
Section
   
125.01   Definitions
   
125.02   Licensing requirements
   
125.03   License application
   
125.04   Issuance, denial and appeal of denial of license
   
125.05   Extended hours convenience store security
   
125.06   Creating or maintaining non-compliant extended hours convenient stores
prohibited
   
125.07   Enforcement
   
125.08   Suspension/revocation of license
   
125.09   Delivery of notices
   
125.10   Expiration and renewal of registration
   
125.11   Nontransferability
 
   
125.99   Penalty
§ 125.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BUSINESS PREMISES.” The main structure and the property belonging to or
associated with an extended hours convenience store.
   “CHIEF OF POLICE.” The Chief of the Hamden Police Department or his/her
designee.
   “DISORDERLY ESTABLISHMENT.” Includes any business premises where acts are
performed or activities are conducted or condoned, whether inside or outside
the business premises, which are contrary to the rules of good order and
behavior, violative of the public peace, indecent, or which tend to corrupt the
morals of the community and promote criminal activity.
   “DROP SAFE.” means a cash management device in which money can be deposited
without the depositor having access to the contents.
   “EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE.” Any building, structure or grounds
primarily used for the retail sale of groceries, consumables, commodities open
for business between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any part thereof.
The term “EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE” shall not include:
      (1)   A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant;
      (2)   A business that has a least 10,000 square feet of retail floor
space within the main structure; or
      (3)   Any business that has no retail floor space accessible to the
public.
   “HEIGHT MARKER.” A measuring strip that may be attached on or near a door
frame of an extended hours convenience store to aid in identifying the height
of a person suspected of committing a crime.
   “LICENSE.” A license issued by the Town Planner under this chapter to the
owner of an extended hours convenience store.
   “OWNER.” The person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or other
entity or group enterprise licensed to do business at an extended hours
convenience store at a particular location or locations, in lawful possession
of the location by virtue of a deed, license, lease, sublease or other contract
or agreement.
   “PERSON.” Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.
   “REGISTERED AGENT.” The person identified in the license application.
   “TOWN PLANNER.” The Town Planner for the Town of Hamden or his/her designee.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.02 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No extended hours convenience store shall be opened between the hours
of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any portion thereof, without a license issued
under this chapter.
   (B)   The fee for this license shall be $100 yearly.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain a license for an extended hours convenience store, a person
must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the Town
Planner. The applicant must be the person who will own or operate the extended
hours convenience store. The application must contain all of the following
information:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
the applicant;
      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and
telephone number of the extended hours convenience store. The names, street
addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the
extended hours convenience store;
      (3)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
a person or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in
the event of an emergency condition involving the extended hours convenience
store;
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
the registered agent for the extended hours convenience store;
      (5)   The total area in square feet of the extended hours convenience
store; and
      (6)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or
that the Town Planner deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether
the requested license should be granted.
   (B)   An applicant shall notify the Town Planner within 45 days after any
material change in the information contained in the application for a license
for an extended hours convenience store, including, but not limited to, any
changes in ownership of the property and any changes in the registered agent,
manager, or emergency contact person(s) for the property.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.04 ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND APPEAL OF DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Planner shall issue to the applicant a license for an
extended hours convenience store if the Town Planner determines that:
      (1)   The applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the license; and
      (2)   The applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in any application for a license.
   (B)   If the Town Planner determines that the requirements of division (A)
of this section have not been met the Town Planner shall deny a license to the
applicant. If the Town Planner determines that an applicant should be denied a
license, the Town Planner shall deliver written notice to the applicant that
the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a
statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
   (C)   A license issued under this section must be displayed to the public in
a manner and location approved by the Town Planner. The license must be
presented upon request to any Town official for examination.
   (D)   No license shall be granted or renewed for any extended hours
convenience store on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the
town of Hamden are delinquent or unpaid (if due).
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.05 EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE SECURITY.
   (A)   Every extended hours convenience store shall be equipped with the
following security devices and standards:
      (1)   A fully operative security camera system capable of recording and
retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and apprehension;
      (2)   A drop safe or cash management system device for restricted access
to cash receipts;
      (3)   A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of between .5 and
1.5 foot candles per square foot at 18 inches above the surface, if applicable;
      (4)   A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash
register contains $50 or less;
      (5)   Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from
outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and
sales transaction area;
      (6)   Height markers at the entrance of the extended hours convenience
store which display height measures; and
      (7)   A cash management system policy to limit the cash on hand at all
times.
   (B)   An extended hours convenience store shall not have window tinting that
reduces exterior or interior viewing of the normal line of sight.
   (C)   Every extended hours convenience store shall be equipped with a silent
alarm to an alarm monitoring company. The alarm must be registered in
accordance with Chapter 100 of the Town Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.06 CREATING OR MAINTAINING NON-COMPLIANT EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENT STORES
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Complaint or violation. Any person affected by the action or inaction
of an extended hours convenience store subject to the provisions of this
chapter may contact the Town Planner.
   (B)   Notice of violation; order to correct; time limit for compliance. If
the Town Planner acting by him/herself or by an appropriate enforcement
officer, has reason to believe, pursuant to an inspection of the premises, that
an owner or agent of an extended hours convenience store has violated the
provisions of this chapter, the Town Planner or Enforcement Officer shall serve
a notice of violation and an order to correct such violation on the owner of
record. If the owner's address is the same as the property where the violation
has occurred, then a notice may be left at the time the violation is noted. The
order shall require the owner to comply with the requirements of this chapter
within 30 days of receipt of the notice.
   (C)   Failure to correct deficiency. If an owner of property has been served
with a notice of violation and order to correct and has failed to do so within
30 days as determined upon subsequent inspection, the Town Planner shall cause
the owner to be fined, by way of citation, $100 for each day that each non-
compliant condition persists beyond 30 days from the effective date of the
order until the owner presents appropriate evidence that the cited non-
compliant conditions have been corrected and the premises have been re-
inspected and approved.
   (D)   Failure to pay. Should an owner fail to pay, within 30 days, a fine
levied pursuant to this chapter, 1% interest charges shall be applied to the
outstanding balance. The interest shall accrue along with the fines and shall
be compounded daily. In addition, the Town of Hamden may bring a civil action
against the debtor in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such debt.
   (E)   Appeal from citation. Any owner may appeal a citation in accordance
with Chapter 12 of the Hamden Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No extended hours convenience store shall be opened between the hours
of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any portion thereof, without a license, nor
allow, create or maintain an environment that attracts or encourages criminal
activity.
   (B)   If an extended hours convenience store owner operates his, her or its
business without a license between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any
portion thereof, the Town Planner has the authority to close the business and
issue citations for each violation of operating without a license.
   (C)   If serious criminal activity, as defined by the Hamden Police Chief,
including, but not limited to, felonious conduct or narcotics or controlled
drug offenses, as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes, occurs, that
extended hours convenience store shall implement one of the following security
measures:
      (1)   Provide for a least two employees on the premises at all times
after 10:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; or
      (2)   Install for use by employees at all times after 10:00 p.m. and
before 5:00 a.m., a secured safety enclosure of transparent polycarbonate or
other appropriate material.
   (D)   License suspension. The Town Planner may suspend a license issued
under this chapter if the owner fails to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any other town ordinance or state or federal law applicable to an
extended hours convenience store; or intentionally made a false statement as to
a material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the license; or
upon the occurrence of any events involving serious criminal activity; or upon
the recommendation of any agents or representatives of the Town of Hamden the
Town Planner may reasonably conclude that the business constitutes a disorderly
establishment and the extended hours convenience store license may be suspended
for up to 30 days in accordance with § 125.08, below of this chapter. The
license may thereafter be suspended again or may be revoked if two or more
serious criminal activity events occur during a 12 month period. The Town
Planner may also at his/her discretion revoke the owner’s extended hours
license to operate if the taxes on the business establishment are delinquent.
   (E)   Appeal from suspension/revocation. Any owner or person designated by
the owner may appeal his/her suspension or revocation of the license of an
extended hours convenience store in accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   Any person served with a notice of suspension or revocation shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Town Planner upon petition. The
person shall file such petition at the Planning Department requesting a hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore, within three
business days after the date notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Town Planner and/or his/her agents shall set a time and place for the
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing,
the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to show why the
notice should be modified or withdrawn.
      (2)   After the hearing, the Town Planner and/or his/her agents shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending on the finding as to when the
provisions of this chapter and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. The license which has been suspended by notice
shall be deemed automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed
within three days after the notice is serviced.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.08 SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Before suspending or revoking an extended hours convenience store
license issued under this chapter, the Town Planner shall deliver written
notice to the owner or the registered agent that the license is being
considered for suspension or revocation. The notice must include the reason for
the proposed suspension or revocation and the actions the registrant must take
to prevent the suspension or revocation, and a statement that the registrant
has ten days after the date of delivery to comply with the notice.
   (B)   If after ten days from the date the notice required above is delivered
the registrant has not complied with the notice, the Town Planner shall suspend
or revoke the license and deliver written notice of the revocation to the
registrant. The notice must include the reason for the suspension or
revocation, the date the Town Planner orders the suspension or revocation, and
a statement informing the registrant of the right of appeal.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.09 DELIVERY OF NOTICES.
   Any written notice that the Town Planner is required to give an owner or
registered agent under this chapter is deemed to be delivered: (1) on the date
the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or registrant or the applicant or
registrant's registered agent; or (2) three days after the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail with proper postage and properly addressed to
the applicant or registrant or the applicant or registrant's registered agent
at the address provided for the applicant or registrant or the registered agent
in the most recent registration application.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.10 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   A license for a convenience store expires one year after the date of
issuance.
   (B)   A license may be renewed by mailing an application to the Town
Planner. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.11 NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A license for an extended hours convenience store is not transferable.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
§ 125.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits a violation. A
person commits a separate violation each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
      (1)   A violation offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of
$250.
   (B)   The penalties provided for in division (A) of this section are in
addition to any other enforcement remedies that the town may have under town
ordinances and state or federal law.
(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)
CHAPTER 126: REGULATION OF CERTAIN PLASTIC BAGS
Section
   
126.01   Purpose
   
126.02   Definitions
   
126.03   Prohibition
   
126.04   Violations; enforcement
   
126.05   Severability
   
126.06   Effective date
   
126.07   Hardship deferments
   
126.08   Other deferments
 
   
126.99   Penalty
§ 126.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce bag waste to protect the
environment in the Town of Hamden for the benefit and welfare of its residents
by encouraging the use of reusable checkout bags and by prohibiting the
provision of all plastic checkout bags at the time of checkout.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phases and words shall
have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated by the context.
   “BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.” Any person, business or non-profit entity that
sells or provides merchandise, goods or materials including, without
limitation, clothing, food or personal items of any kind, directly to a
consumer, and includes, by way of example and not limitation, any grocery
store, grocery delivery service, department store, hardware store, pharmacy,
liquor store, restaurant, catering truck, convenience store, hospital, library,
school, including temporary vendors at farmers markets, street fairs and school
or town sponsored events and facilities.
   “CHECKOUT BAG.” A carryout bag that is provided to a customer at the point
of sale. “CHECKOUT BAG” excludes a Product Bag.
   “RECYCLED PAPER CHECKOUT BAG.” A bag that contains no old growth fiber and a
minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content, is 100% recyclable, and has
printed in a highly visible manner on the bag the word “Reusable” and
“Recyclable,” the name and location of the manufacturer and the percentage of
post-consumer recycled content.
   “PRODUCT BAG.” A single use plastic bag made of any plastic type material or
paper non-checkout bag to include but not be limited to bags that are used by
consumers inside stores to: package wet or bulk items such as fruit, vegetable,
mushrooms, nuts, grains, candy; contain or wrap foods, meat, or fish whether
packaged or not, all of which typically lack handles; contain or wrap flowers,
potted plants or other items where dampness may be a problem; contain unwrapped
prepared foods, bakery goods; contain dry cleaning and clothes cleaner bags;
contain pharmacy prescriptions; or safeguard public health during the
transportation of hospital waste.
   “REUSABLE CHECKOUT BAG.” A bag that is designed and manufactured for
multiple reuses and is made of cloth or other fabric. A “REUSABLE CHECKOUT BAG”
may be recyclable or compostable and is specifically designed and manufactured
for multiple reuses.
   “PLASTIC CHECKOUT BAG.” A bag of any thickness or size that is made of
plastic derived from fossil fuels or from a genetically modified organism bio-
based source (such as corn or other plant sources), which is provided at
checkout to transport items purchased from or provided by a business
establishment. A “PLASTIC CHECKOUT BAG” excludes a Product Bag.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.03 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Distribution of plastic checkout bags. No business establishment in
the town shall provide as a courtesy or sell a plastic checkout bag to any
patron or customer.
   (B)   Distribution of paper checkout bags. No business establishment shall
provide as a courtesy or sell paper checkout bags that do not meet or exceed
the specifications of a recycled paper checkout bag as defined above.
   (C)   Acceptable checkout bags.
      (1)   A business establishment may provide as a courtesy to customers a
recycled paper checkout bag.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a business establishment
from encouraging and providing incentives for the use of reusable checkout
bags. A business establishment may use credits or rebates for customers that
bring their own checkout bags for the purpose of carrying away goods.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.04 VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Litter Enforcement Officer (Enforcement
Officer) or his/her designee to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter 126 and any rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter. The
Enforcement Officer may order any person or business that violates this chapter
to abate such violation and shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue
citations for violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in §
126.99.
   (C)   (1)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, the Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee shall issue a written warning to the business establishment for the
initial violation.
      (2)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that an
additional violation of this chapter has occurred after a written warning
notice has been issued for an initial violation, the Enforcement Officer or
his/her designee shall issue a notice of violation against the business
establishment. The notice shall be sent to the business establishment’s last
known address by certified mail, return receipt requested and by regular mail.
Such notice shall direct the removal, correction or abatement of the violation
within 30 calendar days after receipt of written notice and notify the business
establishment that failure to remove or correct the violation shall result in
the issuance of a citation and the fines and penalties imposed.
      (3)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that an
additional violation of this chapter has occurred after the notice of violation
has been issued, the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall issue a
citation to the business establishment’s last known address by certified mail,
return receipt requested and by regular mail. Such citation shall inform the
owner of the allegations and the amount of the fines, penalties, fees and costs
due and that the business establishment may contest its liability before a
citation hearing officer.
   (D)   (1)   For each violation that occurs after the issuance of the written
warning notice for an initial violation, the penalty shall be as provided in §
126.99.
      (2)   Appeals may be made pursuant to Title I:
Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations of the Town Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19) Penalty, see § 126.99
§ 126.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
local law or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this law or in its application to the person,
individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance directly
involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
To further this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be
severable. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any other
local rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become operative six months following its effective date
to allow business establishments to dispose of their existing inventory of
plastic checkout bags and replace them with checkout bags that comply with this
chapter. If at the effective date of this chapter any business establishment
has any plastic checkout bags remaining, the business establishment shall be
permitted to provide such remaining bags to patrons and customers, provided
that the business establishment is able to clearly provide to the Enforcement
Officer evidence of proof of purchase that is a date prior to adoption of this
chapter.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.07 HARDSHIP DEFERMENTS.
   (A)   Upon written application, the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee
may defer application of this section for a six-month period after the
effective date stated in §
126.06 upon a showing of hardship. Hardship will be found when:
      (1)   Compliance with any section of this chapter would cause significant
economic difficulty;
      (2)   There is no readily available compliant substitute; or
      (3)   Application of this chapter would deprive the applicant of a
legally protected right.
   (B)   Any entity granted a deferment by the Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee must reapply prior to the end of the six-month exemption period and
demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wishes to have the deferment
extended. Deferments may only be granted for intervals not to exceed six
months.
   (C)   A deferment granted in accordance with this section may be extended
for no more than two additional six-month periods, upon written application to
the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee at least two months prior to the
expiration of the prior deferment period and upon a showing that the
circumstances justifying the deferment continue to exist.
   (D)   For any further extension beyond the maximum deferment period, the
applicant must apply for a variance to the Legislative Council and demonstrate
that there is no readily available substitute and why any such substitute is
not capable of being used by the applicant. The applicant must continue to
apply every six months in accordance with this section unless a different time
frame is established by the Council upon approval of the application.
   (E)   A deferment application shall include all information necessary for
the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee to make its decision, including,
but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed
deferment. The Enforcement Officer or his/her designee may require the
applicant to provide additional information to permit it to determine facts
regarding the deferment application.
   (F)   The Enforcement Officer or his/her designee may approve the deferment
application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions that it deems
necessary to protect the environment and public health and further the
interests of this section.
   (G)   Deferment decisions are effective immediately and final.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.08 OTHER DEFERMENTS.
   Farm stands and farm stores owned by farmers are permitted to defer
application of this section for an 18-month period after the effective date of
this chapter. Thereafter any farm stand or farm store owned by farmers may
elect to apply for a hardship deferment.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
§ 126.99 PENALTY.
   For each violation that occurs after the issuance of the written warning
notice for an initial violation as provided in §
126.04, the fine imposed by the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall
be as follows:
   (A)   For the second violation, $150;
   (B)   For the third violation and each subsequent violation, $250.
(Ord. 708, passed 2-19-19)
CHAPTER 127: REGULATION OF SINGLE-USE STRAWS
Section
   
127.00   Purpose
   
127.01   Definitions
   
127.02   Beverage straw upon request
   
127.03   Violations; enforcement
   
127.04   Severability
   
127.05   Effective date
 
   
127.99   Penalty
§ 127.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent litter and protect the environment
in the Town of Hamden for the benefit and welfare of its residents by
regulating the use of single-use straws.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
§ 127.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated by the context.
   “DINE-IN CUSTOMER.” A customer that consumes a food or beverage order on the
same premises it was ordered.
   “SINGLE-USE.” A product that is designed to be only used one time in its
same form by the customer, food vendor or entity.
   “TAKE-OUT FOOD ORDERS.” Prepared meals or other food or beverage items that
a customer purchases at an establishment and are intended for consumption
elsewhere.
   “VENDOR.” Any business providing food or beverages within the Town of
Hamden.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
§ 127.02 BEVERAGE STRAW UPON REQUEST.
   On or after July 1, 2019, single-use beverage straws shall only be available
upon the request of a customer. This shall apply to both dine-in customers and
take-out food orders.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
§ 127.03 VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Litter Enforcement Officer (Enforcement
Officer) or his/her designee to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter 127 and any rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter. The
Enforcement Officer may order any person or business that violates this chapter
to abate such violation and shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue
citations for violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in this section and in §
127.99.
   (C)   (1)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, the Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee shall issue a written warning to the vendor for the initial violation.
      (2)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that an
additional violation of this chapter has occurred after a written warning
notice has been issued for an initial violation, the Enforcement Officer or
his/her designee shall issue a notice of violation against the vendor. The
notice shall be sent to the vendor’s last known address by certified mail,
return receipt requested and by regular mail. Such notice shall direct the
removal, correction or abatement of the violation within 30 calendar days after
receipt of written notice and notify the vendor that failure to remove or
correct the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation and the fines
and penalties imposed.
      (3)   If the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee determines that an
additional violation of this chapter has occurred after the notice of violation
has been issued, the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall issue a
citation to the vendor’s last known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested and by regular mail. Such citation shall inform the owner of the
allegations and the amount of the fines, penalties, fees and costs due and that
the vendor may contest its liability before a citation hearing officer.
      (4)   The penalty for each violation that occurs after the issuance of
the written warning notice for an initial violation shall be as set forth in §
127.99.
      (5)   Appeals may be made pursuant to Title I:
Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations of the Town Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19) Penalty, see §
127.99
§ 127.04 SEVERABILITY.
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
local law or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this law or in its application to the person,
individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance directly
involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall be rendered.
To further this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be
severable. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any other
local rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
§ 127.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become operative six months following its effective date
to allow vendors to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
§ 127.99 PENALTY.
   The fines imposed by the Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall be as
follows for each violation that occurs after the issuance of the written
warning notice for an initial violation, as provided in §
127.03:
   (A)   For the second violation, $150;
   (B)   For the third violation and each subsequent violation, $250.
(Ord. 709, passed 2-19-19)
CHAPTER 128: NONRESIDENT LANDLORD REGISTRATION
Section
   128.01   Title
   128.02   Legislative authority
   128.03   Findings and purpose
   128.04   Definitions
   128.05   Applicability
   128.06   Required registration
   128.07   Violations, assessments and appeals
§ 128.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Nonresident
Landlord Registration” ordinance.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.02 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. §
47a-6a, § 47a-6b, and § 7-148.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.03 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The town finds that the identification and knowledge of the whereabouts of
nonresident landlords of residential rental housing property located within the
town is in the best interest of the community and will promote the public
health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the town. Accordingly, by
enacting this chapter, the town seeks to better protect, preserve, and promote
the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of its residents by requiring
nonresident landlords of residential rental housing property located within the
town to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.04 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions found in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 47a-6a(a), as amended from time
to time, shall apply to the terms of this chapter and are set forth below. In
addition, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ADDRESS.” A location as described by the full street number, unit number if
any, the street name, the city or town, and the state, and not a mailing
address such as a post office box.
   “AGENT IN CHARGE” or “AGENT.” An individual who manages real property,
including, but not limited to, the collection of rents and supervision and or
maintenance of such property, including for the purposes of compliance with
state and local codes.
   “CONTROLLING PARTICIPANT.” An individual or entity that exercises day-to-day
financial or operational control.
   “DWELLING UNIT.” Any house or building, or portion thereof, that is rented,
leased, or hired out to be occupied; or is arranged or designed to be occupied,
or is occupied, as the home or residence of one or more persons, living
independently of each other, and doing their cooking upon the premises, and
having a common right in the halls, stairways, or yards.
   “IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.” Current and accurate proof of an individual's
name, residential address, or other information required to show suc h proof of
identification as may be required by the Town Planner.
   “NONRESIDENT LANDLORD.” A nonresident owner, or project-based housing
provider, as defined in this chapter, of occupied or vacant residential rental
housing property in the town.
   “NONRESIDENT OWNER.” A person who does not live at occupied or vacant
residential rental housing property, dwelling unit or their associated
premises, in the town and is either:
      (1)   An “OWNER” (i.e., one or more people with legal title to the
property or beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of
the premises, including mortgagees in possession); or
      (2)   A controlling participant of the entity that owns the property.
   “PROJECT-BASED HOUSING PROVIDER.” A property owner who contracts with the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide housing to
tenants under the federal Housing Choice Voucher Program, 42 USC 1437f(o).
   “PROPERTY MANAGER.” An individual or company that is hired to oversee the
day-to-day operations of a rental property.
   “RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING PROPERTY.” Vacant or occupied dwelling unit(s)
in the town.
   “TOWN PLANNER.” The Town Planner or their designee.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.05 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all occupied or vacant residential rental
housing property within the town, including mixed-use properties.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.06 REQUIRED REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any nonresident landlords of occupied or vacant residential rental
housing property shall be required to file, and to maintain on file, with the
Town Planner, or their designee, a registration report.
   (B)   Nonresident owners or project-based housing providers of residential
rental housing property with multiple dwelling units, buildings, or properties,
will register each individual dwelling unit. Nonresident landlords will only
register one time, but shall be responsible for updating any contact or other
information changes related to the owner, building, property, or unit. All
contact information, for both the nonresident landlord, agent in charge,
controlling participant, individual who exercises day-to-day financial or
operational control of such entity, property manager, and who tenants should
call for day-to-day operations and maintenance issues, shall be posted at each
dwelling in a conspicuous place.
   (C)   Residential rental housing property is registered with the town when
the nonresident landlord of the residential rental housing property completes
and submits a registration report, on a form made available by the town, signed
under penalty of perjury, to the Town Planner or their designee. The
registration must contain the following information:
      (1)   The current residential address, phone number, and email address
(if any) of the nonresident owner or project-based housing provider of such
residential rental housing property, if the nonresident owner or project-based
housing provider is an individual;
      (2)   If the nonresident owner or project-based housing provider is a
business entity that owns residential rental housing property in the state
(corporation, partnership, trust, or other legal entity):
         (a)   The current residential address, phone number and email address,
(if any) of:
            (i)   The agent in charge of the building; and
            (ii)   Each person who exercises day-to-day financial or
operational control of the residential rental housing property; and
         (b)   Identifying information of the controlling participants;
      (3)   A description of the residential rental housing property,
including, but not limited to, the street address, unit number, and assessor's
parcel number;
      (4)   The number and address or other description of all dwelling units
on the property;
      (5)   The name and current contact information of the property manager,
if any;
      (6)   Name, address, telephone number, and email address (if any) of the
person or entity that a tenant is to contact to request that repairs be made to
their rental housing unit, and the contact’s business relationship to the
nonresident landlord or agent in charge;
      (7)   The date, location, and type of housing, building, fire, health,
and blight violation(s) and or citation(s) issued for any dwelling unit or
residential rental housing property within the past three years; and
      (8)   Any other information reasonably required by the Town Planner to
carry out this chapter.
   (D)   If such nonresident landlord, controlling participant, agent in charge
or an individual who exercises day-to-day financial or operational control of
such entity's residential address, phone number or email address changes,
notice of the new information shall be provided by such nonresident landlord or
agent in charge to the office of the Town Planner, or their designee, not more
than 21 days after the date that the address (or other information) change
occurred.
   (E)   The registration requirement established by this chapter shall go into
effect January 1, 2025. There shall be a fee of $50, plus $25 for each unit
registered. After the initial registration, the nonresident landlord shall be
required to register any changes in ownership within 21 days of such change.
   (F)   Nonresident landlords or agents that fail to register will be in
violation of this chapter and assessed a civil penalty as set forth in §
128.07. Nonresident landlords or agents that fail to file any changes in
ownership or other required information, shall be in violation of this chapter
and assessed a civil penalty as set forth in §
128.07.
   (G)   If the nonresident landlord or agent in charge fails to file or
maintain on file an address as required by this chapter, the address to which
the town mails property tax bills for the residential rental housing property
shall be deemed to be the nonresident landlord or agent in charge's current
address. Such an address may be used for compliance with the provisions of
division (H) below.
   (H)   Proof of service of state or municipal orders relating to maintenance
of any such residential rental housing property or dwelling unit, or compliance
with state law and local codes concerning such residential rental housing
property, directed to the nonresident landlord or agent at the address on file
with the town planner, or deemed to be the current address of the nonresident
landlord or agent in charge pursuant to division (G) above, shall be sufficient
proof of service of notice of such orders in any subsequent criminal or civil
action against the nonresident owner, project-based housing provider or agent
for failure to comply with the orders. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to limit the validity of any other means of giving notice of such
orders that may be used by the state or such municipality.
   (I)   A nonresident landlord that fails to comply with this chapter shall be
deemed to have violated the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 47a-6a and
committed a violation. It is against the public policy of the town for
nonresident landlords to fail to register residential rental housing property,
and a violation of this division shall constitute an unfair practice within the
meaning of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110b.
   (J)   Nonresident landlords shall not pass registrations fees, fines,
penalties, or assessments related to the requirements of this chapter onto
tenants through rental increases or other fees.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
§ 128.07 VIOLATIONS, ASSESSMENTS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Violations of the reporting requirements.
As provided in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 47a-6a and § 47a-6b, a civil penalty of $500
dollars shall be assessed for the first violation of this chapter, and $1,000
for each subsequent violation.
   (B)   Assessments. The town shall send notice of the assessment to the
nonresident landlord or agent in charge of the property that is the subject of
the violation.
   (C)   Appeals. As provided by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 47a-6b, any person who is
assessed a civil penalty pursuant to this section may appeal therefrom to the
Superior Court. An appeal shall be instituted not later than 30 days after the
mailing of a notice of such assessment, by filing a petition to reopen
assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for
a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-259, at the Superior
Court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator, which shall entitle
that person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the
Superior Court.
(Ord. 744, passed 6-18-24)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
RESERVED
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING CODE
         
150A.   DELAY OF DEMOLITION
         
151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
152.   HOUSING CODE
         
153.   SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
         
154.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
156.   PENALTIES FOR ZONING VIOLATIONS
         
157.   MUNICIPAL FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF INLAND WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE
REGULATIONS
         
158.   WAIVER OF PENALTY FOR NOT DISCLOSING THE ACTUAL RENTAL AND RENTAL
RELATED INCOME AND OPERATING EXPENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONN. GEN. STAT., §
12-63c(d)
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
Building Code
   
150.01   Adopted by reference
   
150.02   [Reserved]
   
150.03   [Reserved]
   
150.04   Certification of back taxes
Amendments to Basic Building Code
   
150.05   Authority
   
150.06   Building permit fees
   
150.07   Additional permit fees for certain work
   
150.08   Fee for removal of building
   
150.09   Fees for demolition of a building or structure
   
150.10   Fees for signs, billboards, display structures
   
150.11   Fees for certain equipment
   
150.12   Revocation of permit; incomplete work; penalties; reinspection
   
150.13   Account; disposition of fees
   
150.14   License required; suspension; revocation; fee
   
150.15   Supplementary provisions
   
150.16   Condemnation of structures
   
150.17   Tax exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems
   
150.18   Certificate of zoning compliance prior to certificate of use and
occupancy
   
150.19   Certificate of occupancy fee
   
150.20   "Certificate of W.P.C.A. Compliance" prior to the certificate of use
and occupancy
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The State of Connecticut Building Code, adopted by this town 4-2-64, is
hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. Three copies of such
code shall be found on file in the office of the clerk.
§ 150.02 [RESERVED]
§ 150.03 [RESERVED]
§ 150.04 CERTIFICATION OF BACK TAXES.
   (A)   No building application shall be approved by the Building Department
until the applicant provides the Building Department with a statement, in
writing, from the office of the Tax Collector that there are no delinquent
taxes or sewer use fees due for the property for which an application is made
or provides a statement, in writing, from the Tax Collector, that the owner of
the property for which an application is made has entered into a payment
program approved by the Tax Collector to pay off any delinquent taxes or sewer
use fees which may be due.
(C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(2)(B))
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The Building Official may grant a building application without the
satisfaction of the above certifications if he or she certifies in writing, as
part of the file, that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of
the occupants of the building, upon which property the building application is
sought.
      (2)   The Building Official may grant a building application without the
satisfaction of the above certification if he or she certifies in writing, as
part of the file, that the building upon which property the application is
sought is vacant and in seriously deteriorated condition.
   (C)    As used in this section, the term "building application" shall
include any application for a building, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, refrigeration, well pump installation, ventilating system,
exhaust system permit or a certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   As used in this section, the term "seriously deteriorated condition"
means physical condition of a vacant building that, in combination with issues
related to title, taxes and ownership create a negative value for the property
as determined by the Assessor, Building Official, and the Director of Economic
and Community Development.
(Ord. 401, passed 2-7-00; Am. Ord. 536, passed 6-12-06)
AMENDMENTS TO BASIC BUILDING CODE
§ 150.05 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to authority under the state basic building code, fees are
established in the following sections.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)
§ 150.06 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   The building permit fee shall be $24 for the first $1,000 of estimated cost,
and $24 for each additional $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-64; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed 1-
8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01; Am. Ord. 738,
passed 6-20-23)
§ 150.07 ADDITIONAL PERMIT FEES FOR CERTAIN WORK.
   (A)   In addition to the building permit fee provided for in §
150.06, there shall be paid an additional separate permit fee specifically for
electrical work, plumbing work, heating work, air-conditioning work,
refrigeration work, well pump installations, ventilating and exhaust systems,
plus swimming pool permits. The fee for each of these permits shall be based on
the estimated cost of the specific work done as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-four dollars for the first $1,000 of the estimated cost of
the specific work;
      (2)   Twenty-four dollars for each additional $1,000 of estimated cost or
fraction thereof.
   (B)   Permits for solar electrical work shall be billed at $4.50 PKW.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed 1-
8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01; Am. Ord. 738,
passed 6-20-23)
§ 150.08 FEE FOR REMOVAL OF BUILDING.
   The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot
to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be at the rate of $8 per
$100 of the estimated cost of moving plus the cost of new foundations and all
work necessary to place the building or structure in its completed location on
the site.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)
§ 150.09 FEES FOR DEMOLITION OF A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.
   The fees for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be
$24 for the first $1,000 of estimated cost, and $24 for each additional $1,000
of estimated cost or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed 1-
8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01; Am. Ord. 738,
passed 6-20-23)
§ 150.10 FEES FOR SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, DISPLAY STRUCTURES.
   Permit fees for signs, billboards, and other display structures shall be $24
for the first $1,000 of estimated cost, and $24 for each additional $1,000 of
estimated cost or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed 1-
8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01; Am. Ord. 738,
passed 6-20-23)
§ 150.11 FEES FOR CERTAIN EQUIPMENT.
   The fees for elevator equipment, lift equipment, display structures within
or outside of a building, temporary sheds or tents, or other permanently
affixed equipment used in connection with the operation of the building, such
as compactors, ventilating equipment, exhaust systems, power generators,
temporary heating equipment and duct systems, commercial cooking appliances,
commercial hoods and fans, shall be $24 for the first $1,000 of estimated cost
of the equipment, and $24 for each additional $1,000 of estimated cost of the
equipment or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 738, passed 6-
20-23)
§ 150.12 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; INCOMPLETE WORK; PENALTIES; REINSPECTION.
   (A)   In the case of a revocation of a permit, abandonment or
discontinuation of a building project, the volume of work actually completed
shall be computed by the Building Official, and any excess fee for work not
completed shall be returned to the permit holder.
   (B)   All penalties that may have been imposed on the permit holder under
the requirements of the basic code shall first be collected. If in the opinion
of the Building Official because of the change of scope of work covered under
an existing permit a revised cost or declaration is necessary, the Building
Official shall require an additional charge be paid by the contractor or owner
and applied to the original permit.
   (C)   A $25 fee shall be required for each trade inspector called for a re-
inspection for any reason. All requests for re-inspections shall be made, in
writing, accompanied by the fine, within ten days from receipt of written
notification of such fine. When requested by the enforcing officer, the
contractor or the shall make arrangements to be present at the job at a
specified time.
   (D)   The fee for any permit issued by the Building Department shall be
either doubled or subject to a fine of $100 (whichever is more) for any work
started without proper permits issued by the Building Department.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 139, passed 3-1-76; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-
5-86; Am. Ord. 621, passed 8-6-12)
§ 150.13 ACCOUNT; DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   The building official shall keep an accurate account of all fees collected
for building permits. The collected fees shall be deposited monthly in the
general fund.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)
§ 150.14 LICENSE REQUIRED; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; FEE.
   (A)   Any individual, firm, or corporation desiring to construct, enlarge,
alter, or repair a building, excavate or erect a foundation or change the
occupancy of any dwelling, the construction of which is regulated by the basic
building code, shall first obtain a builder's license to engage in the
business. The license shall remain in force from the date of issuance until the
following first Monday in January, unless revoked sooner. The license may be
suspended or revoked by the building official for failure to comply with the
state basic building code.
   (B)   Upon revocation of a license for just cause, the builder is prohibited
from engaging as a builder or contractor in the town until a hearing has been
held by the building department board of appeals, whose members will act as a
hearing board. Upon suspension of the license, the suspension shall remain in
effect until the violation is corrected. Upon revocation, the permit holder may
appeal such revocation to the building department board of appeals, as provided
by § 128.6 of the state basic building code.
   (C)   Division (A) does not apply to a home owner or individual adding,
repairing, or renovating his own home or dwelling, who has applied for and
obtained the required building permit.
   (D)   There shall be a license fee for a builder's license, of $10 per
annum, payable upon issuance of the license.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)
§ 150.15 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS.
   The following supplementary provisions are established:
   (A)   No wiring shall be installed in a new structure until such time all
rough plumbing and rough heating is installed.
   (B)   All electrical permits must be applied for by a licensed electrician
before a structural permit can be accepted for a swimming pool installation.
   (C)   All sign installations must be approved by the zoning office before
sign permits, structural permits, and wiring permits may be issued by the
building department.
   (D)   Other fees.
      Administrative fee for work performed without a permit      $200
      Copies   $0.50 per page or statutory rate
      Residential plan review   $150
      Commercial plan review   $350
      Commercial plan review, expedited   $700
      Education fee   $0.26 per $1,000 of construction value, or as amended by
state law
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 738, passed 6-
20-23)
§ 150.16 CONDEMNATION OF STRUCTURES.
   The following procedure is established for condemnation of structures:
   (A)   The building official shall issue an order requiring the removal of
the structure within a time period stated within the order, determined upon the
degree of danger to public safety. The order shall be sent to the owner of
record by certified mail (return receipt requested). A copy of the order shall
be recorded on the land records of the town. If the order is undeliverable for
any reason a duplicate copy of the order shall be served upon the owner of
record in the manner provided for service of process.
   (B)   The order shall inform the owner of his responsibility to notify the
building official of rejection or acceptance of the order. If the owner fails
to inform the building official of his intention within ten days after issuance
of the order, or fails to comply with the order within that time, the building
official shall forward notification of the condemnation to all persons having a
financial interest of record in the subject property.
   (C)   If the building official has not received notification of intent to
comply within 15 days of the sending of the notice, he shall forward his
request for demolition to the mayor for processing under applicable provisions
of the Charter and other ordinances of the town relating to appropriation and
expenditure of funds. Not less than 3 bids for demolition shall be obtained
from contractors authorized to conduct demolition work within the town.
   (D)   Expenditures necessary in connection with demolition of any structure
within the town shall become a lien on the land involved, shall be recorded on
the land records of the town and may be collected in the manner provided by
statute for the collection of taxes.
(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)
§ 150.17 TAX EXEMPTION FOR SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after
October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a solar
energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which a solar energy
heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976, and before
October 1, 1991, is exempt from taxation in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-81 (56), to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of the
real property equipped with the solar heating or cooling system exceeds the
assessed valuation of the property equipped with the conventional portion of
the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of the system related
to solar energy. This exemption shall only apply to the first 7 assessment
years following construction of the building or addition of any such system to
a building.
   (B)   As used in this section, "SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM"
means equipment, including windmills, which provides for the collection,
transfer, storage, and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space
heating, or cooling which absent the solar energy system would require a
conventional energy source, such as petroleum products, natural gas, or
electricity, and which meets standards established by regulation by the
commissioner of planning and energy policy.
   (C)   Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section
shall file with the assessor or board of assessors in the town, within 30 days
following the annual assessment date, written application claiming the
exemption on a form as prescribed by the tax commissioner. Failure to file the
application in the manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall
constitute a waiver of the right to the exemption for the assessment year.
(Ord. 170, passed 6-5-78)
§ 150.18 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE PRIOR TO THE CERTIFICATE OF USE AND
OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No certificate of use and occupancy may be issued by the building
inspector or any other duly authorized agent of the town unless a certificate
of zoning compliance as set forth in division (B) of this section has been
issued by the zoning enforcement officer or his duly designated agent.
   (B)   The zoning enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance only if the buildings and structures along with all on-site
improvements are in compliance with approved plans on file with the town
planning and zoning office, if any such plans were required, or all other
applicable zoning ordinances and regulations of the town.
   (C)   When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the zoning
enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance within 10
days after written applications. The certificate shall certify compliance with
the provisions of the town zoning regulations, the land subdivision regulations
for the town. In the event the zoning enforcement officer determines that the
certificate should not be issued, he shall state his reasons in writing. The
decision of the zoning enforcement officer shall be appealable to the zoning
board of appeals.
   (D)   The provision in division (A) of this section to the contrary notwith-
standing, the building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of use and
occupancy if it is determined by the building inspector that weather conditions
are such that completion of all on- site improvements are presently impractical
and that the requirements of the basic building code for the temporary
certificate are complied with and further, that there is sufficient security in
the form of a bond or otherwise on file with the zoning enforcement officer to
insure satisfactory completion of all on-site work.
(Ord. 164, passed 4-3-75)
§ 150.19 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FEE.
   The completion fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $36.
(Ord. 301, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 738, passed 6-20-23)
§ 150.20 "CERTIFICATE OF W.P.C.A. COMPLIANCE" PRIOR TO THE CERTIFICATE OF USE
AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No certificate of use and occupancy may be issued by the building
inspector or any other duly authorized agent of the Town unless a "Certificate
of W.P.C.A. Compliance" as set forth in division (B) of this section has been
issued by the W.P.C.A. or its duly designated agent.
   (B)   The W.P.C.A. shall issue a "Certificate of W.P.C.A. Compliance" only
if the buildings and structures are in compliance with approved plans on file
with the Department of Engineering and all other applicable W.P.C.A.
regulations, in particular that the connection to the public sewer system and
the installation of a check valve has been verified by an inspector from the
Department of Engineering.
   (C)   When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the W.P.C.A. or its
duly designated agent shall issue a "Certificate of W.P.C.A. Compliance" within
ten days after written application. The certificate shall certify compliance
with the provisions of the W.P.C.A. regulations. In the event that the W.P.C.A.
or its duly authorized agent determines that the certificate shall not be
issued, he shall state his reasons in writing.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-3-97)
CHAPTER 150A: DELAY OF DEMOLITION
Section
   
150A.01   Permit requirements
   
150A.02   Additional requirements for certain structures
   
150A.03   Application for permit; contents
   
150A.04   Notice of intent to demolish; publication; posting
   
150A.05   Form/contents of notice
   
150A.06   Objection to demolition application
   
150A.07   Exceptions
 
   
150A.99   Penalty
§ 150A.01 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without
first obtaining a demolition permit from the Building Official or his/her
designee in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes and the
regulations of Connecticut state agencies as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.02 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN STRUCTURES.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements set forth in the Connecticut General
Statutes and the regulations of Connecticut state agencies as may be amended
from time to time, any building, structure or part thereof to be demolished
that falls within any one of the following categories shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in §§
150A.03 through 150A.08, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
      (1)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is 500 square feet or
more in size and that is 50 years old or more; or
      (2)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is listed in a
historic resources inventory, including the town-wide historic and
architectural survey. Applicant and Building Official shall consult the
Connecticut Historical Resource Inventory to see if the property in question is
on the town, state or federal list of historic structures; or
      (3)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is on a list of
individual properties on the National Register of Historic Places; or
      (4)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is listed as a
contributing property located within a National Register Historic District.
   (B)   If it is determined that the proposed demolition is subject to delay
as set forth above, the Building Official or his/her designee shall inform the
applicant in writing that a waiting period of 90 business days from the date of
the application shall be imposed before granting the demolition permit.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS.
   In addition to any other requirements set forth in the Connecticut General
Statutes or the regulations of Connecticut state agencies, Applicants shall
file an application on a form provided and verified under oath by the town's
Building Official, which application shall include the following information:
   (A)   The name, if any, and address of the structure is to be demolished;
   (B)   The name and address of the owner(s) of the structure to be
demolished;
   (C)   The age (year originally built) of the structure to be demolished;
   (D)   The square footage of the structure to be demolished; and
   (E)   The names and addresses of the owners of all properties adjoining the
property on which the structure to be demolished is located, according to a
copy of the current Assessor's map which must be attached to the application.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.04 NOTICE OF INTENT TO DEMOLISH; PUBLICATION; POSTING.
   Within ten calendar days after the filing of an application for a permit to
demolish, the applicant shall:
   (A)   Publish in the local newspaper having the greatest circulation in the
town a "notice of intent to demolish" as set forth in §
150A.05.
   (B)   Mail copies of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the owners of all properties adjoining (abutting) the property on which the
structure to be demolished is situated.
   (C)   Mail copies of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the Hamden Historical Society, the Hamden Historian and any individual,
firm, corporation, organization or other entity which has requested in writing
from the town Building Official copies of any of the notices filed pursuant to
this chapter.
   (D)   Post in a conspicuous location on the property on which the structure
that is to be demolished is situated a sign at least 24 by 36 inches in size
that is visible from the nearest public street or other access way adjoining
the property. The sign shall include a copy of the notice and shall contain the
word "DEMOLITION" in capital letters no less than three inches in height. If
there is more than one structure proposed for demolition, one sign shall be
posted for each structure. All signs required hereunder shall remain posted on
the property, if the permit is issued, until the completion of all demolition
activities authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.05 FORM/CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   The notice required in §
150A.04 shall be on a form approved by the town Building Official, shall
include the words "Notice of Intent to Demolish" in prominent letters at the
head of the notice and shall include the following information:
   (A)   The information required in §
150A.03;
   (B)   A statement that an application for a permit to demolish a structure
has been filed in the office of the town Building Official and is currently
pending and available for public inspection; and
   (C)   A statement setting forth the provisions of §
150A.06.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.06 OBJECTION TO DEMOLITION APPLICATION.
   (A)   With respect to any application to demolish a building, structure or
part thereof, if a written objection to the issuance of the permit is filed
with the town Building Official by any individual, firm, corporation,
organization or other entity within 14 calendar days following publication of
the legal notice as required, the Building Official shall delay issuance of the
permit for demolition for a period of 90 calendar days from the receipt of the
application.
   (B)   If no objection to the demolition of the subject building, structure
or part thereof is filed within 14 calendar days of the publication, the
Building Official may issue the permit forthwith.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see §
150A.99
§ 150A.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any building, structure or part thereof, if a local or state official
having authority has ordered demolition because of a threat to public health or
safety; or
   (B)   Buildings or structures or parts thereof within historic districts or
historic properties as the demolition waiting periods with respect thereto are
governed by Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-147j and 7-147y.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04)
§ 150A.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to other penalties and remedies provided by law, each violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $100 per
day, with each day of the violation constituting a separate violation.
(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Authority
   
151.02   Declaration of policy
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Subdivision control
   
151.05   Subdivision design standards
   
151.06   Specifications for maps and plans
   
151.07   Filing of maps and plans
   
151.08   Variances
   
151.09   Records and reviews
   
151.10   Chart of pavement types
   
151.11   Chart of highway classes
   
151.12   Road construction specifications; minimum
   
151.13   Notes
   
151.14   Violation prohibited
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 Authority.
   The town plan and zoning commission prescribes the following rules and
regulations to control the subdivision of land pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat.,
Ch. 45, § 8-25, As provided in the act, these rules and regulations constitute
part of the official plan of Hamden, and no subdivision, either public or
private, shall be authorized in the town until its character and extent has
been submitted to arid approved by the commission and the legislative council.
('66 Code, § 63-1)
§ 151.02 Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to achieve orderly urban
development through land subdivision, to promote and develop the utilization of
land to assure the best possible urban environment, to cause land subdivision
to be in accordance with the master plan for the town, and to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
('66 Code, § 63-2)
§ 151.03 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:
   (A)   "Access drive." A private right-of-way providing secondary vehicular-
access to the side or rear of 3 or more lots, parcels or properties.
   (B)   "Agreement." An agreement between the owner, developer and contractor
of the subdivision and the town.
   (C)   "Block." An area bounded by streets.
   (D)   "Cartway." The portion of a street for vehicular use.
   (E)   "Commission." The town plan and zoning commission, except when the
term is used in relation to powers or matters ex pressly reserved for either
the planning section or the zoning section under the special act creating the
town plan and zoning commission. In that case, the term "commission" shall be
deemed to mean either the zoning section or the planning section in accordance
with the duties and powers of the respective sections as provided by such
special act.
   (F)   "Dead end street." A street having but one vehicular access to another
street, and not terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   (G)   "Easement." A right granted for the purpose of limited public or
quasi-public use across private land.
   (H)   "Improved street." A street with paved cartway and curbs, and
provided, if specified, with sidewalks or curbs.
   (I)   "Interior walk." A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street.
   (J)   "Legally opened street." A street for which the town accepts
responsibility for public use.
   (K)   "Loam." Loose, fertile soil, suitable for growing grass and shrubs.
   (L)   "Lot." A plot or parcel of land which is, or in the future may be,
offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement.
   (M)   "Master plan for the town." A comprehensive plan for the town showing
its present and planned physical development drawn pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 8-23.
   (N)   "Multiple dwelling." A detached dwelling, designed and occupied for
dwelling purposes by more than 2 families.
   (O)   "Performance bond." A surety bond issued by an insurance company or
bonding company licensed to do business in the state.
   (P)   "Plot plan." A plan prepared primarily for title purposes which shows
the location, dimensions and bearings of parcels of ground.
   (Q)   "Preliminary subdivision plan." A preliminary drawing of the entire
property under single ownership, showing approximate proposed street and lot
layout for the specific area, to be submitted as a basis for consideration
prior to the preparation of a record subdivision plan, except such areas as may
be exempted by specific direction of the commission.
   (R)   "Print." A white paper reproduction of the original drawing.
   (S)   "Private street." A street for which the abutting property owners only
have complete legal and financial responsibility.
   (T)   "Property data map." A map showing all existing conditions affecting
or affected by the property to be subdivided, required prior to the submission
of an application for subdivision approval.
   (U)   "Record subdivision plan." A complete and exact subdivision plan,
prepared in form for official recording, to define property lines, proposed
streets and other improvements for inclusion in one agreement.
   (V)   "Reverse frontage lot." A lot extending between and having frontage on
a major street or highway and a residential street, with vehicular access
solely from the latter.
   (W)   "Right-of-way." Land reserved for use as a street, interior walk or
for other public purpose.
   (X)   "Setback or building line." The line within a property de fining the
required minimum distance between any structure and the adjacent right-of-way
or property line as defined and established by the regulations of the town plan
and zoning commission, or as defined and restricted in the front-yard
restrictions of the zoning regulations or by building lines established under
special or general acts relating to the town, or as required herein.
   (Y)   "Sight distance." The maximum distance of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street 4 feet above the ground at any
given point on the street.
   (Z)   "Street." A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, whether
dedicated or not, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. Street shall be deemed to include avenue, boulevard, court,
expressway, highway, lane, road and the like. Streets may be further subdivided
as follows:
      (1)   A major highway is a street used primarily for traffic not local in
destination.
      (2)   A major street is a street which carries traffic, generally local,
to or from the system of major highways or which serves as main circulation for
a large area.
      (3)   A primary residential street is a street which serves the prime
function of collecting or distributing intracommunity residential traffic.
      (4)   A secondary residential street is a street which is used primarily
for residential access.
      (5)   A tertiary residential street is a street which provides access to
homes on lots in excess of 20,000 square feet, having 100 feet minimum frontage
at the building line and having no house or garage located within 50 feet of
such right-of-way; or one which serves not more than 6 lots or parcels.
      (6)   A marginal access street is a major street, parallel and adjacent
to a major street or major highway, providing access to abutting properties and
controlling the location of intersection with such major street or highway.
      (7)   A cul-de-sac street is a minor street having but one vehicular
access to another street and terminated by a paved ve hicular turn-around.
   (AA)   "Subdivider." The owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of the
owner or equitable owner of the property subdivided.
   (BB)   "Subdivision."
      (1)   A division of any part or area of land by the owner or his agent,
into lots or parcels 3 or :more in number for the purpose of conveyance,
transfer, improvement or sale with or without appurtenant roads, streets,
lanes, driveways and ways dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use
or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon. A subdivision
includes division of a parcel of land having frontage on an existing improved
street into 3 or more lots, one or more of which have frontage on the existing
street.
      (2)   Any development of a parcel of land which involves installation of
streets and driveways whether or not dedicated and whether or not the parcel is
divided for the purpose of immediate conveyance, transfer or sale.
      (3)   The term subdivision includes resubdivision and, as appropriate,
shall refer to the process of subdividing land or to the land so subdivided.
      (4)   Where only a portion of land is subdivided, the balance of such
tract for which subdivision is not proposed need not be included in the record
subdivision plan as required hereunder. if the balance of such tract is later
subdivided, the provisions of these regulations shall apply.
   (CC)   "These regulations." The subdivision regulations of the town plan and
zoning commission.
('66 Code, § 63-3)
§ 151.04 Subdivision control.
   (A)   No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected,
and no street, driveway, sanitary sewer, storm water sewer, water main or
public service or other facilities in connection with land subdivision shall be
constructed, maintained, opened or dedicated for public use, or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, until a subdivision plan has
been approved and the provisions of these regulations have been complied with.
   (B)   No subdivider shall sell any lot in a subdivision, or erect any
building on land in a subdivision, unless and until a subdivision plan has been
approved, and subject to the provisions of §
151.07 (F).
   (C)   The commission shall review and approve or disapprove subdivision
plans and shall administer provisions of these regulations.
   (D)   The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to the sale or
conveyance of land in excess of 5 acres for purposes other than land
subdivision and the immediate improvement thereof for resale; provided the
seller furnishes to the commission a plot plan of the lots of land so sold or
conveyed and the commission approves such plot plan based upon a finding that
such plan is not contrary to the public interest and the purpose of these
regulations.
   (E)   The terms and provisions of these regulations shall not apply to
pending or previously approved land subdivision plans.
('66 Code, § 63-4)
§ 151.05 Subdivision design standards.
   (A)   Application. The principles, standards and requirements set forth in
this section shall be applied by the commission in its review of proposed
subdivision. Such principles, standards and requirements shall be deemed as
minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards or requirements of
other town codes, ordinances or regulations are higher or more restrictive, the
latter shall control any application for proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Recommendations. In the consideration of subdivision the commission
shall make such recommendations as seem necessary to preserve and enhance or
produce scenic values and conditions for the improvement of subdivision or
development design.
   (C)   Suitability of land use:
      (1)   Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be
subdivided. Land of such character that it cannot be safely used for building
purposes because of exceptional danger to health or peril from fire, flood or
other menace shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood
hazard, until appropriate measures have been taken by the subdivider to lessen
such hazards.
      (2)   All plans shall be in reasonable conformity to the master plan for
the town as adopted by the town plan and zoning commission.
   (D)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips of land, which in the opinion of the
commission show an intent by the subdivider to control access to land of
another, are prohibited.
   (E)   Street system:
      (1)   Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to
produce reasonable grades and suitable building sites.
      (2)   Proposed streets shall, conform to the requirements of a general
plan of the area as developed by the commission.
      (3)   Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the department of public works and engineering.
      (4)   Residential streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through
traffic; however, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation
of existing or proposed major streets or highways.
      (5)   If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to
permit resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate
street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be provided as
necessary.
      (6)   The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the
continuation of streets as required by the commission in adjoining subdivision
or for their proper future projection when adjoining property is not
subdivided, and shall be of a width consistent with that of existing connecting
streets, or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
      (7)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street or highway, the commission may require marginal access streets,
driveways, reverse frontage lots or such additional treatment as will reduce
the number of intersections with such street or highway, separate local and
through traffic, and provide protection for abutting properties.
      (8)   Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs to
permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, in which case they shall
be provided with a temporary turnaround of standard cul-de-sac radius.
   (F)   Cul-de-sac streets. CuIs-de-sac, permanently designed as such, shall
be of reasonable length, not exceeding 500 feet, and shall have at the closed
end a turnaround containing a right-of-way having an outside radius of not less
than 60 feet, which shall be paved to a radius of not less than 50 feet.
   (G)   Street requirements:
      (1)   Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall conform to the
town plan, and where not shown thereon shall conform to the following:
         (a)   A primary residential street shall have a cart-way 40 feet in
width centered in a right-of-way 60 feet in width.
         (b)   A secondary residential street shall have a cart-way 30 feet in
width centered in a right-of-way 50 feet in width.
         (c)   A tertiary residential street shall have a cartway 20 feet in
width centered in a right-of-way 50 feet in width.
         (d)   A marginal access street shall have a cartway 26 feet in width
included in a right-of-way which shall vary with conditions but in no case
shall be less than 36 feet.
      (2)   Additional right-of-way and cartway requirements may be required by
the commission in order to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers, to facilitate the adequate provision for
transportation and other public requirements and to promote the general
welfare.
      (3)   Short extension of existing streets with lesser right-of-way or
cartway requirements may be permitted at the discretion of the commission.
   (H)   Street alignment:
      (1)   Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5º, connection
shall be made by a horizontal curve.
      (2)   To ensure adequate sight distance, center line radii for horizontal
curves shall be laid out in accordance with the following standards:
         (a)   Primary residential street, 150 feet.
         (b)   Secondary residential street, 100 feet.
         (c)   Tertiary residential street, 100 feet.
      (3)   A tangent of 50 feet minimum shall be required between 2 successive
curves turning in opposite directions.
   (I)   Street grades:
      (1)   Center line grades shall be not less than 0.7%.
      (2)   Center line grades shall not exceed the following standards:
         (a)   Primary and secondary residential streets, 8%.
         (b)   Tertiary residential street, 10%.
      (3)   Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 3% and
shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change and to provide
the following minimum sight distances:
         (a)   Primary residential streets, 200 feet.
         (b)   Secondary residential streets, 150 feet.
         (c)   Tertiary residential streets, 100 feet.
      (4)   Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 4 %, leveling areas having a maximum grade of 2% shall be provided for
a minimum distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of
the intersecting street.
   (J)   Street intersections:
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
75º. In all cases intersections shall be designed so as to provide satisfactory
land usage and safe traffic condition.
      (2)   Intersections with major streets or major highways should be
reduced to a minimum.
      (3)   Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125 feet
between their center lines.
      (4)   Curb radii shall be provided at street intersection varying
according to the types of streets intersecting and the angle at which they
intersect: provided, however, that none shall be less than 15 feet.
   (K)   Street names:
      (1)   Names of new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic
resemblance to, the names of existing streets within the town.
      (2)   Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of abutting or
neighboring properties shall bear the same name.
   (L)   Blocks:
      (1)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be designed with due
regard for:
         (a)   Provision of suitable building sites for the type of use
contemplated.
         (b)   Eliminating of excessive street area.
         (c)   Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
         (d)   Topography and drainage.
         (e)   Requirements of the town zoning regulations.
      (2)   Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate 2
tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required.
      (3)   Interior walks may be required where necessary to facilitate
circulation or provide access to community facilities.
   (M)   Lots and lot sizes:
      (1)   Frontage shall be measured at the building line or at the street
line, whichever is larger.
      (2)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
      (3)   Reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide separation from traffic arteries or to provide protection for abutting
properties or to overcome certain conditions of topography or orientation.
      (4)   There shall be adequate width and area on every lot after the
erection of a residence to permit the parking within the lot of at least one
car for each family dwelling unit permitted under the zoning regulations.
      (5)   All lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning
regulations of the town. The width and depth of the lots shall be exclusive of
the right-of-way of any access drive.
      (6)   In areas where no off-lot sewerage or water facilities are
available, the director of health may require lot sizes in excess of the
minimum requirements of the zoning regulations. In fixing the allowable lot
size, the director of health shall give consideration to the topography of the
site; the location of existing and proposed buildings on the lot, and existing
buildings on adjacent lots; the location of existing sewerage and water
facilities on adjacent property; the water table; the geology and
characteristics of the soil; the type and size of proposed sewerage and water
facilities and the estimated use thereof.
      (7)   In areas where no off-lot sewerage or water facilities are
available, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide adequate
information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit the
installation and operation of an individual sewage disposal system (septic tank
and drain field). Such in formation shall consist of the report of the director
of health re garding seepage and other tests he may require. The subdivider
shall provide the necessary equipment and labor for making these tests.
      (8)   Lots with no frontage on an accepted street or on a street proposed
for acceptance shall not be permitted.
      (9)   All lots in a subdivision shall be numbered consecu tively with the
first lot designated by the numeral one. No fraction, suffix or prefix shall be
permitted. Adjoining subdivisions having the same name shall not duplicate the
numbers of the previous plan, but shall continue the sequence used in the
previous plan.
   (N)   Driveway and easements:
      (1)   Where permitted, access drives serving residential properties on 2
sides must have a minimum paved width of 15 feet. In cases where access drives
serve properties on one side only, the commission may permit a paving of
narrower width; however, in no case shall access drives be paved less than 12
feet wide.
      (2)   Access drives may be required in commercial and industrial
subdivisions, except where other adequate, provision is made for off-street
loading and parking consistent with the use proposed. Where required these
access drives shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet.
      (3)   Dead end and access drives shall be avoided; however, where this
proves impossible, they shall be terminated with a paved, T-bar, turning area
having a minimum depth of 20 feet on both sides of the access drive and a
minimum width of 10 feet.
      (4)   Access drive intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, and where necessary, corners shall be rounded or cut back sufficiently
to permit safe vehicular circulation.
      (5)   Easements shall be provided as necessary for public utilities and
shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
      (6)   Such easement shall be located on or be adjacent to rear or side
lot lines.
      (7)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be a
drainage easement of right-of-way conforming substantially to the line of such
watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to provide drainage and
permit access for maintenance by the town.
      (8)   Where a subdivision adjoins a park, watercourse or other land use
different from that proposed, the commission may require a setback from such
park, watercourse or other land use for the protection of or separation of the
several land uses; provided, such setback shall be not less than 10 feet nor
more than 50 feet.
   (O)   Community facilities:
      (1)   Areas set aside for parks and playgrounds to be dedicated or to be
reserved for the common use of all property owners by covenant in the deed,
whether or not required by the commission, shall be of reasonable size and
character for neighborhood playgrounds or other recreational uses.
      (2)   The commission may require that an area of reasonable size,
exclusive of streets, shall be reserved or dedicated for recreational or public
use.
      (3)   If a subdivider reserves an area for recreational or public use,
the area shall be adequate for building sites for the facilities, landscaping
and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
   (P)   Approval of appropriate departments. All improvements such as streets,
driveways, water mains and sewers shall be constructed at the expense of the
subdivider in accordance with the specifications set forth in the material
following §
151.12.
   (Q)   Tree planting. The subdivider shall supply and plant, to the
specifications of the director of public works for genus, size and number
(depending on the width of the lot), not less than one tree per 60 foot lot.
   (R)   Loam. All areas excepting cartways, sidewalks and other hard-surfaced
areas shall be covered with a minimum of 4 inches of loam, except the areas
which are to be left in their natural condition, such as rocky outcroppings,
swamps, etc., and which areas are delineated on the property data map. (See §
151.06 (A).
   (S)   Street signs. Street signs shall be erected by the public works and
engineering department at the expense of the subdivider.
   (T)   Merestones. Merestones set at all control points within a subdivision
shall be of the type as specified by the public works and engineering
department.
   (U)   In matters of judgment or interpretation of the above general
standards, the opinion of the commission shall prevail.
('66 Code, § 63-5)
§ 151.06 Specifications for maps and plans.
   (A)   Specifications for property data map:
      (1)   Property data maps shall be drawn at a scale of 50 feet to one
inch, on individual sheets not to exceed 24 by 36 inches.
      (2)   The following information shall be shown thereon:
         (a)   Name of the subdivider.
         (b)   Name of the registered owner.
         (c)   Name of and registration number of and certification by a
registered engineer, or land surveyor responsible for the certification of
maps.
         (d)   North point and scale and date.
         (e)   Tract boundaries with bearings or angles and distances.
         (f)   Adjacent streets with names and widths where established. In
addition each tract shall be referenced to adjacent street lines and to the
town coordinate system where applicable.
         (g)   Name of adjacent subdivisions, or of owners, and of record
owners of adjacent unplatted properties.
         (h)   Topography based on datum approved by the public works and
engineering department and showing contours at vertical intervals of not more
than 5 feet.
         (i)   Lines and limits of all easements and rights-ofway.
         (j)   Limits of zoning classifications in which the property lies.
         (k)   All merestones or other established control points within the
property.
         (l)   Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock
outcrops, existing buildings and actual location of sewers, inlets, water
mains, easements and rights-of-way, fire hydrants. railroads, existing and
accepted streets and their established grades.
   (B)   Specifications for preliminary plan and data.
      (1)   The preliminary plan shall indicate in sketch form on the property
data map the following information:
         (a)   Proposed street layout, street names, lot lines and lot
identification numbers. Streets shall indicate proposed cartway and right-of-
way widths, approximate radii of curvature and approximate grades; lots shall
show approximate dimensions and areas when required by the commission.
         (b)   Sites dedicated or reserved for purposes other than residential.
         (c)   Proposed sewerage and drainage.
      (2)   When required, the subdivider shall submit data on subsoil
conditions.
   (C)   Specifications for record subdivision plan:
      (1)   The record subdivision plan shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to
one inch, on individual sheets not to exceed 24 by 36 inches.
      (2)   The record subdivision plan shall indicate the following
information on one or more sheets as required for clarity except that
subparagraphs (a) and (d) below shall be shown on all sheets submitted.
         (a)   Name of the subdivider and of the owner in whose name the
subdivision is to be recorded.
         (b)   Title.
         (c)   North point, scale and date.
         (d)   Name, registration number of and certification by a registered
professional engineer or land surveyor.
         (e)   Primary control points, approved by the department of public
works and engineering, or ties to such control points to which all pertinent
engineering data shall be referred.
         (f)   Boundaries, with distances, bearings and location of monuments.
Such dimensions shall be in feet and tenths of a foot.
         (g)   Name of adjacent subdivisions, or of owners, and of record
owners of adjacent unplatted properties.
         (h)   Topography based on datum approved by the department of public
works and engineering, and showing contours at intervals of 5 feet.
         (i)   Street lines, street names, lot lines and lot identification
numbers, easements, rights-of-way and other land divisions and their purpose.
         (j)   Radii, lengths of curves, and tangent bearings for all streets.
         (k)   Right-of-way and cartway widths for all streets.
         (l)   When required by the department of public works and engineering,
street profiles, details of culverts or other necessary data, as specified by
the department of public works and engineering and as stipulated in the
material following §
151.12.
         (m)   Adjacent streets with names and dimensions.
         (n)   Building lines or street setback lines.
         (o)   Calculated areas of all lots where area approxi mated is within
5% of the minimum area requirements.
         (p)   Location and boundaries of all nondedicated ways or easements,
and of drainage ways.
         (q)   Location and outline of all existing structures to remain.
         (r)   Location of all watercourses.
         (s)   When required by the commission the location, depth and size of
sewers, storm water drains, water lines, location of wells and cesspools or
septic tanks.
         (t)   A certification showing that applicant is owner of the land, or
his qualified representative.
         (u)   Statement dedicating streets, rights-of-way or other areas for
public use as may be required by the town.
         (v)   Such other certificates, affidavits or endorsements as the
commission may require for the enforcement of these regulations.
('66 Code, § 63-6)
§ 151.07 Filing of maps and plans.
   (A)   Filing of property data map:
      (1)   Every subdivider shall file with the commission 2 prints of the
property data map, prior to filing an application for the conditional approval
of the preliminary plan. Property data maps shall conform to the provisions of
§
151.06 (A).
      (2)   Following the filing of the property data map and prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall ascertain from the
commission those elements and conditions which should be taken into
consideration in the design of the subdivision. These shall include any
features of the master plan for the town and its amendments, or of any plans of
the commission, including but not limited to proposed streets, recreation
areas, drainage reservations, shopping centers and school sites.
   (B)   Filing and approval of preliminary plan:
      (1)   Written application shall be made to the clerk of the commission on
a form supplied by him on or before the first of the month during which the
application is to be acted upon by the commission. There shall be a fee of $10
accompanying the application.
      (2)   A minimum of 6 prints of the preliminary plan and supplementary
data shall be submitted to the commission together with the written application
for conditional approval. Preliminary plans shall comply with the provisions of
§
151.06 (B).
      (3)   The clerk of the commission shall, upon receipt of the plans, check
the plans to ascertain that they comply with these regulations and the zoning
regulations.
      (4)   Approval of other departments is necessary before action can be
taken by the commission:
         (a)   Approval of the proposed methods of sanitary sewage disposal
shall be expressed in writing by the director of health.
         (b)   Approval of the engineering design of the street and drainage
system shall be expressed in writing by the director of public works and
engineering.
      (5)   When a subdivision plan abuts a state highway, the clerk of the
commission shall, within 3 days of the receipt of application for subdivision
approval, transmit the plans and all appurtenant data to the state highway
commissioner for consideration and recommendation before action is taken by the
commission. If no recommendation is received within 14 days, the commission
shall assume that there are no objections to the plan.
      (6)   When a subdivision plan abuts a town boundary, the clerk of the
commission shall, within 3 days of the receipt of application for subdivision
approval, transmit the plans and all appurtenant data to the head of the
government of the adjoining town for consideration and recommendation before
action is taken by the commission. If no recommendation is received within 30
days, the commission shall assume that there are no objections to the plan.
      (7)   The commission shall act on the application for approval of the
preliminary plan forthwith except that if it fails to act within 60 days its
approval shall be assumed.
         (a)   If it approves the preliminary plan the commission shall express
such approval as conditional approval and shall notify the subdivider and the
department of public works and engineering of the approval.
         (b)   In the event of disapproval, the commission shall notify the
subdivider in writing, not more than 10 days following, of its action and its
reason therefor.
      (8)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute
approval of the record subdivision plan, but shall be deemed as an expression
of approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the record
subdivision plan.
   (C)   Agreement and performance bond requirements:
      (1)   The subdivider shall, after conditional approval is granted to the
subdivider, sign an agreement prepared by the commission containing all phases
of improvement to be effected by the subdivider. The registered engineer or
land surveyor certifying to the plans submitted to the commission shall make an
estimate of the cost of all the required improvements and submit such estimate
to the clerk of the commission. Upon approval of this estimate, the subdivider
shall be so notified and will submit an approved performance bond in an amount
equal to the approved estimate.
      (2)   The subdivider shall have the full responsibility for design and
construction of adequate drainage systems and streets, and for the acquisition
of rights-of-way as shown on the record subdivision plan or as are necessary
for the protection of third parties or for the access to the subdivision.
      (3)   The subdivider shall provide for the design and con struct all
facilities such as roads and sewers, etc., shown on the record subdivision plan
or as are necessary for access to such subdivision or for the protection of the
right of third parties.
   (D)   Filing and approval of the record subdivision plan:
      (1)   Record subdivision plans shall comply with the pro visions of §
151.06 (C) of these regulations, and shall be in substantial conformity with
the preliminary plan, as approved. A record subdivision plan may consist of a
portion of the approved preliminary plan, if desired.
      (2)   Application for the approval of the record subdivision plan shall
be submitted in writing to the commission within 6 months after approval of the
preliminary plan; otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an
extension of time is applied for in writing and granted by the commission:
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by a minimum of 7 copies of
each drawing comprising the record sub division plan, of which 2 copies shall
be on linen, and other exhibits required for approval.
         (b)   The commission shall act upon the application forthwith, except
that if it fails to act within 60 days its approval shall be presumed.
         (c)   The approval of the commission shall be noted on all copies of
each drawing comprising the record subdivision plan. The 2 linen prints shall
be signed, with one retained by the commission and the other by the town clerk,
the distribution of the other 5 prints with the approval noted thereon shall
be: one copy each to the department of public works and engineering, the
department of public health, the building department, fire department and to
the subdivider.
         (d)   The commission may, if it deems necessary, hold a public hearing
on a record subdivision plan, after due notice in a daily newspaper published
in the vicinity, which notice shall be published at least 5 days prior to the
hearing. At this hearing, the subdivider or his agent and all other parties
whose interest may be affected by the proposed subdivision shall be heard.
         (e)   In the event of disapproval the commission will notify the
subdivider of its reasons therefor in writing not more than 10 days following
such action.
   (E)   Record filing. The record subdivision plan must be filed in the office
of the town clerk within 3 months after the date of final approval by the
commission, with such filing contingent upon fulfillment of all related legal
requirements. An extension of time for a period not exceeding one year may be
granted by the commission upon application by the subdivider.
   (F)   Completion. The subdivider shall construct all streets, curbs and
sewers as provided in the subdivision agreement prior to the sale of any lot
within such subdivision unless the contract for sale expressly prohibits the
occupancy of such premises at a time prior to the completion of the streets,
curbs and sewers. Sidewalks shall be installed within the time limited by the
terms of the agreement for completion of the subdivision, which shall not
exceed 2 years.
§ 151.08 Variances.
   The commission may authorize the variances from the terms of these
regulations as will not be contrary to the interact of public health, safety or
general welfare, and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of these regula tions will result in serious practical
difficulty; provided, however, that the purpose and intent of these regulations
shall be observed and substantial justice done. Where the subdivider desires
the variance of any provisions of the foregoing regulations, he shall include a
request therefor, with a statement of reasons for such request, with the
application for the approval of the preliminary or final plan.
('66 Code, § 63-8)
§ 151.09 Records and reviews.
   (A)   The commission shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision applications filed with it. All
such records shall be public records.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any administrative decision of any employee of
the commission, with respect to any interpretation or requirement of any
provision of these regulations, shall have a right to a review by the
commission within 30 days of the mailing or communication of the decision. Any
person requesting such review may appear before the commission in person or by
agent or attorney.
('66 Code, § 63-9)
§ 151.10 Chart of pavement types.
A
 Subbase Base Surface
            Subbase                 Base            Surface
Class A 1 �8 inch gravel           7 inch ABM      3 inch AC concrete
2 —       8 inch gravel                           10 inch-8 inch-10 inch PC
                                                    concrete
3 —       8 inch gravel           8 inch PC crete 2 inch AC concrete
4 —
Class B 1 �12 inch gravel                          3 inch AC concrete
2 —       9 inch gravel           3 inch WBM      3 inch ABM
3 —       8 inch gravel           4 inch ABM      3 inch ABM Class
C 1 —     Granular local material 9 inch gravel   3-coat MC-1-2-3 sand
2 —       Granular local material 9 inch gravel   2-coat MC-1-3 sand
                                                    1-coat RC-5 sand
3 —       Granular local material 8 inch WBM      2-coat RC-2-5 stone
 
('66 Code, § 63-13)
§ 151.11 Chart of highway classes.
 A AB B C
               A               AB              B               C
Daily traffic  4,000 to 20,000 750 to 12,000   750 to 4,000    300 to 750
Surface width  2 - 25 feet     40 feet         36 feet         30 feet
Shoulders      10 feet         8 feet          4 feet          0
Maximum grade  4%              6%              6%              8%
Minimum grade  0.5%            0.5%            0.8%            1%
Maximum crown  1/8 inch to 1.0 1/4 inch to 1.0 1/4 inch to 1.0 1/2 inch to 1.0
               foot            foot            foot            foot
Minimum right- 100 feet        80 feet         60 feet         50 feet
of-way
 
('66 Code, § 63-14)
§ 151.12 Road construction specifications, minimum.
   (A)   Class C-I:
      (1)   Base graded to proper line and cross section of suit able material
none of which is organic. Satisfactorily compacted.
      (2)   Eight inches of bank-run gravel compacted in place to final grade.
      (3)   MC-1 Cutbach asphalt applied at a rate of 0.5 to 0.7 gallons per
square yard and allowed to penetrate. If necessary (still tacky) sanded where
required 8 to 24 hours later.
      (4)   After 5 to 7 days - MC-2 or MC-3 applied at a rate of .05 gallons
per square yard and covered within one hour with sharp sand and lightly
broomed.
      (5)   After an additional 7 to 20 days MC-3 applied at a rate of 0.35 to
0.5 gallons per square yard and sanded and broomed.
   (B)   Class C-II:
      (1)   Similar to C-1
      (2)   Similar to C-1
      (3)   Similar to C-1
      (4)   Similar to C-1
      (5)   After an additional 7 to 20 days MC-5 applied at a rate of 0.3 to
0.4 gallons per square yard and 1/2 inch stone chips applied at a rate of 25 to
40 pounds per square yard and thoroughly rolled.
('66 Code, § 63-15)
§ 151.13 Notes.
   (A)   Rolled bank-run gravel. Materials, workmanship, construction, etc.,
shall be in accordance with § 3.02, Rolled Gravel Base, Connecticut State
Highway Specification, latest edition or amendment thereto.
   (B)   Bituminous material. Materials, application, methods of construction,
etc., shall be in accordance with Section Bituminous Material for Surface,
Connecticut State Highway Specification, latest edition or amendment thereto.
   (C)   Bituminous gutters. Bituminous gutters as approved shall be
constructed on all grades greater than 5% and shall be in accordance with §
8.02 Bituminous Gutters, Connecticut State Highway Specification, latest
edition or amendment thereto.
   (D)   Bituminous curbs. Bituminous curbs as approved shall be constructed
only when concrete curbs and sidewalks have been waived by the proper
authorities having jurisdiction.
   (E)   Plans and profiles. Plans and profiles of all roads or streets,
drainage lines, catch basin locations, manholes, sanitary sewer lines,
utilities, etc., to be submitted with approved layout. No gravel base to be
laid until subbase has been approved by the engineering department.
   (F)   Concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks and curbs to be 1:2:4 concrete
and Constructed to dimensions shown.
   (G)   Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches to be 6 inches thick and
constructed as shown.
   (H)   Street curvature. Minimum center line radius to be 180 feet on
secondary streets (see "minimum sight distance" sketch, available for
inspection in the office of the town planner).
   (I)   Street width. Minimum street width is 50 feet.
   (J)   Street signs. Street signs of the standard type used by the town shall
be placed at all street intersections.
   (K)   Curb radius. Minimum radii of all curbs of street intersections to be
not less than 20 feet.
   (L)   Merestones. Merestones as shown on plans shall be set on both sides of
street at all angle points of the streets, the beginning and end of each curve,
at all street intersections and at all other critical points on the street
lines.
   (M)   Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac to have radii of not less than 60 feet.
Wherever necessary either type "A" or type "B" as shown hereon (sketches of
types "A" and "B" culs-de-sac are available for inspection in the office of the
town planner), may be used.
('66 Code, § 63-16)
§ 151.14 Violation prohibited.
   (A)   As provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., Title 8, Ch. 126 no person shall lay
out or open any street or tract of land within the town without a map or plat
of such street or tract having been approved by the commissioner and filed in
the office of the town clerk and shall be fined for each lot sold or offered
for sale or so subdivided.
   (B)   Any subdivision of land in violation of the terms of these regulations
is declared to be a public nuisance and the appropriate officers of the town
are authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceedings to restrain
or abate such violation.
('66 Code, § 63-10) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of §
151.14 (A) shall be fined not more than $200.
('66 Code, § 63-10)
CHAPTER 152: HOUSING CODE
Section
General
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Director of health to enforce
Inspections
   
152.05   Inspection of dwellings, premises, etc.
   
152.06   Coordination of enforcement
   
152.07   Administrative liability
Service of Notices; Hearings
   
152.10   Notice of violation
   
152.11   Grounds for content may be filed
   
152.12   Time limit
   
152.13   Designation of referees
   
152.14   Powers of referee
   
152.15   Record of proceedings
   
152.16   Time limit for decision
   
152.17   Further hearing by board of review
   
152.18   Board of review to grant hearing
   
152.19   Notice of hearing
   
152.20   Rights of petitioner
   
152.21   Conditions for extension of time
   
152.22   Conditions for variances
   
152.23   Conditions for setting aside final decision
   
152.24   Emergency determined by director of health
   
152.25   Conference granted to owner
Basic Equipment and Facilities, Minimum Standards
   
152.30   Compliance required
   
152.31   Kitchen sink required
   
152.32   Flush water closet and lavatory basin
   
152.33   Bathtub or shower
   
152.34   Limitation of use of facilities
   
152.35   Hot and cold water lines
   
152.36   Rubbish storage
   
152.37   Garbage disposal
   
152.38   Water-heating facilities
   
152.39   Means of egress
Light, Heating; Minimum Standards
   
152.45   Compliance required
   
152.46   Total window area
   
152.47   Adequate ventilation
   
152.48   Requirements for bathroom and water closet
   
152.49   Electric service requirements
   
152.50   Heating facilities
   
152.51   Public halls and stairways lighted
   
152.52   Screens required
   
152.53   Rodent control
Dwelling Units, Sanitary Maintenance
   
152.55   Compliance required
   
152.56   Foundation, wall, roof, etc.
   
152.57   Window, exterior door and basement hatchway
   
152.58   Stairs and porch
   
152.59   Installation of plumbing fixtures
   
152.60   Floor surfaces maintained
   
152.61   Maintenance of all facilities
   
152.62   Rental or occupancy of vacant dwelling unit
   
152.63   Discontinuance of service
Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
   
152.65   Compliance required
   
152.66   Floor space
   
152.67   Space requirement for sleeping rooms
   
152.68   Ceiling height
   
152.69   Smoke alarms
   
152.70   Basement space prohibited; conditions
Owner's Responsibility
   
152.75   Maintenance of premises
   
152.76   Responsibilities of occupant
   
152.77   Rubbish disposal
   
152.78   Garbage disposal
   
152.79   Screens, storm doors and windows
   
152.80   Extermination of insects, rodents
   
152.81   Plumbing fixtures
Rooming House
   
152.85   Compliance required; exceptions
   
152.86   Rooming house permit
   
152.87   Inspection
   
152.88   Permit suspended; conference granted
   
152.89   Plumbing facility requirements
   
152.90   Bed linen and towels supplied
   
152.91   Floor space in sleeping rooms
   
152.92   Means of egress
   
152.93   Sanitary maintenance
   
152.94   Hotels, motels, dormitories, clubs
Unfit Dwellings; Legal Procedure
   
152.100   Compliance required
   
152.101   Defects in unfit dwellings
   
152.102   Unfit dwellings vacated
   
152.103   Written approval required to reoccupy
   
152.104   Placards on unfit dwellings
   
152.105   Conference and hearing granted
Violation
   
152.110   Prohibited
 
   
152.199   Penalty
GENERAL
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:
   (A)   "Basement." That portion of a building which is partially or
completely below grade.
   (B)   "Door." A swinging or sliding barrier by which an entry is closed or
opened.
   (C)   "Dwelling." Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary
housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   (D)   "Dwelling unit." Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   (E)   "Extermination." The control and climination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigation, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest-elimination
methods approved by the director of health.
   (F)   "Garbage." The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   (G)   "Habitable room." A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water-closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   (H)   "Director of health." The legally designated health authority of the
town, or his authorized representative.
   (I)   "Infestation." The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
   (J)   "Multiple dwelling." Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
   (K)   “Occupant.” Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit.
   (L)   “Operator.” Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let.
   (M)   "Ordinary minimum winter conditions." The temperature 15°F. above the
lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period.
   (N)   "Owner." Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to or beneficial interest in any dwelling or
dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or officer, or director of a corporation
or corporate owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if
he/she were the owner.
   (O)   "Plumbing." Shall include all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage-disposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   (P)   Intentionally blank.
   (Q)   “Rooming House” or “Boarding House.” With the exception of any
dwelling that has received and maintained a valid student housing permit from
the Planning and Zoning Department, any dwelling in which at least three
persons but less than 15 persons are housed or boarded for consideration or
otherwise without separate kitchen facilities, with or without meals. If 15 or
more persons are housed or boarded, such building shall be considered a hotel
or motel.
   (R)   "Rubbish." Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimming, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
   (S)   "Supplied." Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
   (T)   "Temporary housing." Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
   (U)   Meaning of certain words: Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “premises,” are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
   (V)   “Window.” An opening typically in the wall of a building, for
admission of light and air that is usually closed by casements or sashes
containing transparent material (such as glass) and capable of being opened or
shut.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16)
§ 152.02 DIRECTOR OF HEALTH TO ENFORCE.
   The director of health is authorized to make and, after a public hearing has
been held by the director of health of this town, to adopt such written rules
and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter; provided that the rules and regulations shall not
be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The director of health
shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he/she may adopt
with the clerk of this town. The rules and regulations shall have the same
force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for a
violation thereon shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the
provisions of this chapter as hereinafter provided.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
INSPECTIONS
§ 152.05 INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS, PREMISES, ETC.
   The Director of Health is authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, and premises located
within this town, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For
the purpose of making the inspections, the Director of Health is authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling
units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling and dwelling unit,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Director of Health free access
to the dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purpose of the inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises,
at all reasonable times for the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as
are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with
any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. The foregoing shall not authorize entry by
force to make the inspections and in the event the owner or occupant of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall refuse to
permit entry for the inspection, entry for such purpose shall be allowed only
through a properly issued warrant in accordance with law.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.06 Coordination of enforcement.
   Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith
under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of
the health department of the municipality. Wherever, in the opinion of the
director of health, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any
condition by any other department, he shall arrange for this, to be done in
such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to
visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order
for correction of any violation under this chapter shall be issued without the
approval of the director of health, and it shall be the responsibility of that
official before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence
of any other department or official of the government concerned with any matter
involved on the case in question.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.07 Administrative liability.
   Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no
officer, agent or employee of the municipality charged with the enforcement of
the housing code shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in
the discharge of his duties under this chapter. No person who institutes, or
assists in the prosecution of, a criminal proceeding under this chapter shall
be liable to damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without
reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was
guilty of an unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent or employee of the municipality, as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter, shall be defended
by the legal representative of the municipality until the final determination
of the proceedings therein.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
SERVICE OF NOTICE; HEARINGS
§ 152.10 Notice of violation.
   Whenever the director of health determines that there are rea sonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pur suant thereto, he shall give
notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor,
as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
   (A)   Be put in writing;
   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
   (C)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
and
   (D)   Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served
upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his
last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served with such notice
by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state. Such
notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.11 Grounds for content may be filed.
   Any person aggrieved by a notice of the director of health issued in
connection with any alleged violation of this chapter or of applicable rules
and regulations issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or
demolition, may petition the director of health for a conference on the matter.
The petition may be filed by means of a letter, setting forth the petitioner's
grounds for contesting the notice or order and must be received by the director
of health within 21 days after such notice or order was served on the
petitioner.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.12 Time limit.
   The director of health shall set a time and place for the conference and
shall advise the petitioner in writing of such time and place within 10 days of
the receipt cf his petition.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.13 Designation of referees.
   The director of health shall designate one or more referees to preside at
the conference, such referee or referees to be a member or members of the board
of review, which shall consist of the fire marshal, the planning director and
the building inspector.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.14 Powers of referee.
   The referee is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations and to
subpoena any witnesses or documents, which may be introduced before him.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.15 Record of proceedings.
   A verbatim record of the proceedings before the referee shall be kept for
each conference.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.16 Time limit for decision.
   Within 10 days following the close of each conference, the referee shall
affirm, set aside or modify the notice or order contested by the petitioner,
and shall advise the petitioner and the board of review of his decision in
writing.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.17 Further hearing by board of review.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the referee may file a petition for
hearing before the board of review within 21 days after such decision has been
rendered and served upon petitioner in the manner prescribed for the service of
notice in §
152.10.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.18 Board of review to grant hearing.
   Upon receipt of a valid petition, the board of review shall grant the
hearing requested, and shall advise petitioner of its decision in writing
within 10 days of the day on which his petition was received.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.19 Notice of hearing.
   When the board of review determines to hold a hearing, it shall serve
petitioner with notice of its decision in the manner provided for service of
notice in §
152.10. The board of review shall also notify the director of health of its
determination, and shall request that a transcript of the record of the
conference held pursuant to §
152.11 be filed with the board of review within 10 days of the announcement of
the decision.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.20 Rights of petitioner.
   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause
why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn, or why the period of
time permitted for compliance should be extended.
(Adopted, 9-5-67)
§ 152.21 Conditions for extension of time.
   The hearing shall be on the record of the conference. The board of review,
after consideration of the record as a whole, may affirm, modify or revoke the
notice of order, and may grant an extension of time for the performance of any
act of not more than 6 additional months, where the board of review finds that
there is practical difficulty or undue hardship connected with the performance
of any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by applicable rules or
regulations issued pursuant thereto, and that the extension is in harmony with
the general purpose of this chapter to secure the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.22 Conditions for variances.
   The board of review may grant variances from the provisions of this chapter,
or from applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, when .the
board of review finds that there is practical difficulty or undue hardship
connected with the performance of any act required by this chapter and
applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto; that strict adherence to the
provisions would be arbitrary in the case at hand; that extension would not
provide an appropriate remedy in the case at hand; and that the variance is in
harmony with the general purpose of this chapter to secure the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.23 Conditions for setting aside final decision.
   Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the board of review may obtain
judicial review by filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, within 21 days
of the announcement of the decision, a petition praying that the decision be
set aside in whole or in part. A copy of each petition so filed shall be
forthwith transmitted to the board of review which shall file in a court a
record of the proceedings upon which it based its decision. Upon the filing of
the record, the court shall affirm, modify, or vacate the decision complained
of in whole or in part. The findings of the board of review with respect to
questions of fact shall be sustained if supported by substantial evidence on
the record, considered as a whole.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.24 Emergency determined by director of health.
   Whenever, in the judgment of the director of health, an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, he may, without notice, conference or hearing, issue an order
directing the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the structure to
which the provisions of this chapter or applicable rules and regulations
pursuant thereto apply, to take such action as is necessary to correct or abate
the emergency; or, if circumstances warrant may himself act to abate or correct
it.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.25 Conference granted to owner.
   The owner,. occupant or other person in charge of the structure shall be
granted a conference on the matter upon his request, as soon as practicable,
but the conference shall in no case stay the abatement or correction of the
emergency.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES, MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 152.30 Compliance required.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements provided
in §§
152.30 to
152.39, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.31 Kitchen sink required.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition
and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the director of
health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.32 Flush water closet and lavatory basin.
   Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under §
152.34) shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within the room
and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved
by the director of health,
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.33 BATHTUB OR SHOWER.
   Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under §
152.34) shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within
the room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected
to a water and sewer system approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199 
§ 152.34 LIMITATION OF USE OF FACILITIES.
   The occupants of not more than two dwelling units may share a single flush
water closet, a single lavatory basin, and a single bathtub or shower ir:
   (A)   Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two rooms;
provided that, for the purposes of this paragraph, a kitchenette or an
efficiency kitchen with not more than 60 square feet of floor area shall not be
counted as a room;
   (B)   The habitable area of each of such dwelling units shall equal not more
than 250 square feet of floor area; and
   (C)   Such water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.35 HOT AND COLD WATER LINES.
   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required under the
provisions of §§
152.31 to
152.34, inclusive, shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water
lines.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.36 RUBBISH STORAGE.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, type and location of which are approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.37 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, type and location of which are approved by the
director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.38 WATER-HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot-water lines required under the provisions of §
152.35, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120º F. The supplied
water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under
the provisions of §
152.70 are not in operation.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.39 MEANS OF EGRESS.
   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
LIGHT, HEATING; MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 152.45 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements provided in §§
152.45 to
152.53, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.46 TOTAL WINDOW AREA.
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facility directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 8% of the floor area of such
room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any room
and light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, the window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included
as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only
window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of the room, the total
window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15 % of the total floor area
of the room.
   (B)   Emergency egress.
      (1)   Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable window or
exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The units must be
operable from the inside to a full clear opening without the use of a key or
tool. Where the windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue, they shall
have a sill height of not more than 44 inches above the floor. All egress or
rescue windows from sleeping rooms must have a net clear opening of 5.7 square
feet. The minimum net clear opening height shall be 24 inches. The minimum net
clear opening width shall be 20 inches. Grade floor windows may have a minimum
net clear opening of 5.0 square feet. Existing windows shall be permitted to
utilize removable sash. To achieve required opening, sash shall be capable of
being removed without use of key or tool.
      (2)   Sliding glass doors may be considered to meet the required window
area provided the required square foot area is met.
   (C)   Ventilation.
      (1)   The glazed areas need not be openable when the opening is not
required by division (B)(2) above, and an approved mechanical ventilation
system is provided and capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the
room or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed and capable of
supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute per occupant
computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and one occupant
for each additional bedroom.
      (2)   The glazed area may be omitted in rooms where the opening is not
required by division (B)(1) above, and an approved mechanical ventilation
system is provided and capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the
room of a whole-housed mechanical ventilation system is installed and capable
of supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute per occupant
computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and one occupant
for each additional bedroom, and artificial light is provided capable of
producing an average illumination of six foot candles over the area of the room
at a height of 30 inches above the floor level.
      (3)   When alcove rooms open without obstruction into adjoining rooms,
the required window openings to the outer air shall be based on the combined
floor area of room and alcove. For the purposes of determining light and
ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of the
adjoining room when at least 1/2 of the area of the common wall is open and
unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than 1/10 of the floor area of
the interior room but not less than 25 square feet.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09)
Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.47 ADEQUATE VENTILATION.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can
easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room.
The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size,
as required in §
152.46, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.48 REQUIREMENTS FOR BATHROOM AND WATER CLOSET. 
   Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in § §
152.46 and
152.47, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately
ventilated bathrooms and water-closet compartments equipped with a ventilation
system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the director of
health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.49 ELECTRIC SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not
more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable room of such dwelling
shall contain at least two separate floor- or wall-type electric convenience
outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric-
light fixture; and every water-closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room,
furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or
wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be
properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and
shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.50 HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water-closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least 65º F at a distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum
winter conditions.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.51 PUBLIC HALLS AND STAIRWAYS LIGHTED.
   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or
more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall
and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing
not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on
when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.52 SCREENS REQUIRED.
   During that portion of each year when the director of health deems it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied
screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings
to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise
be supplied with screens; provided that such screens shall not be required
during such period in rooms deemed by the director of health to be located high
enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and
in rooms located in areas of this town which are deemed by the director of
health to have so few such insects as to render screens unnecessary.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.53 RODENT CONTROL.
   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation,
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry. for
rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
DWELLING UNITS, SANITARY MAINTENANCE
§ 152.55 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements provided in §§
152.55 to
152.62, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.56 FOUNDATION, WALL, ROOD, ETC.
   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be capable of affording
privacy and shall be kept in good repair.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.57 WINDOW, EXTERIOR DOOR AND HATCHWAY.
   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.58 STAIRS AND PORCH.
   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.59 INSTALLATION OF PLUMBING FIXTURES.
   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and
obstructions.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.60 FLOOR SURFACES MAINTAINED.
   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.61 MAINTENANCE OF ALL FACILITIES.
   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.62 RENTAL OR OCCUPANCY OF VACANT DWELLING UNIT.
   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling or
dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy in
compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(Adopted 9-5-67; Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.63 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, let or occupied by him, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance
of service is approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.65 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupany any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements as provided in § §
152.65 to
152.69, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.66 FLOOR SPACE.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor
space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated
on the basis of total habitable room area.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.67 SPACE REQUIREMENT FOR SLEEPING ROOMS.
   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.68 CEILING HEIGHT.
   (A)   At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
   (B)   Ceiling height in existing basements being converted to habitable
space shall not be less than six feet ten inches clear except under beams,
girders, pipes, ducts or other obstructions where the clear height shall be a
minimum of six feet six inches.
(Am. Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.69 SMOKE ALARMS.
   (A)   Smoke alarms.
      (1)   Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
         (a)   In each sleeping room.
         (b)   Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms.
         (c)   On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements
but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwelling units with
split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a
smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
      (2)   The smoke detectors may be battery operated and are not required to
be interconnected when other remodeling considerations do not require the
removal of the appropriate wall and ceasing coverings to facilitate concealed
interconnected wiring.
   (B)   Carbon monoxide detectors.
      (1)   Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed outside of each
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedroom.
      (2)   Exception. Carbon monoxide detectors shall not be required in
dwelling units not containing a fuel-burning appliance, fireplace or attached
garage.
(Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.70 BASEMENT SPACE PROHIBITED; CONDITIONS.
   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
   (A)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
   (B)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum
window area sizes as required in §
152.45;
   (C)   The required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade
of the ground adjoining the window area; and
   (D)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under §
152.47, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY
§ 152.75 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.76 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANT.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.77 RUBBISH DISPOSAL.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by §
152.36 of this chapter.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.78 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage, and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers required by §
152.37 of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply
the facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing
more than 4 dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where
more than 4 dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases it shall
be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.79 SCREENS, STORM DOORS AND WINDOWS.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply the
service.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.80 EXTERMINATION OF INSECTS, RODENTS.
   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation
is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or
reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of
the owner. Whenever infestation exists in 2 or more of the dwelling units in
any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing 2 or
more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.81 PLUMBING FIXTURES.
   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein
in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
ROOMING HOUSES
§ 152.85 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy in any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of
every section of this chapter, except the provisions of §§
152.30 through
152.53.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.86 ROOMING HOUSE PERMIT.
   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming
house permit issued by the Director of Health in the name of the operator and
for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the
Director of Health for the permit, which shall be issued by the Director of
Health upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of the
chapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all
times. The permit shall be nontransferable. Every person holding such a permit
shall give notice in writing to the Director of Health within 24 hours after
having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of,
interest in, or control of the rooming house. The notice shall include the name
and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the rooming
house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of one year following
its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter
provided. For every permit issued hereunder and for each annual renewal, there
shall be paid to the health department, for the use of the town, a permit fee
of $50 by each rooming house.
(Adopted 9-5-67; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78; Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16)
Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.87 Inspection.
   Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the director of health finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the
director of health shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming
house that unless the conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period, to be determined by the director of health, the operator's rooming
house permit will be suspended. At the end of the period the director of health
shall reinspect the rooming house, and if he finds that the conditions or
practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the
operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of
suspension, the operator shall immediately cease operation of the rooming
house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.88 Permit suspended; conference granted.
   Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended, or
who has received notice from the director of health that his permit is to be
suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are
corrected, may request and shall be granted a conference and hearing on the
matter under the procedure provided by §§
152.10 to
152.25, inclusive; provided that, if no petition for such conference and
hearing is filed within 21 days following the day on which such permit was
suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
§ 152.89 Plumbing facility requirements.
   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the director of
health and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each 6 persons or
fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided that,
in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than 1/2 the required number of water closets. All of
the facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably
accessible from a common hail or passageway to all persons sharing the
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot-water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement
except by written approval of the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.90 Bed linen and towels supplied.
   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to
any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.91 Floor space in sleeping rooms.
   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor
space for each occupant thereof.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.92 Means of egress.
   Every rooming house shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and
this town.
(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.93 Sanitary maintenance.
   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house. He shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.94 Hotels, motels, dormitories, clubs.
   Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels, motels, dormitories and clubs, except to the extent that any
such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the
lawful regulations of any state board or agency.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
UNFIT DWELLINGS; LEGAL PROCEDURE
§ 152.100 Compliance required.
   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements as provided in §§
152.100 to
152.105, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.101 Defects in unfit dwellings.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be
so designated and placarded by the director of health:
   (A)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupant; or of the public.
   (B)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
   (C)   One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary,
or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.102 Unfit dwellings vacated.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and
so designated and placarded by the director of health, shall be vacated within
a reasonable time as ordered by the director of health.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.103 Written approval required to reoccupy.
   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit
for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and the placard is removed by, the director of
health. The director of health shall remove the placard whenever the defect or
defects, upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based, have
been eliminated.
(Adopted 9-5-87) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.104 Placards on unfit dwellings.
   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such, except as provided in §
152.103.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.105 Conference and hearing granted.
   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a conference and hearing on the matter under the
procedure set forth in §§
152.10 to
152.25, inclusive.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
VIOLATION
§ 152.110 Prohibited.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision of
any rule or regulation adopted by the director of health pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter.
(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
152.199
§ 152.199 Penalty.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $25 or
imprisoned not less than 10 days nor more than 25 days. Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Adopted 9-5-67)
CHAPTER 153: SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
Section
   
153.01   Definition
   
153.02   Permit required
   
153.03   Application for permit
   
153.04   Permit fee
   
153.05   Approval of plans
   
153.06   Final inspection
   
153.07   Location
   
153.08   Violation prohibited
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter a "SWIMMING POOL" shall be defined as an
enclosure for water with a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 1)
§ 153.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person constructing or erecting a swimming pool shall first obtain a
written permit from the director of health or an inspector duly appointed by
him.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 3) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Applications for a swimming pool permit shall be in writing, shall be in the
name of the owner of the premises where the swimming pool is to be constructed
or erected, or his agent, and shall contain information relative to the
swimming pool, its construction or erection and the proposed location as may be
required by the director of health on a form provided by the health department.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 4)
§ 153.04 PERMIT FEE.
   For every permit issued hereunder there shall be paid to the health
department, for the use of the town, a permit fee of $5.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 6; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)
§ 153.05 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct,
erect, or cause to be constructed, erected or commence to construct or erect in
the town any swimming pool unless and until plans for the swimming pool have
been approved by the director of health or an inspector duly appointed by him
and a written permit issued by the director of health or his duly appointed
inspector for the construction or erection of a swimming pool.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 2) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.06 FINAL INSPECTION.
   All swimming pools constructed or erected shall be subject to a final
inspection by the director of health or his duly appointed inspector before the
swimming pools are used.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 5) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.07 LOCATION.
   (A)   Swimming pools shall be located only in areas where proper and
adequate drainage is available so that a public nuisance is not created.
   (B)   No swimming pool shall be located within 25 feet of any sanitary
system or within 75 feet of any well.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, §§ 2 and 4) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.08 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of this chapter.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 7) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50.
('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 7)
CHAPTER 154: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
Building On Unaccepted Streets
   
154.01   Intent
   
154.02   Issuance of permit, town engineer to certify
   
154.03   Issuance of permit, applicant to certify
   
154.04   When exempt
   
154.05   Building permit to restore
   
154.06   Violation prohibited
Property Maintenance
   
154.10   Purpose and application
   
154.11   Nuisances defined
   
154.12   Enforcement
   
154.13   Inspections and investigations; reports
   
154.14   Notice of violation
   
154.15   Citations
   
154.16   Removal by town
   
154.17   Appeal; hearing procedure
Ratproofing Methods
   
154.20   Floor foundation area
   
154.21   Use of mesh wire
   
154.22   Building on supports
Tax Abatement, Housing for Low- and Moderate-Income Persons
   
154.25   Definitions
   
154.26   Contracts for abatement
   
154.27   Term
   
154.28   Valuation
   
154.29   State assistance
Blight Prevention
   
154.30   Declaration of policy
   
154.31   Blighted properties prohibited
   
154.32   Definitions
   
154.33   Enforcement
   
154.34   Special consideration
   
154.35   Prohibitions and notice of violation
   
154.36    Citations; penalties
   
154.37    Removal by town
   
154.38    Appeal; hearing procedure for citations
Tax Relief for Elderly and/or Disabled Homeowners
   
154.45   Intent and purpose
   
154.46   Effective date of tax benefits
   
154.47   Applications
   
154.48   Determination of tax relief and relief allowed
   
154.49   Real property tax relief for certain homeowners age 65 or over or
permanently and totally disabled
   
154.50   Real property tax relief to certain elderly homeowners; applications
for real property tax relief
   
154.51   No conflict with state statute
Tax Abatement for Certain Occupants
   
154.60   Residence's exceeding 8% of occupant's income
Historic Properties
   
154.65   Purpose
   
154.66   Historic property
   
154.67   Historic Properties Commission
   
154.68   Powers of Commission
   
154.69   Termination of Historic Study Commission
 
   
154.99   Penalty
BUILDING ON UNACCEPTED STREETS
§ 154.01 INTENT.
   Sections
154.01 to
154.06, inclusive, are enacted pursuant to and in keeping with "building on
unaccepted streets," of the Conn. Gen. Stat., § 8-27.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)
§ 154.02 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TOWN ENGINEER TO CERTIFY.
   (A)   The building inspector of the town shall not issue a building permit
for the construction of a building on a tract, lot or parcel of land which does
not abut an accepted highway, unless the town engineer shall certify, in
writing, that such tract, lot, or parcel abuts an unaccepted street which is
equivalent to a road completed to a point of laying a bituminous binder course
in accordance with the specifications of the town engineer, unless such
proposed structure is a farm building or an accessory building. The
certification shall not be deemed to be an acceptance or acknowledgment by the
town of such street as a public highway.
   (B)   The building inspector of the town may issue a building permit for the
construction of a building located on a tract, lot or parcel which abuts an
unaccepted highway, provided that such tract, lot or parcel is located in a
subdivision approved by the planning section of the planning and zoning
commission and containing more than 200 dwelling units, provided that no
temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy or zoning permit may be issued
for any such building until the town engineer certifies that the road abutted
by the tract, lot or parcel containing such building has been completed in
accordance with the specifications required by the town subdivision regulations
for such road to be accepted as a public highway. The building inspector shall
notify the zoning enforcement officer in writing of any building permit issued
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75; Am. Ord. 318, passed 9-3-91) Penalty, see §
154.99 (A)
§ 154.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPLICANT TO CERTIFY.
   The building inspector of the town shall not issue a building permit for the
construction of a building on a tract, lot, or parcel of land which does not
abut an accepted highway, unless the applicant therefore certifies, in writing,
that he will inform, in writing, prior to sale, any and all subsequent owners
of the land that the street has not been accepted or acknowledged as a public
highway by the town. The obligation of the applicant to so inform shall
terminate when such street is accepted by the legislative council as a town
highway.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75) Penalty, see §
154.99 (A)
§ 154.04 WHEN EXEMPT.
   Any tract, lot, or parcel of land which is not shown on an approved and
recorded subdivision plan which is in single ownership and is of sufficient
size to be divided into two tracts, lots, or parcels each having sufficient
area to meet the lot size requirements of the town zoning regulations for the
zone in which such tract, lot or parcel is located shall be exempt from the
provisions of §§
154.01 to
154.06, inclusive; provided however, that the land-deed records do or shall
show that each parcel of land has permanent access with a minimum width of 12
feet to an accepted or acknowledged highway. Such permanent access shall not be
considered to be a public right-of-way, unless approved as such by the town
planning and zoning commission and accepted by the legislative council.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75) Penalty, see §
154.99(A)
§ 154.05 BUILDING PERMIT TO RESTORE.
   Nothing in §§
154.01 to
154.06, inclusive, shall prohibit the issuance of a building permit for the
restoration, or reconstruction of any building which may have been destroyed or
damaged by fire, explosion, windstorm, or other such accident or natural cause,
provided such restoration, or reconstruction is undertaken within a period of
12 months.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)
§ 154.06 VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any building erected or occupied in violation of the provisions of §§
154.01 to
154.06, inclusive, shall be deemed an unlawful structure or unlawfully occupied
and the building inspector shall institute or request the institution of legal
proceedings to restrain, enjoin or abate the erection or occupation of such
structure or cause it to be vacated and removed.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, occupy or permit to be
occupied a structure in violation of §§
154.01 to
154.06, inclusive.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75; Am. Ord. 318, passed 9-3-91) Penalty, see §
154.99(A)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 154.10 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   In order to prohibit and abate within the municipality nuisances and causes
thereof, as defined in §
154.11, it is declared that all structures, including but not limited to one
and two-family and multiple-family dwellings, whether or not used for
residential purposes, garden apartments, and all other apartment complexes,
condominiums, vacant lots, all shopping centers, supermarkets, retail stores,
discount houses, warehouses, manufacturing or fabrication plants, factories,
gasoline service stations, public garages, motor vehicle repair shops or other
business uses, and accessory structures to all of the foregoing, whether
occupied or vacant, shall be maintained in conformity with the standards set
out in §
154.10 through
154.15, so as to assure that none of these structures or properties will
adversely affect their neighborhood or the larger community. It is found and
declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration,
certain structures and properties have the further effect of creating blighting
conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and
removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in
time the expenditures of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions, as herein
contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood
and property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of
residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public
health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
§ 154.11 NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   Open areas:
      (1)   Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to
prevent the development of stagnant ponds.
      (2)   No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing, and the baskets, carts or wagons shall be collected as often as
necessary and removed to the interior of the building or buildings from which
they were taken.
      (3)   All fences shall be maintained. Such maintenance shall include, but
not be limited to, painting as needed, and the replacement or repair of fences
which may become in disrepair.
      (4)   All landscaping shall be maintained so that lawns, hedges, bushes
and trees shall be kept neatly and free from becoming overgrown and unsightly
where exposed to public view and where the same may have a tendency to
depreciate adjoining property. The maintenance should include, but not be
limited to, the replacement of trees and shrubs which may die or otherwise be
destroyed.
      (5)   The planting strip fronting the property shall be maintained in a
safe condition, neat, mowed as necessary, and free of litter, poison ivy,
ragweed and any other noxious plant.
      (6)   Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be filled, and
necessary repairs or replacement accomplished. All off-street parking
facilities shall be swept as often as necessary in the determination of the
enforcement agent.
      (7)   Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of
physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and shall be maintained in
a manner that will prevent trash, garbage, litter, debris and rubbish from
being blown about them. The property owner or his/her agent shall remove
discarded or inoperative appliances, furnishings or machinery.
      (8)   All signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in good
repair. Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put into good
repair. Any nonoperative or broken electrical or other sign shall be repaired
or removed.
      (9)   Trash receptacles shall be emptied on a regular basis.
   (B)   Buildings and structures:
      (1)   The exterior of buildings and structures shall be maintained so
that their appearance shall not have a tendency to depreciate adjoining
property.
      (2)   The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and be structurally sound.
      (3)   Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building shall be so
maintained as to keep water from entering the building and to prevent undue
heat loss from occupied areas. Materials which have been damaged or show
evidences of dry rot or other deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of
the building shall be free from loose and unsecured objects and material. Such
objects or materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
      (4)   Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation.
      (5)   Buildings and structures shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition free from health, safety and fire hazards.
(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor
(Enforcement Officer) is charged with the enforcement of this subchapter. It
shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated under this subchapter. The
Enforcement Officer may order any person who violates this subchapter to abate
such violation and shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue citations
for violations of this subchapter in accordance with §
154.15.
   (B)   In addition to, and not in substitution for, the penalty provision of
§
154.99(B), upon failure of the owner(s) to comply with a written notice of
violation, the Enforcement Officer shall contact the Public Works Department,
who shall cause the abatement of any nuisance defined in §
154.11 at the expense of the owner(s) of the premises on which such nuisance
exists.
(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
§ 154.13 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS; REPORTS.
   The Enforcement Officer shall initiate inspections and investigations, and
shall receive information and complaints concerning compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. The Enforcement Officer shall provide the
Legislative Council with monthly written status reports, indicating the number
of complaints, violations identified, active and closed cases, and other
information as requested.
(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
§ 154.14 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The town shall serve a written notice to any owner, agent, tenant and/or
person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly referred to as
the "Owner") who violates this subchapter to the owner's last known address by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall direct the removal,
correction or abatement of the violation within ten calendar days after receipt
of written notice and notify the owner that failure to remove or correct the
violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance with §
154.15; the fines and penalties imposed; and that if the owner fails to remove
or correct the violation, the town may cause the abatement of the violation at
the expense of the owner of the premises on which such violation exists.
(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
§ 154.15 CITATIONS.
   (A)   The town shall serve a written citation notifying the owner, agent,
tenant and/or person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly
referred to as the "Owner") of a violation(s) of this subchapter to the owner's
last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The citation
shall inform the owner of the allegations against him/her and the amount of
fines; that he/she may contest his/her liability before the town's duly
appointed Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by mail, written
notice to the Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor within
ten calendar days from the date of the citation(s); that if he/she does not
demand such a hearing in accordance with this section, he/she shall be deemed
to have admitted liability; that an assessment and judgment shall be entered
against him/her; and that judgment may issue without further notice.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of $100 for each day a violation exists and continues.
(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.16 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any land or property within the
town of any violation(s) of this subchapter (citing the Code sections) and to
direct such owner to remove or correct such violation which is dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall be by registered mail,
addressed to the owner at his/her last known address.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to correct or remove any violation(s) of this
subchapter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten days
after receipt of written notice provided for in §
154.14 and division (A) of this section, or within ten days after the date of
such notice in the event same is returned to the town because of inability to
make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the town may cause the abatement of a
violation of this subchapter at the expense of the owner(s) of the premises
where such violation exists. Costs shall include labor, materials and
equipment.
   (C)   Conference granted to owner/agent. Any owner or agent notified under
division (A) of this section shall be granted a conference with the Town
Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor upon his/her request.
Such conference shall be granted as soon as practicable, but the conference
shall in no way stay the abatement order.
   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such work, the
Enforcement Agent shall determine the actual cost thereof and bill the owner or
agent thereof. Upon the failure of the owner or agent to remit to the town the
amount of such charge within 30 days from the date of such notice, the
Enforcement Agent, within 90 days from the date of such notice, shall cause to
be recorded in the land records a sworn statement showing the cost and expense
incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the
property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement
shall constitute a lien on the property. Any appeal from any action taken
following this section shall be in accordance with §
154.17.
(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
§ 154.17 APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other
than police officers, employees, or persons who issue citations to conduct the
hearings authorized by this section.
   (B)   If any person who is sent notice pursuant to §
154.15 wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person
or by mail to an official designated by the town. Such payment shall be
inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of
such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver
or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first
notice provided for in §
154.15 shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated town
official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for herein and shall follow the procedures set forth in
§
154.15 for placing a lien on real property.
   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided
the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
an interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing town official or
Police Officer shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall be deemed to
be a business record within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180, and
evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official
or Police Officer shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests.
A person wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and
may present evidence in his/her behalf. A designated municipal official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality.
If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by
default against him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the
applicable provisions(s) of this subchapter. The hearing officer may accept
from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports,
and other official documents by mail, and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she deems
fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of
the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall
dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If
he/she determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such
person as provided by this subchapter.
   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk
of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street,
Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The certified copy
of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within
such 12-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and
filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment if the amount
of such record of assessment and appropriate court costs against such person
favor of the town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes,
the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the
effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy of execution on such judgment may
issue without further notice to such person.
   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing
a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-
259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court, Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the judges of the Superior Court.
(C.G.S. § 7-152c)
(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
RATPROOFING METHODS
§ 154.20 FLOOR FOUNDATION AREA.
   Floor foundations should be of 4-inch thickness of concrete, with
foundations extending at least 2 feet below ground level. From ground level to
a height of 12 inches, building should be ratproofed with metal or 1/2-inch
mesh wire hardware cloth.
('66 Code, Appendix VII, § 1)
§ 154.21 USE OF MESH WIRE.
   Where the above is not practicable, 1/2-inch mesh wire hardware cloth may
approved by the town attorney, directing removal or correction of the violation
within 7 days after service of the notice, or shall cause the posting of the
notice in a prominent place upon such premises whenever a responsible person
reasonably cannot be located. Immediately upon expiration of any period for
correction set forth in any violation notice, the council enforcement agent
shall determine whether correction has occurred and, if not fully, shall
without further delay of any kind file request for arrest warrant with the
prosecutor having jurisdiction.
(Adopted 8-3-70)
§ 154.22 BUILDINGS ON SUPPORTS.
   All buildings should be at least 2 feet above ground level, with supports
ratproofed with metal disks extending at least 9 inches out from supports, and
a clear space should be present underneath the building. All openings should be
screened with wire mesh of not less than 1/2-inch mesh, except that doors may
be of wood, with metal flashings extending one foot above the bottom of the
doors, and doorsills and jambs flashed with metal.
('66 Code, Appendix VII, § 3)
TAX ABATEMENTS, HOUSING FOR LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME PERSONS
§ 154.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
   "LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING." Housing, the construction or
rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way, by federal or state
statute, which housing is subject to regulation or supervision of rents,
charges or sales prices and methods of operation by a governmental agency under
a regulatory agreement or other instrument which restricts occupancy of such
housing to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed prescribed limits,
and shall be deemed to include the property on which such housing is situated.
   "OWNER." A person or persons, partnership, joint venture, or corporation who
or which has executed, or will execute a regulatory agreement or other
instrument which a governmental agency which limits occupancy of the low- and
moderate-income housing owned or to be owned by such person or persons,
partnership, joint venture or corporation or persons or families whose incomes
do not exceed prescribed limits.
(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)
§ 154.26 CONTRACTS FOR ABATEMENT.
   The Mayor may, by resolution enacted by majority vote of the Legislative
Council, enter into contracts for the town with owners of low- or moderate-
income housing granting abatement, in whole, or in part, of the real property
taxes of such housing; provided, that such abatement need be not be conditioned
upon receipt of state reimbursement to the town for such abatement; and
provided, further that each such contract shall require that the owner apply
the money equivalent of the taxes abated to one or more of the following
specified purposes; (1) to reduce rents below the levels which would be
achieved in the absence of abatement and to improve the quality and design of
such housing; (2) to effect occupancy by persons and families of varying income
levels, within limits determined by the Commissioner of Economic and Community
Development by regulation; or (3) to provide necessary related facilities or
services in such housing. Such abatement shall be made pursuant to a contract
between the town and the owner of any such housing, which contract shall
provide the terms of such abatement, the moneys equal to the amount of such
abatement shall be used for any one or more of the purposes herein state, and
that such abatement shall terminate at any time when such housing is not solely
for low or moderate income persons or families. The amount of such abatement
shall be established in each such contract, giving due consideration to the
purposes to which the money equivalent to the taxes so abated is to be applied.
(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)
§ 154.27 TERM.
   The abatement shall become effective on the date specified on the contract
between the town and the owner of low- or moderate-income housing. The term of
abatement shall extend for the remainder of the fiscal year in which such
abatement becomes effective and may continue as specified in the contract;
provided, that such abatement shall terminate at any time when the property for
which tax abatement had been granted is not used solely for low- or moderate-
income housing.
(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)
§ 154.28 VALUATION.
   For the purpose of determining the amount of taxes to be abated as
aforesaid, the present true and actual value of low- or moderate-income housing
on which rents and carrying charges are limited by regulatory agreement with,
or otherwise regulated by federal or state government or department or agency
thereof, shall be based upon and shall not exceed the capitalized value of the
net rental income of the housing project. For purposes of this section, "net
rental income" shall mean gross income of the project as limited by schedule of
rents or carrying charges, less reasonable operating expenses and property
taxes.
(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)
§ 154.29 STATE ASSISTANCE.
   The Mayor of the town, may, when authorized by resolution enacted by a
majority vote of the Legislative Council, enter into contracts with the state
for financial assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for all or
part of the tax abatement granted to an owner of low or moderate income housing
in accordance with this subchapter but the entering into such a contract for
financial assistance need not be a condition of any tax abatement.
(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)
BLIGHT PREVENTION
§ 154.30 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter is to be known as the Blight Prevention and
Enforcement Ordinance and is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the
town under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv).
   (B)   It is hereby found and declared that there exist within the town a
number of residential and commercial real properties which are vacant and/or in
blighted condition, and that the continued existence of such properties
contributes to the decline of neighborhoods.
   (C)   It is further found that the existence of such properties adversely
affects the economic well-being of the town and is adverse to the health,
safety and welfare of its residents.
   (D)   It is further found that many of the properties can be rehabilitated,
reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide decent, safe and
sanitary housing and ancillary commercial facilities, and that such
rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would eliminate, remedy
and prevent the adverse conditions described above.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.31 BLIGHTED PROPERTIES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be the duty of all owners of residential and commercial real
property to maintain their property in the town so as not to create or maintain
blight premises. No owner or agent, tenant, occupant, corporation, other entity
or person in control of residential or commercial real property located in the
town shall allow, create, maintain or cause to be created or maintained, any
blighted premises.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.32 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
   “BLIGHT” OR “BLIGHTED.” Blighted premises as defined in this section.
   “BLIGHTED PREMISES.” Any building or structure, or any parcel of land,
including housing and commercial real property, in which at least one of the
following conditions exists:
      (1)   It is determined, by the Town Planner, Building Official. Director
of Health, as defined, or such other official designated by the Mayor as an
Enforcement Officer, that the building, structure or parcel of land is in a
condition that poses a serious threat to the safety, health and general welfare
of the community;
      (2)   It is vacant and attracts illegal activity as documented by Police
Department reports or vacant buildings or structures left unsecured or
unguarded against unauthorized entry;
      (3)   It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or documented
by the Fire Department;
      (4)   It is not being maintained, as evidenced by the existence of one or
more of the following conditions or such conditions as may be discovered in
furtherance of the purposes of this section, as otherwise set forth in federal,
state or local law: missing or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing
walls, roof or floor; seriously damaged or missing siding; fire or water
damage; a structurally-faulty foundation: physical hazards, rodent harborage or
any pest infestation, garbage, trash or abandoned motor vehicles or boats
situated on the premises (unless the premises is a junk yard legally licensed
in the State of Connecticut); overgrown grass, brush, shrubs or weeds of at
least one foot in length; or front yards allowed to deteriorate into unattended
bare, dirt patches or containing litter, poison ivy, ragweed or other noxious
plants, broken glass, crumbling stone or other condition reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance, a dumpster or other refuse container
on a residential construction site unless a construction, improvement or other
project is to commence or has been completed within one month;
      (5)   It is a substantial factor causing serious depreciation of the
property values in the neighborhood;
      (6)   Commercial parking lots left in a state of disrepair or abandoned;
      (7)   Is or continues to be is a state of disrepair or is or is becoming
dilapidated as documented by the Building Official, Director of Health or other
Enforcement Officer, designated by the Mayor.
      (8)   It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference
with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the
building or of other premises within the neighborhood as documented by
neighborhood complaints, or cancellation of insurance on proximate properties.
   “BUILDING.” In addition to the ordinary meanings, includes any watercraft,
trailer, sleeping car, railroad or other structure or vehicle.
   “BUILDING OFFICIAL.” The building official as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., §
29-250.
   “CAPABLE INDIVIDUAL.” A person that can be reasonably expected to perform
maintenance and yard work around a property or premises. This shall include
children above 16 years of age without physical or mental disability as defined
herein.
   “DILAPIDATED” OR “STATE OF DISREPAIR.” A building or structure, or part
thereof, that would not qualify for a certificate of occupancy if applied for,
or which is deemed an unsafe structure as defined by the State Building Code,
and any dwelling or unit which is designated as unfit for human habitation as
defined in the State Building code and/or the Town Code of Ordinances, or is in
a physically deteriorating condition that, left unabated, would cause an unsafe
or unsanitary condition or nuisance to the general public.
   “DIRECTOR OF HEALTH.” The town official, if any or legally designated health
authority of the town or other entity, authorized to administer the provisions
of Chapter 368e (Municipal Health Authorities) or any local Housing Code.
   “DISABLED INDIVIDUAL.” In the case of an owner-occupied residence, an
individual who has a disability meeting the definitions for the mental or
physical disability as defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990, and does not have other household members capable of providing the
necessary maintenance.
   “HOUSING BLIGHT” OR “BLIGHTED COMMERCIAL REAL PROPERTY.” Blighted premises
as defined in this section.
   “LEGAL OCCUPANCY.” Human habitation which is legal by virtue of compliance
with the State Building, State Fire Safety, Local Zoning, Local Housing and all
other pertinent codes, and which habitation must be demonstrated by proof of
occupancy through a bona fide lease agreement, rent receipt or utility
statement.
   “LOW INCOME INDIVIDUAL.” In the case of an owner-occupied residence, an
individual, or where more than one person resides on the premises, a family
unit, that has an income below the highest level of income established by the
State of Connecticut’s Elderly Tax Relief Program. This level is in the upper
limit of step 5 as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(c). It is
immaterial that a person is not elderly with regards to this subchapter,
because the reference to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(c) is only for the
purpose of providing a guideline for this subchapter.
   “NEIGHBORHOOD.” An area of the town comprised of premises or parcels of
land, any part of which is within a contiguous radius of 800 feet of any other
parcel within the town.
   “OWNER.” The owner of record title of a blighted premises; however, for
purposes of conducting enforcement hearings, other persons or agents of the
owner shall be compelled to comply with any notices or requirements to appear.
   “PROPERTY.” Includes all residential and commercial buildings, structures
and parcels of land.
   “TOWN.” The Town of Hamden.
   “UNIT.” Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a
single person or entity for his or its sole use, and is intended to be a single
and distinct space.
   “VACANT.” A period of 60 days or longer during which a building or
structure, or part thereof, or land, is not legally occupied.
   “VACANT PARCEL.” A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.33 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor (Enforcement
Officer) are charged with the enforcement of this subchapter. It shall be the
duty of the Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter
and any rules or regulations promulgated under this subchapter. The Enforcement
Officer may order any owner who violates this subchapter to abate such
violation, and shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue citations for
violations of this subchapter in accordance with §
154.36.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.34 SPECIAL CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   Special consideration shall be given to disabled individuals if they
cannot maintain a reasonable level of upkeep of the owner- occupied residence
because they are disabled and no capable person resides in the residence. In
such cases, the Enforcement Officer shall give such disabled individuals
adequate time to correct the problem.
   (B)   Where the owner of a blighted premises is found to be a low income
individual under this subchapter, the Enforcement Officer shall give special
consideration to that person by providing adequate time to correct the problem.
If the items designated as blighted have to do with lawn, brush, weeds and
shrub maintenance or keeping the grounds free from rubbish and debris, the
Enforcement Officer will not provide additional time to correct the problem.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.35 PROHIBITIONS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Blight violations. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any
owner, tenant, agent, occupant, corporation, business, entity or person in
control of such property to create or maintain a blighted premises.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The town shall serve a written notice to an owner
of a blighted premises of the violation(s) of this subchapter to the owner's
last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice
shall:
      (1)   Direct the removal, remediation, correction or abatement of the
violation within ten calendar days after receipt of written notice;
      (2)   Notify the owner that failure to remove, remediate, correct and/or
abate the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance
with §
154.36;
      (3)   Set forth the fines and penalties imposed; and
      (4)   Specify that, if the owner fails to remove, remediate, correct and/
or abate the violation, the town may cause the removal, remediation, correction
and/or abatement of the violation at the expense of the owner of the blighted
premises on which such violation exists, as further set forth in §
154.37, below.
Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.36 CITATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Service of written citation. The town shall serve a written citation,
notifying the owner of a blighted premises of the violation(s) of this
subchapter, to the owner's last-known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Such citation shall inform the owner of the following:
      (1)   Amount of fine. The allegations against the owner and the amount of
fines;
      (2)   Contesting the penalty. That the owner may contest the issue of
liability before the town's duly appointed citation hearing officer by
delivering, in person or by mail, written notice to the Town Planner and/or
other official designated by the Mayor, within ten calendar days from the date
of the citation(s);
      (3)   Admission of liability. That if the owner does not demand such a
hearing in accordance with this section, the owner shall be deemed to have
admitted liability; and
      (4)   Lien for unpaid blight fines. That the Town shall file a lien
against the real property in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148aa, for
the amount of any unpaid blight fine imposed by the town in accordance with
this subchapter, and that the lien may be enforced in the same manner as tax
liens.
   (B)   Penalty for violations of blighted premises (“blight-related
penalty”). Blight violations as set forth in §
154.35(B) or other applicable provisions, shall be punishable as follows:
      (1)   Occupied blighted premises. A fine of $150 for each day a violation
exists and continues.
      (2)   Unoccupied blighted premises. A fine of $250 for each day a
violation exists and continues.
      (3)   Three or more violations at blighted premises. A fine of $1,000 for
each day that a violation exists and continues if such violation is the third
or more such violation at such property during the prior 12-month period at the
blighted premises.
      (4)   Standard for determination of three or more violations pursuant to
§
154.36 (B)(3). For the sole purpose of determining if a violation is the third
or more such violation at such property during the prior 12-month period,
“VIOLATION” means a violation of this subchapter, for which the town has issued
a notice of violation, and:
         (i)   In the determination of the town, the conditions creating such
violation were previously cured; or
         (ii)   One hundred twenty days have passed from the notice of
violation and the conditions creating the violation have not been cured.
         A third violation may also be established where three or more
conditions constituting such violation exist at a property simultaneously.
(Am. Ord. 74, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.37 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Enforcement Officer or other official designated
by the town is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
blighted premises, pursuant to §
154.35(A), within the town, to remediate, remove, correct and/or abate blighted
conditions that are not conducive to the public health, safety or welfare. Such
notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s last-
known address.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner, following notification to remediate, remove, correct and/or abate blight
violations dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, within ten
calendar days after receipt of written notice provided for in §
154.35(D) and division (A) of this section, or within ten days after the date
of such notice in the event same is returned to the town because of inability
to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last-
known address of the owner, the town may cause the remediation, removal,
correction and/or abatement of the blight at the expense of the owner(s) of the
blighted premises where such condition exists.
   (C)   Immediate action upon noncompliance. The town may take immediate
enforcement action in the case of a violation at a blighted premises that is
the third or more such blight violation at such property during the prior 12-
month period. The town may cause the remediation, removal, correction and/or
abatement of blight at the expense of the owner of the blighted premises.
   (D)   Recovery of expenses. The town may recover any expenses incurred to
remediate, remove, correct and/or abate a blighted condition on such blighted
premises under the provisions of the General Statutes or regulations from the
owner of the real estate for which such expenses were incurred.
   (E)   Lien for expenses incurred to remediate, remove, correct and/or abate
blight. The interest of each owner in such real estate shall be subject to a
lien for the payment of such expenses, which lien shall take precedence over
any other encumbrance except municipal tax assessments on such real estate. No
such lien shall be valid, unless the town, not later than the date 30 days
after the date on which such work has ceased, files a certificate of the lien
and gives notice to the owner of the real estate in the same manner as provided
in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 49-34. Simultaneous with the filing, the municipality
shall make reasonable efforts to mail a copy of the certificate by first class
mail to the lienholdefs current or last-known address.
   (F)   Appeal. Any appeal from any final action taken following this section
may be taken in accordance with §
154.38, below.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
§ 154.38 APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.
   (A)   Appointment of citation hearing officers. The Mayor shall appoint one
or more citation hearing officers, other than police officers, employees, or
persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this
section.
   (B)   Notice regarding uncontested payment of fines, penalties costs or
fees. Within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for the
uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for a citation issued
under this subchapter, for an alleged violation thereof, the town shall send
notice to the owner. The notice shall inform the owner cited:
      (1)   Of the allegations against them and the amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees due;
      (2)   That they may contest their liability before a citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten days of
the date thereof;
      (3)   That if they do not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against them; and
      (4)   That such judgment may issue without further notice. For purposes
of this section, notice shall be presumed to have been properly sent if it was
mailed to the owner's last-known address on file with the Tax Collector.
If the owner to whom such notice is issued is a registrant, the municipality
may deliver such notice in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148ii,
provided nothing in this section shall preclude the town from providing notice
in another manner permitted by applicable law.
   (C)   Admission of liability.
      (1)   Payment of fines. If the owner who or which is sent notice pursuant
to division (B) of this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged
violation, they may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the
fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official
designated by such municipality. The payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of the owner making the
payment.
      (2)   Failure to demand appeal hearing. Any owner who does not deliver or
mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first
notice provided for in division (B) of this section shall be deemed to have
admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify the
owner's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall
thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by
the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in division
(E) of this section.
   (D)   Appeal hearing: notice. Any owner who or which requests a hearing
shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing.
      (1)   Timing of hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than 15 days
nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided the
hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by
any interested party for postponement or continuance.
      (2)   Initial notice of violation deemed a business record. An original
or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing
official or police officer shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall
be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-
180 and evidence of the facts contained therein.
      (3)   Presence of issuing official. The presence of the issuing official
or police officer shall be required at the hearing if so requested by the
owner.
      (4)   Presentation of evidence. An owner wishing to contest their
liability shall appear ar the hearing and may present evidence on their behalf.
A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present
evidence on behalf of the municipality.
      (5)   Failure to appear. If the owner fails to appear, the hearing
officer may enter an assessment by default against the owner upon a finding of
proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The
hearing officer may accept from the owner copies of police reports,
investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail, and
may determine thereby that the appearance of the owner is unnecessary.
      (6)   Conduct of the hearing. The hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as they deem fair
and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be
strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
      (7)   Decision by the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall announce
their decision at the end of the hearing. If they determine that the owner is
not liable, they shall dismiss the matter and enter their determination in
writing accordingly. If they determine that the owner is liable for the
violation, they shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or
fees against the owner as provided by the applicable ordinance of the town.
   (E)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the owner
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days or more than 12 months after
such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of a
superior court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator, together
with an entry fee. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall
constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments
against the same owner may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment.
The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and
court costs, against the owner in favor of the municipality. Notwithstanding
any provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when
so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and
a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to the
owner.
   (F)   An owner against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing
a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-
259, at a superior court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator,
which shall entitle the owner or person to a hearing in accordance with the
rules of the judges of the Superior Court.
(C.G.S. § 7-152c) (Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 741, passed 3-4-24)
TAX RELIEF FOR ELDERLY AND/OR DISABLED HOMEOWNERS
§ 154.45 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to provide optional property
tax relief for certain residents of the town as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat.,
§§ 12-129n (Real Property Tax Relief for Certain Homeowners Age 65 or Over or
Permanently and Totally Disabled), 12-170v (Real Property Tax Relief to Certain
Elderly Homeowners) and 12-170w (Application for Real Property Relief).
(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
§ 154.46 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX BENEFITS.
   The tax benefit shall commence with the taxes due on the Grand List of
October 1, 2013, and thereafter until this subchapter shall be repealed,
amended and/or modified by action of the Legislative Council. All tax benefits
granted under this subchapter shall be subject to the availability of funding
by the Legislative Council.
(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
§ 154.47 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All applicants who apply for and are eligible for tax relief under
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa shall be deemed to have applied for relief under
this subchapter. Consistent with the requirements of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-
170aa, applicants shall file semi-annually for tax credits under this
subchapter, however, tax credits granted under this subchapter shall be
determined and granted on an annual basis according to the funding, if any, of
this program by the Legislative Council.
   (B)   Applicants shall provide the Assessor for the town any such additional
information as may be required by the Assessor to determine eligibility.
(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
§ 154.48 DETERMINATION OF TAX RELIEF AND RELIEF ALLOWED.
   (A)   The Assessor shall review applications and information provided by
applicants seeking tax relief under this subchapter; determine eligibility in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n and/or §§ 12-170v and 12-170w; and
notify the Tax Collector of the amount of tax relief granted, if eligible.
   (B)   The property tax credits provided by this subchapter shall be in
conjunction with property tax relief under Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-129b to 12-
129d, inclusive, and with § 12-170aa and shall not exceed in the aggregate the
total amount of tax which would, except for said §§ 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, and 12-129aa and this subchapter, be laid against the taxpayer. The
property tax relief provided for under this subchapter may in any case where
title to real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his/her
spouse and any other person or persons, be prorated to reflect the fractional
share in the property of such taxpayer or spouse or if such property is a
multi-family dwelling, such relief may be prorated to reflect the fractional
portions of such property occupied by the taxpayer and the persons not
otherwise eligible for tax relief shall not receive any credit.
(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 469, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 489, passed 7-
7-03; Am. Ord. 504, passed 6-1-04; Am. Ord. 535, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 550,
passed 5-29-07; Am. Ord. 561, passed 6-2-08; Am. Ord. 572, passed 5-6-09; Am.
Ord. 583, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 604, passed 4-13-11; Am. Ord. 617, passed 5-
7-12; Am. Ord. 631, passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
§ 154.49 REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FOR CERTAIN HOMEOWNERS AGE 65 OR OVER OR
PERMANENTLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED.
   (A)   Town credit. For the 2020 Grand List Year and thereafter, applicants
who are determined eligible for tax credits under this subchapter and Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 12-129n, shall receive a tax credit toward the payment of their
real property on their principal residence as follows:
 
Town Credit
Income          Benefit
Over    To      Married Unmarried
$0      $18,900 $3,400  $3,400
$18,901 $25,100 $3,400  $3,400
$25,101 $36,900 $2,375  $2,375
$36,901 $48,000 $2,375  $125
 
   (B)   The income limits in the above tables shall be adjusted annually in
the same manner as Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(b)(2).
   (C)   Additional town credit. For the 2015 Grand List Year and thereafter,
with the exception of applicants whose increase is due to a change in
assessment not related to revaluation, applicants who have received the local
town credit set forth in division (A) above for at least one year, and whose
tax bill has increased from the immediately preceding year, shall receive an
additional credit equal to the amount of the increase in taxes but not to
exceed the amounts as follows:
 
Additional Town Credit
Income          Maximum Benefit
Over    To      Married Unmarried
$0      $17,600 $2,250  $2,250
$17,601 $23,600 $2,250  $1,750
$23,601 $35,200 $1,750  $1,750
$35,201 $42,900 $1,750  $0
 
   (D)   The income limits in the above tables shall be adjusted in the same
manner as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(b)(2).
   (E)   Recipients of tax relief under this subchapter shall be required to
pay a minimum of 25% of what his/her tax bill would be without any benefits.
   (F)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Any person who owns real property in the Town of Hamden, or who is
liable for the payment of taxes thereon under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-48, and
who occupies that property as his/her principal residence, shall be eligible
for real property tax relief pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n in the
form of a tax credit provided that all the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Such person is 65 years of age or over at the close of the
calendar year preceding the period in which a claim for relief is filed; or
whose spouse living with him/her is 65 years of age or over at the close of the
calendar year preceding the period in which a claim for relief is filed; or
such person is 60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
qualified in Hamden under this subchapter at the time of his/her death or with
respect to real property on which such applicants or their spouses are liable
for taxes under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-48; or
         (b)   Such person is under age 65 and eligible in accordance with
applicable federal regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits
under Social Security, or has not been engaged in employment covered by Social
Security and accordingly has not qualified for benefits thereunder, but has
become qualified for permanent total disability benefits under any federal,
state, or local government retirement disability plan, including the Railroad
Retirement Act and any government-related teacher’s retirement plan, in which
requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent total disability
benefits are comparable to such requirements under Social Security.
      (2)   Applicants or their spouses under divisions (F)(1)(a) or (b) above
have been taxpayers of the Town of Hamden for one year immediately preceding
their receipt of tax credits under this subchapter and meet the requirements
with respect to maximum income allowance during the calendar year preceding the
year in which the application is made for the tax credit provided in this
subchapter; and
      (3)   Applicants own and occupy the real property in the town for which
this tax credit is claimed as their principal residence. Principal residence
shall be defined as residency of at least six months and one day in each Grand
List year for which the exemption is claimed; and
      (4)   Applicant’s qualifying income does not exceed the requirements as
set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa.
      (5)   Applicants have applied for and are eligible for tax relief under
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa.
      (6)   If any person with respect to whom a claim for property tax relief
in accordance with this subchapter has been approved for any assessment year
transfers, assigns, grants or otherwise conveys on or after the first day of
October but prior to the first day of August in such assessment year the
interest in real property to which such claim for tax relief is related,
regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance is
voluntary or involuntary, the amount of such tax credit shall be a pro rata
portion of the amount otherwise applicable in such assessment year to be
determined by a fraction the numerator of which shall be the number of full
months from the first day of October in such assessment year to the date of
such conveyance and the denominator of which shall be 12. If such conveyance
occurs in the month of October the grantor shall be disqualified for tax credit
in such assessment year.
      (7)   The grantee shall be required within a period not exceeding ten
days immediately following the date of such conveyance to notify the Assessor
thereof, or in the absence of such notice, upon determination by the Assessor
that such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance has occurred, the Assessor
shall determine the amount of tax reduction to which the grantor is entitled
for such assessment year with respect to the interest in real property conveyed
and notify the tax collector of the reduced amount of the tax reduction
applicable to such interest. Upon receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the
tax collector shall, if such notice is received after the tax due date in the
municipality, within ten days thereafter mail or hand a bill to the grantee
stating the additional amount of tax due as determined by the Assessor. Such
tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other property taxes and
subject to the same liens and processes of collection, provided such tax shall
be due and payable in an initial or single installment not sooner than 30 days
after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the grantee and in equal amount
in any remaining, regular installments as the same are due and payable.
(Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 658, passed 6-15-15; Am. Ord. 674, passed
6-6-16; Am. Ord. 688, passed 6-12-17; Am. Ord. 703, passed 6-4-18; Am. Ord.
711, passed 5-6-19; Am. Ord. 716, passed 5-18-20; Am. Ord. 721, passed 6-14-21)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n
§ 154.50 REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF TO CERTAIN ELDERLY HOMEOWNERS; APPLICATIONS
FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF.
   (A)   Local freeze. For the 2013 Grand List Year only, applicants who are
determined eligible under this subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170v,
received the additional town credit on the 2012 Grant List, and whose taxes
would fall below 25% of what the tax bill would otherwise be without any
benefits, shall be entitled to pay the tax levied on such property, calculated
in accordance with the provisions of division (B) of this section for the first
year the claim for such tax relief is filed and approved in accordance with the
provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-170v and 12-170w, and such person shall
be entitled to continue to pay the amount of tax or such lesser amount as may
be levied in any year, during each subsequent year that such person meets such
qualifications, and the surviving spouse of such owner or tenant, qualified in
accordance with the requirements pertaining to a surviving spouse in this
division, or any owner or tenant possessing a joint interest in such property
with such owner at the time of such owner’s death and qualified at such time in
accordance with the requirements in this subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-
170v, shall be entitled to continue to pay the amount of such tax or such
lesser amount as may be levied in any year, as it becomes due each year
following the death of such owner for as long as such surviving spouse or joint
owner or joint tenant is qualified in accordance with the requirements in this
subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170v.
      (1)   After the first year a claim for relief is filed and approved,
application for such tax relief shall be filed biennially on a form prepared
for such purpose by the Assessor of the town. Any such owner or tenant who is
qualified in accordance with this subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170v,
and any such surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant surviving upon the
death of such owner or tenant, shall be entitled to pay such tax in the amount
as provided in this section for so long as such owner or tenant or such
surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant continues to be so qualified.
      (2)   To qualify for the tax relief provided in this section, a taxpayer
shall meet all of the following requirements:
         (a)   On December 31 of the calendar preceding the year in which a
claim is filed, be (A) 70 years of age or over, (B) the spouse of a person 70
years of age or over, provided the spouse is domiciled with such person, or (C)
62 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who at the time
of such taxpayer’s death had qualified and was entitled to tax relief under
this section, provided such surviving spouse was domiciled with such taxpayer
and the time of the taxpayer’s death;
         (b)   Occupy such real property as his/her home;
         (c)   Either spouse shall have resided within the State of Connecticut
for at least one year before filing the claim under this section and Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-170w; and
         (d)   Otherwise meet the qualifications under Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-
170v and 12-170w.
   (B)   The tax on the real property for which the benefits under this section
are claimed shall be the lower of: The tax due with respect to the homeowner’s
residence for the assessment year commencing October first of the year
immediately preceding the year in which the initial claim for tax relief is
made, or the tax due for any subsequent assessment year. If title to real
property is recorded in the name of the person or the spouse making a claim and
qualifying under this section and any other person or persons, the claimant
hereunder shall be entitled to pay the claimant’s fractional share of the tax
on such property calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section,
and such other person or persons shall pay the person’s or persons’ fractional
share of the tax without regard for the provisions of this section. For the
purposes of this section, a “MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME”, as defined in Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 12-63a, shall be deemed to be real property.
(Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-170v and 12-170w
§ 154.51 NO CONFLICT WITH STATE STATUTE.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute,
rule or regulation.
(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)
TAX ABATEMENT FOR CERTAIN OCCUPANTS
§ 154.60 RESIDENCE'S EXCEEDING 8% OF OCCUPANT'S INCOME.
   (A)   Property taxes due for any tax year with respect to any residential
dwelling occupied by the owner or owners and for whom the dwelling is the
primary place of residence, may be abated to the extent that such property
taxes exceed 8% or more of the total income from any source, adjusted for self-
employed persons to reflect the allowance for expenses in determining adjusted
gross income for federal income tax purposes, of such owner or owners and any
other person for whom such dwelling is the primary place of residence, for the
calendar year immediately preceding the beginning of the tax year for which
such taxes are due; and
   (B)   Applications for such abatement shall be made not later than 30 days
preceding the tax due date for such tax year, provided if the amount of such
taxes has not been determined on such date, within ten days following
determination of the amount of such taxes.
   (C)   If the town approves such application for abatement, then not later
than ten days following the tax due date for such taxes abated, the owner or
owners shall deliver to the tax collector, an agreement, on a form executed and
acknowledged in the form and manner required for the transfer of an interest in
real property, to reimburse the town in the amount of the taxes abated, with
interest at 6% annum (or such other rate as approved by the Council) that
contains a legal description of the real property with respect to which such
abatement is approved and shall be recorded in the lands records of the town.
   (D)   Such agreement shall constitute a lien on such real property, which
shall remain valid until paid. Such lien shall be due and payable in full upon
sale or transfer of such real property or upon the death of the owner, or if
owned by more than one person at the time such lien is created, upon the death
of the last of such owners surviving. Such lien shall be released by the tax
collector in the town when the taxes are secured thereby and have been paid. No
lien recorded under the provision of this subchapter shall take precedence over
any mortgage recorded in the land records prior to such certificate of lien.
   (E)   Approval of any request for abatement pursuant to this subchapter
shall be at the town's sole discretion and shall automatically cease upon
transfer or sale of the property or the death of the owner(s).
(Ord. 549, passed 5-7-07)
HISTORIC PROPERTIES
§ 154.65 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to designate an historic property, provide
for the creation of an History Property Commission and terminate the Historic
Property Study Commission.
(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)
§ 154.66 HISTORIC PROPERTY.
   Each property listed in Schedule A below is hereby established as an
historic property. The boundaries of each property are fixed and defined in
Schedule A.
 
SCHEDULE A: HISTORIC PROPERTY
PROPERTY                  BOUNDARIES
                          South by Dixwell Avenue, 50 ft.; east by land of the
                          Episcopal Church Society and the land of the Town of
Hamden Memorial Town Hall Hamden; north by land formerly of John H. Rochford,
                          53 feet; and west by land now or formerly belonging
                          to Amadio Mantovani. The east and west lines being
                          215 feet each, more or less.
 
(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)
§ 154.67 HISTORIC PROPERTIES COMMISSION.
   (A)   An Historic Properties Commission is hereby established to promote the
purposes set forth in this subchapter and to perform all functions provided in
this subchapter and as shall from time to time be prescribed under the
Connecticut General Statutes relative to the property now or hereafter
designated in §
154.66.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five regular and three alternate
members who shall consist of electors of the town, holding no salaried
municipal office in Hamden. The members of the Commission shall be appointed
and may be removed by the Mayor. The regular members shall be appointed in such
a manner that the term of at least one member shall expire each year, with
their successors to be appointed in like manner for terms of five years.
Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of three years. The Mayor is
further empowered to make appointments to fill vacancies, which appointments
shall be for the duration of the vacated unexpired term.
   (C)   Within a period of 30 days after the appointment of the original
members of the Commission, the regular members shall meet and elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. Alternate members shall not participate in
the vote for election of officers of the Commission. In all other matters, in
case of an inability to act because of absence, sickness or self-interest on
the part of any member of the Commission, an alternate member shall take the
Commissioner's place designated by the Chairperson.
   (D)   All members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)
§ 154.68 POWERS OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Commission shall have such powers, shall perform such functions
and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to time be
prescribed by the applicable Connecticut General Statutes.
   (B)   The Commission may from time to time, in accordance with Conn. Gen.
Sta., § 7-147q, initiate the designation of additional historic properties or
the enlargement of the boundaries of an existing historic property.
   (C)   The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with
the provisions of the state statutes, and may, subject to appropriation, employ
clerical and technical assistance or consultants and may accept gifts of money
and expend the same for such purposes.
(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)
§ 154.69 TERMINATION OF HISTORIC STUDY COMMITTEE.
   The Historic Study Committee(s) shall be terminated as of September 27,
2002.
(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
154.02 to
154.04, inclusive, or
154.06 shall be fined not more than $200 for each structure erected or
violation committed. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
154.10 through
154.17 shall be fined $100. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)
   (C)   (1)   Violations of the provisions of §§ 154.130 through 154.138 shall
be punishable by a fine of $100 for each day a violation exists and continues.
      (2)   Any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to §§ 154.130 through 154.138
shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the fine was imposed
from the date of such fine in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148aa. Each
such lien shall be continued, recorded and released as provided for in Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 7-148aa.
(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)
CHAPTER 155: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Findings
   
155.02   Purpose
Administration
   
155.03   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
155.04   Duties of Planning and Zoning Commission
   
155.05   Zoning Board of Appeals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 FINDINGS.
   The Special Flood Hazard Areas of the town, as identified on the federal
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the
cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which
increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-4-79; Am. Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)
§ 155.02 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to do the following.
   (A)   Protect human life and health.
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so to minimize future flood blight
areas.
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard.
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their action.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-4-79; Am. Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.03 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by approving and applying flood regulations as mandated
by FEMA, within the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)
§ 155.04 DUTIES OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall include, but not be
limited to the following.
   (A)   Permit review.
      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      (2)   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
      (3)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of
special flood hazard.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, "ADVERSELY AFFECTS" means that the
cumulative effects of proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development increases the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point.
   (B)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with the Flood Insurance Study, the planning and
zoning commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in
order to administer the requirements of residential and non-residential
construction standards.
   (C)   Information to be obtained and maintained.
      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures.
      (2)   For all new or substantially improved structures, verify and record
the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level).
      (3)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Alteration of watercourses.
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and department of environmental
protection, State of Connecticut, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of the notification to FEMA.
      (2)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   (E)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual filed conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in § 155.05.
(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)
§ 155.05 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the town shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances of the flood regulations contained in the
zoning regulations. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the enforcement or
administration of the flood regulations contained in the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)
CHAPTER 156: PENALTIES FOR ZONING VIOLATIONS
Section
   
156.01   Procedure of issuance of citations
   
156.02   Compliance periods after citation is issued
   
156.03   Payment of fines
   
156.04   Hearing procedure for a citation
   
156.05   Miscellaneous provisions
§ 156.01 PROCEDURE OF ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
   (A)   The zoning enforcement officer, or his or her agent, shall provide
written notice to any person who violates any provision of any section of the
town's zoning regulations. Such written notice shall explain the nature of the
violation and the steps required for compliance, and shall allow a 72-hour
period within which to correct the violation or within which a written plan for
correction shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer setting forth a
reasonable time period for correction of the violation as agreed upon by the
zoning enforcement officer. A written notice issued by the zoning enforcement
officer pursuant to this division (A) shall be served:
      (1)   By hand delivery, at which time the 72-hour period shall begin; or
      (2)   By certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular first-
class mail. Three business days shall be allowed for mail delivery of the
notice prior to the commencement of the 72-hour period.
   (B)   Within 48 hours after the period for correction established in
division (A) expires, the zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent shall
re-inspect the subject property to determine compliance.
   (C)   If the violations set forth in the written notice have not been
corrected at the time of re-inspection, the zoning enforcement officer or his
or her agent may issue a citation and fine for each violation. All citations
issued by the zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent shall state the
violation for which the citation is being issued, the fine imposed for the
violation, the time period within which the fine must be paid, and an address
for remittance of the fine. The fine for each violation shall be $150 for each
day that such violation continues. Citations shall be issued by the zoning
enforcement officer or his or her agent by hand, or by delivery to the abode or
residence of the person in violation.
(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)
§ 156.02 COMPLIANCE PERIODS AFTER CITATION IS ISSUED.
   Upon the issuance of a citation by the zoning enforcement officer or his or
her agent, the time period for correction of the violation cited in such
citation shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   For violations that involve the illegal use of a property by a non-
structural object such as a sign, vehicle, junk and the like, compliance with
the regulations shall be within 48 hours of issuance of the citation.
   (B)   For violations that involve the illegal use of a property by the
conduct of an activity, which is not permitted, compliance with the regulations
shall be within 48 hours of issuance of the citation.
   (C)   For violations that involve the illegal placement of a structure, all
work on the structure shall immediately cease. Further, all violations not
included in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be brought in
compliance with the zoning regulations within 48 hours of the issuance of the
citation, or within such other time period as designated in writing by the
zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent.
   (D)   Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not
corrected within the time period allowed in this section, shall be a new
violation of the zoning regulations, and every 24-hour period thereafter in
which the violation is not corrected shall constitute a new violation. For
repeated violations of the same section of the zoning regulations by the same
person, the zoning enforcement officer shall not be required to provide the
violator with another written notice or correction period, and may immediately
issue the citations and fines permitted by this chapter.
   (E)   The zoning enforcement officer shall not be responsible for a daily
re-inspection; rather the person to whom the citation has been issued shall be
responsible for reporting subsequent compliance to the zoning enforcement
officer or his or her agent. The zoning enforcement officer, or his or her
agent, shall re-inspect to confirm compliance within 24 hours of such report.
(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)
§ 156.03 PAYMENT OF FINES.
   (A)   All fines imposed under this chapter shall be made payable to the
Treasurer of the town and shall be received by the zoning enforcement officer
or his or her agent within ten business days from receipt of the citation. All
fines collected by the zoning enforcement officer shall be directed to the Town
Treasurer.
   (B)   No zoning permit shall be approved by the Planning Department until
the applicant provides the Planning Department with a statement, in writing,
that there are no delinquent fines or fees due for the property for which an
application is made or provides a statement in writing, from the Town Planner
or his or her agent that the owner of the property for which an application is
made has entered into a payment program approved by the Finance Director to pay
off any delinquent fines or penalties.
   (C)   The Town Planner may authorize the issuance of a zoning permit without
the satisfaction of the above if he or she certifies in writing, as part of the
file, that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the occupants
of the building upon which property the zoning application is sought.
(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 542, passed 9-5-06)
§ 156.04 HEARING PROCEDURE FOR A CITATION.
   (A)   Appointment of citation hearing officer. The Mayor, acting within his
or her capacity of chief executive officer, shall appoint one or more citation
hearing officers, other than police officers or employees or persons who issue
citations, to conduct the hearing authorized by this section. Further, no
zoning enforcement officer, building inspector or employee of the municipal
body exercising zoning authority may be appointed to be a hearing officer for
citations issued for zoning violations.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final
period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any
citation issued under this ordinance adopted pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 8-
12a, as amended, for an alleged violation thereof, an official of the town
shall send notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform the person
cited:
         (a)   Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the
fines, penalties, costs or fees due;
         (b)   That he or she may contest his or her liability before a
citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice
within ten days of the date thereof;
         (c)   That if he or she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment
and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and
         (d)   That such judgment may issue without further notice.
      (2)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division (A) of this
section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the
town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal,
to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any
person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten
days of the date of the first notice provided for in division (A) of this
section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated
municipal official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the
hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines
provided for within this article and shall follow the procedures set forth in
division (B)(4) of this section.
      (3)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice of
hearing, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. An
original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the
issuing official or police officer shall be filed and retained by the
municipality, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or police officer shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his or her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his or her
behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to appear,
the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him or her upon
a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes,
ordinances or zoning regulations. The hearing officer may accept from such
person copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other
official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of
such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof, as he or she deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be
strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The hearing officer shall announce his or her decision at the end of the
hearing. If he or she determines that the person is not liable, he or she shall
dismiss the matter and enter his or her determination in writing accordingly.
If he or she determines that the person is liable for the violation, he or she
shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against
such person as provided by the applicable town ordinances.
      (4)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12
months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with
the clerk of the superior court for the geographical area in which the town is
located together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of the notice of
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12-month
period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person in favor of the
municipality. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment,
shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.
      (5)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall
be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by
filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount
equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §
52-259, in the superior court for the geographical area in which the town is
located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the
rules of the judges of the superior court.
(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)
§ 156.05 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The penalties established by this chapter shall not be exclusive of
any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by the zoning enforcement
officer or his or her agent for violations of the town's zoning regulations, as
authorized by any state statute, town ordinance, or the town's zoning
regulations.
   (B)   In construing this chapter, feminine or neuter pronouns shall be
substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.
(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 627, passed 12-3-12)
CHAPTER 157: MUNICIPAL FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF
INLAND WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE REGULATIONS
Section
   
157.01   Procedure for issuance of citations
   
157.02   Compliance periods after citation is issued
   
157.03   Payment of fines
   
157.04   Hearing procedure for a citation
   
157.05   Miscellaneous
§ 157.01 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
   (A)   The wetlands enforcement officer, or his/her agent, shall provide
written notice to any person who violates any provision of any section of the
Hamden Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations. Such written notice shall
explain the nature of the violation and the steps required for compliance, and
shall allow a period of time as set forth in the regulations to remedy the
violation or within which a written plan for remediation shall be submitted to
the Inland Wetlands Commission setting forth a reasonable time period for
remediation of the violation as agreed upon by the Inland Wetlands Commission .
A written notice issued by the wetlands enforcement officer pursuant to this
division shall be served:
      (1)   By hand delivery; or
      (2)   By certified mail return receipt requested and by regular first-
class mail. Three business days shall be allowed for mail delivery of the
notice to be considered received.
   (B)   Within 48 hours after the period for remediation established in
division (A) of this section expires, the wetlands enforcement officer or his/
her agent shall re-inspect the subject property to determine compliance.
   (C)   If the violations set forth in the written notice have not been
corrected at the time of re-inspection, the wetlands enforcement officer or
his/her agent may issue a citation and fine for each violation. All citations
issued by the wetlands enforcement officer or his/her agent shall state the
violation for which the citation is being issued, the fine imposed for the
violation, the time period within which the fine must be paid, and an address
for remittance of the fine. The fine for each violation shall be $150 for each
offense. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense, and in the case of
continuing violations each day's continuance of the offense is a separate and
distinct offense. Citations shall be issued by the wetlands enforcement officer
or his or her agent by hand, or by mail delivery to the abode or residence of
the person in violation.
(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)
§ 157.02 COMPLIANCE PERIODS AFTER CITATION IS ISSUED.
   (A)   Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not
corrected within the time period allowed shall be a new violation of the
wetlands regulations, and every 24-hour period thereafter in which the
violation is not corrected shall constitute a new violation. For repeated
violations of the same section of the inland wetlands and watercourse
regulations, the wetlands enforcement officer shall not be required to provide
the violator with another written notice or correction period, and may
immediately issue the citations and fines permitted by this chapter.
   (B)   The wetlands enforcement officer shall not be responsible for a daily
re-inspection; rather the person to whom the citation has been issued shall be
responsible for reporting subsequent compliance to the wetlands enforcement
officer or his/her agent. The wetlands enforcement officer, or his/her agent,
shall re-inspect to confirm compliance within 24 hours of such report.
(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)
§ 157.03 PAYMENT OF FINES.
   All fines imposed under this chapter shall be made payable to the Treasurer,
Town of Hamden and shall be received by the inland wetlands enforcement officer
or his/her agent within ten business days from receipt of the citation. All
fines collected by the wetlands enforcement officer shall be directed to the
Town Treasurer.
   (B)   No permit to conduct regulated activity shall be issued by the
Planning Department of the Town of Hamden until the applicant provides the
Planning Department with a statement, in writing, that there are no delinquent
fines or fees due for the property for which an application is made or provides
a statement in writing, from the Town Planner or his/her agent that the owner
of the property for which an application is made has entered into a payment
program approved by the Finance Director to pay off any delinquent fines or
penalties.
(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)
§ 157.04 HEARING PROCEDURE FOR A CITATION.
   The provisions for a hearing under this chapter shall be in accordance with
Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 7-152c, as may be amended.
(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)
§ 157.05 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   The penalties established by this chapter shall not be exclusive of
any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by the wetlands enforcement
officer or his/her agent for violations of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse
Regulations, as authorized by any state statute, town ordinance, or the Hamden
Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations.
   (B)   In construing this chapter, feminine or neuter pronouns shall be
substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.
(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)
CHAPTER 158: WAIVER OF PENALTY FOR NOT DISCLOSING THE ACTUAL RENTAL
AND RENTAL RELATED INCOME AND OPERATING EXPENSES
IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONN. GEN. STAT., § 12-63c(d)
Section
   
158.01   Waiver of penalty
§ 158.01 WAIVER OF PENALTY.
   In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-63c(d) as may be amended, the
Assessor or Board of Assessment Appeals shall waive the ten percent penalty
imposed if the owner of the real property required to submit actual rental and
rental related income and operating expenses in accordance with Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-63c, as may be amended, is not the owner of such property on the
assessment date for the Grand List to which such penalty is added upon receipt
by the Assessor or Board of Assessment Appeals of such information verifying
that it was not the owner on the assessment date to which such penalty shall be
applied.
(Ord. 687, passed 5-1-17)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Tables
      
A.   ANNEXATIONS
      
B.   SCENIC ROADS
Table A: Annexations
Ord. No. Description
Ord. No.         Description
'66 Code, § 78-1Setting off a part of the town to City of New Haven. L.D.
'66 Code, § 78-3Annexing a part of North Haven to Hamden. L.D.
'66 Code, § 78-5Annexing a part of North Haven to Hamden.
'66 Code, § 78-6Changing line adjacent to Wintergreen Ave. changed.
'66 Code, § 78-7Changing line a:Long Wooding St. changed.
'66 Code, § 78-8Changing line extended easterly.
 
TABLE B: SCENIC ROADS
 
Ord. No. Description
         Designating a portion of Hogan Road, beginning at a point 1438 feet
253      from the southerly side of Mount Carmel Avenue at the intersection of
         Hogan Road and Mount Carmel Avenue, as a scenic road.
256      Designating Spruce Bank Road as a scenic road.
357      Designating Brookside Drive from Sante Fe Avenue north to Glen Parkway
         as a scenic road.
358      Designating Hillfield Road from Johnson Road to West Todd Street as a
         scenic road.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Connecticut General Statutes
References to 1966 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES
CONN. GEN. STAT. CODE SEC.
CONN. GEN. STAT.          CODE SEC.
1-82a                     Charter 7-2
1-200(2)                  Charter 1-4,
                          7-1
1-200(6)                  Charter 7-1
1-218                     106.01
1-225                     Charter 4-3
4-124i - 4-124p           32.21
4-124o                    32.22
4-176e – 4-181a         124.04
Title 7, Chapter 92       Charter 6-1
7-16                      Charter 6-1
7-16a                     Charter 6-1
7-17                      Charter 6-1
7-18                      Charter 6-1
7-19                      Charter 6-1
7-20                      Charter 6-1
7-21                      Charter 6-1
7-22                      Charter 3-10,
                          6-1
7-22a                     Charter 6-1
7-23                      Charter 6-1
7-24                      Charter 6-1
7-25                      Charter 6-1
7-25a                     Charter 6-1
7-26                      Charter 6-1
7-26a                     Charter 6-1
7-27                      Charter 6-1
7-27a                     Charter 6-1
7-27b                     Charter 6-1
7-28                      Charter 6-1
7-29                      Charter 6-1
7-30                      Charter 6-1
7-31                      Charter 6-1
7-32                      Charter 6-1
7-32a - 7-32j             Charter 6-1
7-32k                     Charter 6-1
7-33                      Charter 6-1
7-33a                     Charter 6-1
7-34                      Charter 6-1
7-34a                     Charter 6-1
7-34b                     Charter 6-1
7-35                      Charter 6-1
7-35a                     Charter 6-1
7-35b - 7-35z             Charter 6-1
7-37                      Charter 6-1
7-131a                    33.25
7-136                     33.38
7-147j                    150A.07
7-147q                    154.68
7-147y                    150A.07
7-148                     12.02,
                          128.02
7-148aa                   154.36,
                          154.99
7-148(b) - 7-148(f)       33.70
7-148b - 7-148f           33.71,
                          33.74
7-148(c)(2)(D)            Charter 5-4
7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv)        154.30
7-148d(b)                 33.83
7-148e                    33.86
7-148f                    33.74
7-148h                    Charter 7-2
7-148h(a)                 Charter 7-2
7-148h(b)                 Charter 3-9
7-148ii                   154.38
7-148v                    Charter 8-4
7-148w                    Charter 8-4
7-149a                    98.02
                          94.20,
                          94.42,
                          101.07,
7-152c                    100.08,
                          154.17,
                          154.38,
                          157.04
7-163a                    96.31
7-171 - 7-186             121.01
7-169                     121.01
7-171                     121.01
7-186                     121.01
                          Charter Preamble,
7-191b                    10-5,
                          10-6,
                          10-7
7-193(a)(1)(c)            Charter 1-4,
                          4-1
7-193(a)(2)(c)            Charter 1-4
                          Charter 4-1,
7-193(b)                  7-1,
                          7-2
7-246 - 7-269a            51.75,
                          51.76
7-255                     51.55
7-274 - 7-280             Charter 7-2
7-276                     Charter 7-2
7-278                     Charter 8-5
7-302                     Charter 8-5
7-324                     Charter 7-2
7-408                     Charter 7-2
7-410                     Charter 7-2
7-421                     Charter 4-1
7-421a                    Charter 4-1
7-421b                    Charter 4-1
7-422                     Charter 7-2
7-450(a)                  31.50
8-5                       Charter 7-2
8-5(a)                    Charter 7-2
8-6                       Charter 7-2
8-12a                     156.04
8-19a                     33.61
8-23                      151.03
8-25                      151.01
8-28                      98.03
8-31A - 8-37A             32.02
9-1                       Charter 1-4
9-12                      Charter 3-5
9-164                     Charter 3-5
9-167a                    Charter 7-1
9-167A                    32.03
9-169f                    Charter 3-7
9-189a                    Charter 3-3,
                          6-2
9-190                     Charter 6-2
9-190a                    Charter 3-3
9-192                     Charter 3-5
9-210                     Charter 4-1
9-251                     Charter 3-3
9-253                     Charter 3-3
9-271                     Charter 10-11
9-369                     Charter 10-11
9-369b                    Charter 10-11
9-369d                    Charter 10-11
9-372                     Charter 1-4,
                          7-1 
9-372(5) and (6)          Charter 3-5
9-437                     Charter 3-3
9-453                     Charter 3-3
11-30                     Charter 7-2
11-32                     Charter 7-2
11-36                     Charter 7-2
12-40a                    Charter 8-4
12-48                     154.49
12-63a                    154.50
12-63c                    158.01
12-63c(d)                 Ch. 158,
                          158.01
                          123.02,
12-64                     123.08,
                          123.10
12-65b                    123.07,
                          123.08
12-65e                    123.09
12-65g                    123.07
12-65h                    123.07,
                          123.10
12-81                     36.48 -
                          36.50
12-81(17), (18)           36.47
12-81(19)                 36.48
12-81(20)                 36.48
12-81(20), (21)           36.46
12-81(22)                 36.48
12-81(55)                 36.45
12-81(56)                 36.51
12-81(57)                 36.51
12-81(63)                 36.51
12-81(72)                 123.02,
                          123.10
12-81c                    36.49
12-81i                    36.45
12-81j                    36.47
12-81l                    36.45,
                          36.48
12-93                     120.03
12-129b - 12-129d         154.48
                          154.45,
12-129n                   154.48,
                          154.49
12-129aa                  154.48
12-130a                   Charter 8-4
12-144c                   36.52
                          154.45,
12-170v                   154.48,
                          154.50
                          154.45,
12-170w                   154.48,
                          154.50
12-170aa                  154.47 -
                          154.49
12-170aa(b)(2)            154.49
12-170aa(c)               154.32
13a-149                   96.31
14-1                      111.15
14-164A                   112.05
14-297                    Charter 7-2
16-1                      36.51
16-1(27)                  36.51
16-1(27)(a)               36.51
16-234                    53.06
19a-131a                  Charter 5-4
19a-1312a                 Charter 5-4
19a-206((b),(c)           122.05
21-3                      113.03
21-28                     120.99
21-29                     120.99
21-36                     117.08
21-37                     117.02,
                          117.08
21-38                     117.99
                          33.74,
21-80a                    33.83,
                          33.86
22a-36 - 22a-45           Charter 7-2
22a-42                    Charter 7-2
22a-114 et seq.           94.21
22a-133w                  123.11
22a-133x                  123.11
22a-133y                  123.11
22a-134                   123.11
22a-226d                  12.02
22a-226d(a)               94.11
22a-241(b)                52.03
22a-248(4)                94.10
22a-248(6)                94.10
22a-248(9)                94.10
22a-248(12)               94.10
22a-248(17)               94.10
22a-250                   94.11
22a-250(b)                94.11
22a-260(7)                94.36
22a-354                   33.67
22a-354p                  33.67
22a-354v                  33.67
22a-452c                  123.11
23-58 - 23-60             53.04
23-59                     53.09
23-65(a)                  94.14,
                          94.22
23-65(c)                  94.14,
                          94.22
23-65(d)                  94.14
23-65(e)                  94.14
25-84 - 25.98             33.152
27-103                    117.08,
                          120.03
27-135                    33.127,
                          33.128
28-9                      Charter 5-4
29-129 - 29-143           112.05
29-250                    154.32
29-251b                   Charter 8-7
29-260                    Charter 8-7
29-261                    Charter 8-7
29-262                    Charter 8-7
29-266                    Charter 7-2
29-266(a)                 Charter 7-2
29-292(a)(1)              93.33
29-297                    Charter 7-2,
                          8-5
30-1                      111.01,
                          111.15
30-15                     111.01
30-20                     111.01
30-39                     111.10
30-90a                    111.08
33-421(K)                 120.02
42-110b                   128.06
                          128.02,
47a-6a                    128.06,
                          128.07
47a-6a(a)                 128.04
47a-6b                    128.02,
                          128.07
                          33.71,
                          33.74,
47a-20                    33.78,
                          33.83,
                          33.86
                          33.71,
47a-23c                   33.74,
                          33.78
49-34                     154.37
50-9                      36.40
50-10 - 50-14             36.40
                          12.02,
                          94.20,
                          96.32,
52-180                    100.08,
                          154.17,
                          154.38,
                          156.04
                          12.02,
                          94.20,
                          96.32,
52-259                    100.08,
                          128.07,
                          154.17,
                          154.38,
                          156.04
Ch. 54                    36.51
Ch. 99                    Charter Preamble
Ch. 100                   33.12
Ch. 100 § 7-204          33.13
Ch. 103 § 7-246          51.01
Ch. 103a                  36.25 -
                          36.27
Ch. 477 §§ 25-84 - 25-9433.22
Ch. 530 §§ 29-96 - 29-1093.01
Ch. 563                   110.04,
                          110.05
Ch. 750 § 43-6           35.05
Title 8 § 8-27           154.01
Title 8 Ch. 126           151.14
                          
 
REFERENCES TO 1966 CODE
1966 CODE SECTION 1977 CODE SECTION
1966 CODE SECTION 1977 CODE SECTION
4-1               91.10
4-2               91.11
4-3               91.12,
                  91.99
4-10              91.99
6-1               111.07
6-2               111.02
6-3               111.01
6-5               111.03
6-6               111.04
6-7               111.05
6-9               111.06
7-1               112.01
7-2               112.02
7-3               112.05
7-4               112.06
7-5               112.07
7-6               112.04
7-7               112.03
7-8               112.99
7-9               112.08
8-1               90.01
8-2               90.02
8-3               90.03
8-4               90.04
8-5               90.05,
                  90.99
10-1              113.01
10-2              113.02
10-3              113.03
10-4              113.05
10-5              113.99
10-6              113.06
16-1              92.01
16-2              92.02,
                  92.99
16-3              92.03
19-1              33.35
19-2              33.36
19-3              33.37
19-4              33.38
19-5              33.39
22-1              97.01
22-2              97.02
22-3              97.03
22-4              97.04
22-5              97.05
22-6              97.06
22-7              97.07
22-8              97.08
22-12             97.09
22-13             97.10,
                  97.99
25-1              93.01
25-2              93.02
25-3              93.03
25-4              93.04
25-5              93.05
25-6              93.06,
                  93.99
30-1              94.01
30-2              94.02,
                  94.99
30-3              94.05,
                  94.99
33-1              114.01,
                  114.02
33-2              114.03
33-3              114.04,
                  114.99
34-1              35.10
38-1              36.40
40-1              116.01
                  116.02,
40-2              116.10,
                  116.99
40-3              116.06
40-4              116.07
40-5              116.08
40-6              116.10,
                  116.99
40-7              116.05
40-9              116.09
40-10             116.10,
                  116.99
40-11             116.05
43-1              93.10
43-2              93.11
43-3              93.12
43-4              93.13
43-5              93.14
43-6              93.16,
                  93.99
43-7              93.15
45-1              33.10
45-2              33.11
45-3              33.12
45-5              33.13
45-6              33.14
45-7              33.15, 33.99
46-1              95.01,
                  95.02
46-2              95.03
46-3              95.04,
                  95.99
48-1              117.01
48-2              117.02
48-3              117.03
48-4              117.04
48-5              117.05,
                  117.99
50-1              35.01
50-2              35.02
50-3              35.03
52-1              32.01
52-2              32.02
52-3              32.03
52-4              32.04
54-1              35.05
56-1              70.15
56-2              70.16
56-3              70.17,
                  70.99
57-1              50.01
57-2              50.02
57-3              50.03
57-4              50.04
57-5              50.05
57-6              50.06
57-7              50.07
57-9              50.08,
                  50.99
57-11             50.10
57-12             50.11
57-13             50.12
57-14             50.13
57-15             50.14
57-16             50.15
57-17             50.16
57-18             50.17
57-19             50.18
57-20             50.19
57-21             50.20
57-22             50.21
59-9              96.10
59-10             96.11
59-11             96.12
59-12             96.13
59-13             96.14
59-14             96.15
59-15             96.16
59-16             96.17
59-17             96.18
59-18             96.19
59-25             96.35
59-26             96.36,
                  96.99
60-1              93.20
60-2              93.21
60-3              93.22
60-4              93.23
60-5              93.24
60-6              93.25,
                  93.99
62-1              118.01
62-2              118.02,
                  118.99
63-1              151.01
63-2              151.02
63-3              151.03
63-4              151.04
63-5              151.05
63-6              151.06
63-8              151.08
63-9              151.09
63-10             151.14,
                  151.99
63-13             151.10
63-14             151.11
63-15             151.12
63-16             151.13
65-1              70.20,
                  70.21
70-1              97.15
70-2              97.16
70-3              97.17
70-4              97.18
70-5              97.19
70-6              97.20
70-7              97.21,
                  97.99
77-1              36.01
77-2              36.02
77-3              36.03
81-1              11.01
81-2              11.02
85-1              36.35
90-9              33.63
90-10             33.64
App. V    § 1 31.15
      2     31.16
      3     31.17
      4     31.18
App. VII    § 154.20
      2     154.21
      3     154.22
App. VIII    §153.01
      2     153.05,
                  153.07
      3     153.02
      4     153.03,
                  153.07
      5     153.06
      6     153.04
      7     153.08,
                  153.99
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
ORD. NO. DATE PASSED CODE SECTION
ORD. NO. DATE PASSED CODE SECTION
105      12-4-72     150.05 -
                     150.16
108      3-20-73     36.25 -
                     36.29
119      6-3-74      34.01 -
                     34.99
                     154.01 -
131      6-2-75      154.06,
                     154.99
                     70.07 -
134      9-2-75      70.09,
                     70.99
135      9-9-75      35.15
139      3-1-76      150.12
143      8-2-76      96.20
164      4-3-78      150.18
165      4-3-78      70.30,
                     70.99
166      4-3-78      90.06
                     50.05,
167      4-18-78     97.19,
                     152.06,
                     153.04
169      5-1-78      33.10 -
                     33.15
170      6-5-78      150.17
173      8-7-78      35.15
175      2-5-79      90.07
178      6-4-79      155.01,
                     155.02
185      9-10-79     70.31
                     33.70 -
187      11-5-79     33.75,
                     33.77 -
                     33.88
191      4-7-80      70.32
197      7-7-80      Ch. 113
202      4-6-81      33.77 -
                     33.80
204      5-4-81      33.90 -
                     33.96
213      7-6-82      11.03
                     111.08,
216      9-7-82      111.09,
                     111.99
                     111.08,
229      12-12-83    111.09,
                     111.99
                     120.01 -
231      5-7-84      120.03,
                     120.99
232      6-4-84      32.20 -
                     32.24
233      8-6-84      Ch. 30
235      9-4-84      Ch. 51
240      11-5-84     11.05 -
                     11.13
                     111.15 -
241      11-5-84     111.17,
                     111.99
248      9-4-85      120.02,
                     120.03
251      4-7-86      98.01 -
                     98.04
252      5-5-86      150.05 -
                     150.16
253      5-5-86      Table B
256      8-5-86      Table B
260      2-3-87      94.20 -
                     94.25
261a     5-4-87      33.65
262      7-10-87     90.08
267      2-2-88      33.97
277      7-14-88     121.01
281      11-14-88    98.99
285      2-6-89       
                     94.35 -
                     94.41,
286      2-6-89      94.43 -
                     94.47,
                     94.99
287      4-24-89     36.45
288      4-24-89     36.46
289      4-24-89     36.47
290      4-24-89     36.48
292      5-1-89      99.01 -
                     99.06
293      5-1-89      99.15 -
                     99.18
295      6-5-89      97.35
                     122.01 -
297      8-7-89      122.07,
                     122.99
301      1-2-90      150.19
                     150.06,
302      1-8-90      150.07,
                     150.09,
                     150.10
307      2-26-91     Ch. 122
308      5-7-90      33.65
309      5-7-90      36.50
                     Ch. 51,
312      1-7-91      Ch. 96,
                     Ch. 97
313      1-7-91      70.33
317      9-3-91      95.11,
                     95.99
318      9-3-91      154.02,
                     154.06
320      10-7-91     33.70 -
                     33.88
                     150.06,
321      5-4-92      150.07,
                     150.09,
                     150.10
323      9-8-92      36.60 -
                     36.66
324      9-8-92      33.67
325      12-7-92     95.20 -
                     95.23
326      12-7-92     95.04 -
                     95.06
331      5-3-93      33.65
332      5-12-93     11.05 -
                     11.13
336      7-6-93      95.20 -
                     95.23
                     154.10 -
337      7-6-93      154.15,
                     154.99(B)
339      9-7-93      36.80
340      9-7-93      33.66
                     52.01 -
343      2-7-94      52.07,
                     52.99
                     52.02,
352      10-3-94     52.04,
                     52.07
354      11-7-94     Ch. 71
355      5-1-95      96.25 -
                     96.32
357      10-11-95    T.S.O. B
358      10-11-95    T.S.O. B
365      5-6-96      35.10
368      12-4-96     70.20
369      2-3-97      33.45 -
                     33.48
370      2-3-97      150.20
371      2-3-97      51.02,
                     51.15
376      5-4-98      36.49
377      5-4-96      70.99
384      10-20-98    123.01
388      4-5-99      35.20
389      4-5-99      33.100 -
                     33.103
                     51.01,
                     51.02,
397      10-25-99    51.55 -
                     51.70,
                     51.75 -
                     51.81
401      2-7-00      150.04
405      5-1-00      33.01-
                     33.04
407      5-1-00      33.25 -
                     33.30
                     33.35,
408      5-1-00      33.37,
                     33.39
409      5-1-00      33.97
410      5-1-00      95.20
413      7-5-00      33.100
414      7-5-00      33.91
415      7-5-00      33.107 -
                     33.110
417      9-5-00      96.01
                     97.03,
418      9-5-00      97.07,
                     97.08
420      10-2-00     36.63
421      10-2-00     33.115 -
                     33.118
422      10-2-00     33.125 -
                     33.128
424      10-2-00     154.30 -
                     154.38
                     154.10 -
425      10-2-00     154.17,
                     154.99
426      11-6-00     123.03
                     101.01 -
                     101.08,
                     101.99,
428      12-4-00     123.02   
                     123.08,
                     123.10   
                     123.13
429      12-4-00     94.10 - 94.23,
                     94.99
432      2-5-01      97.01 -
                     97.08
433      3-12-01     33.135 -
                     33.137
434      3-12-01     51.15
435      3-12-01     31.30 -
                     31.47
                     150.06,
436      4-2-01      150.07,
                     150.09,
                     150.10
                     154.45 -
439      6-4-01      154.48,
                     154.51
440      7-2-01      123.03
                     123.01 -
446      10-1-01     123.08,
                     123.10   
                     123.13
449      11-5-01     36.50
451      11-5-01     36.49
452      2-4-02      33.150 -
                     33.152
453      2-4-02      33.115
458      6-3-02      31.39,
                     31.47
459      6-3-02      36.80
460      6-3-02      51.15
461      6-3-02      96.01
462      6-3-02      97.04A
463      6-3-02      97.01b
464      6-3-02      33.66A
465      6-3-02      33.66
467      6-3-02      33.65
469      6-3-02      154.48
470      6-3-02      100.01 - 100.10,
                     100.99
472      9-3-02      154.65 -
                     154.69
476      10-7-02     36.03
478      11-4-02     95.10
481      12-16-02    95.05 -
                     95.07
483      4-14-03     70.34
488      5-27-03     11.05
489      7-7-03      154.48
                     100.02,
490      11-6-03     100.08,
                     100.09,
                     100.99
                     152.01,
                     152.46,
491      11-6-03     152.50,
                     152.62,
                     152.69
497      2-2-04      33.01
                     150A.01 -
501      4-7-04      150A.07,
                     150A.99
502      4-7-04      35.10
504      6-1-04      154.48
509      2-7-05      156.01   
                     156.05
                     123.01   
510      2-7-05      123.08,
                     123.10   
                     123.13
512      3-7-05      12.01   
                     12.03
513      3-7-05      111.08
514      3-7-05      111.99
517      4-4-05      124.01   
                     124.04
520      4-4-05      33.160   
                     33.163
529      8-1-05      123.13
532      10-31-05    36.51
533      4-3-06      33.125
535      6-12-06     154.48
536      6-12-06     150.04
538      7-5-06      31.39
539      8-7-06      33.66A
540      8-7-06      33.66
541      8-7-06      33.65
542      9-5-06      156.03
547      12-4-06     154.25   
                     154.29
549      5-7-07      154.60
550      5-29-07     154.48
                     31.30,
551      6-5-07      31.33,
                     31.34
                     30.01   
                     30.08,
552      6-18-07     30.10   
                     30.14,
                     30.16
556      2-4-08      123.03
557      3-3-08      31.30
560      5-5-08      36.48
561      6-2-08      154.48
                     123.01   
562      7-7-08      123.08,
                     123.10   
                     123.13
564      9-2-08      33.67A
                     152.46,
568      1-5-09      152.68,
                     152.69
569      1-5-09      94.06,
                     94.99
570      1-5-09      101.04
571      3-2-09      31.37,
                     31.38
572      5-6-09      154.48
575      6-1-09      31.30,
                     31.34
                     117.01 -
576      7-6-09      117.08,
                     117.99
                     120.01 -
578      7-6-09      120.03,
                     120.99
580      9-8-09      33.125
581      9-8-09      95.30 -
                     95.33
                     33.65,
582      11-24-09    33.66,
                     33.66A
583      4-19-10     154.48
                     100.01 -
584      5-3-10      100.09,
                     100.98,
                     100.99
589      6-7-10      97.02
590      6-7-10      96.05
591      6-7-10      96.01
592      6-7-10      36.80
598      12-6-10     155.01 -
                     155.05
601      2-8-11      30.10
602      3-7-11      97.35
603      3-7-11      33.66A
604      4-13-11     154.48
607      5-2-11      90.08
608      6-6-11      36.51
609      7-5-11      123.03
612      8-1-11      94.42
                     123.01   
613      1-3-12      123.08,
                     123.10   
                     123.13
                     33.65,
615      4-2-12      33.66,
                     33.66A
616      5-7-12      36.52
617      5-7-12      154.48
618      6-4-12      95.12
620      8-1-12      11.20 -
                     11.29
621      8-6-12      150.12
622      8-7-12      33.62
623      9-4-12      33.55 -
                     33.61
625      10-1-12     157.01 -
                     157.05
627      12-3-12     156.05
                     52.01 -
628      12-3-12     52.07,
                     52.99
629      12 3-12     11.05 -
                     11.13
631      5-6-13      154.48
632      6-3-13      36.45
633      6-3-13      36.46
634      6-3-13      36.47
635      6-3-13      36.49
                     111.02,
                     111. 03,
637      7-1-13      125.01 -
                     125.11,
                     125.99
641      10-7-13     36.51
642      10-8-13     31.50
645      1-6-14      36.10   
                     36.21
646      5-12-14     154.45   
                     154.51
647      6-4-14      33.140   
                     33.143
648      7-7-14      111.10
                     115.01   
653      11-10-14    115.20,
                     115.99
654      1-5-15      123.01   
                     123.13
658      6-15-15     154.49
661      7-6-15      123.03
664      9-28-15     11.06
665      10-5-15     121.01
666      12-7-15     31.30 -
                     31.47
667      1-19-16     11.06
                     152.01,
                     152.05,
669      2-1-16      152.85 -
                     152.87,
                     152.92
672      4-18-16     95.11
674      6-6-16      154.49
676      6-20-16     111.03
                     102.01 -
677      7-5-16      102.04,
                     102.99
                     93.30 -
682      9-19-16     93.36,
                     93.99
685      1-17-17     37.01,
                     37.02
687      5-1-17      158.01
688      6-12-17     154.49
689      9-18-17     36.48
692      11-20-17    31.30,
                     31.33
                     102.01 -
695      2-5-18      102.04,
                     102.99
696      2-5-18      33.127,
                     33.128
697      2-26-18     93.33
698      2-26-18     103.01
703      6-4-18      154.49
704      6-4-18      123.03
706      12-17-18    123.03
707      1-22-19     36.80
                     126.01 -
708      2-19-19     126.08,
                     126.99
                     127.00 -
709      2-19-19     127.05,
                     127.99
711      5-6-19      154.49
712      6-10-19     33.40
716      5-18-20     154.49
721      6-14-21     154.49
722      6-22-21     72.01 -
                     72.05
723      9-20-21     105.01 -
                     105.03
724      1-18-22     123.03,
                     123.14
725      3-7-22      53.01 -
                     53.10
726      4-18-22     95.11
727      6-6-22      13.01 -
                     13.03
731      9-19-22     31.41
- -      11-8-22     Charter
732      11-9-22     31.42
733      11-28-22    106.01 -
                     106.04
734      1-17-23     33.70 -
                     33.88
735      3-6-23      36.80
736      3-6-23      97.04A
737      5-15-23     11.05 -
                     11.13
                     150.06,
                     150.07,
738      6-23-23     150.09 -
                     150.11,
                     150.15,
                     150.19
740      8-28-23     106.01 -
                     106.04
741      3-4-24      154.30 -
                     154.38
742      5-20-24     36.10 -
                     36.21
744      6-18-24     128.01 -
                     128.07
                     Charter
- -      4-22-25     10-5,
                     10-6,
                     10-7
                    
 
 
